Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (ISDS)
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: April 25, 2004                          Report No.:AC 179
A. Basic Project Data
A.1. Project Statistics
Country: Bangladesh                       Proiect ID: P040712
Project: Water Management Improvement Project  TTL: Mohinder S. Mudahar
Total project cost (by component): $147.5 m
Appraisal Date: February 10, 2004         Loan/Credit amount($m):
IDA: 84.6
Board Date: July 1, 2004
Other financing amounts by source:        ($m.)
Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Afffairs/  20.0
Ministry of Development Cooperation
Managing Unit: SASRD                      Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector
(75%); Irrigation and drainage (25%)
Lending Instruments: Specific Investment Loan
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency recovery?  Yes [ ]       No   [ X]
Environmental Category: B                 Safeguard Classification: S2
A.2. Project Objectives
The primary Project Development Objective (PDO) of the proposed project is to improve national water
resources management by involving the local communities to play an expanded role in all stages of the
participatory scheme cycle management, from planning and design to operations and management. The
secondary objective is to enhance institutional performance of the country's principal water institutions,
particularly BWDB and WARPO. This is expected to result in reduced vulnerability and enhanced
livelihood opportunities for the beneficiaries, and will also create a more favorable environment for
improved water resources management by the core water institutions, in partnership with the beneficiaries.
The PDO would be achieved by gradually changing a centralized top down approach to a more
decentralized and participatory water sector management approach for efficient and sustainable operations
and management of the existing FCD/FCDI schemes.
A.3. ProjectDescription
The project deals with the new approach to water resource management with stakeholders' participation and
is implemented through the following three components: (i) System Improvement and Management
Transfer (SIMT); (ii) O&M Performance Improvement (OMPI); and (iii) Institutional Improvement (II).
Component 1: System Improvement and Management Transfer (Total Cost of US$91.0 million): This
component would support rehabilitation and improvement (R&I) of about 102 existing medium and large
FCD/FCDI schemes of BWDB, covering approximately 378,900 hectares of land. The project schemes
will be selected in batches from seven BWDB zones by following a set of selection criteria to enhance the
project impact and sustainability. The SIMT procedure will follow a systematic approach of Participatory
Scheme Cycle Management (PSM).     Important design features of the component include: (i) the
participatory process in scheme cycle management, which is based on the Guidelines for Participatory
Water Management adopted by the Government; (ii) a resource database survey, GIS and mathematical
modeling tools that would be used in screening and auditing the FCD/FCDI batches of schemes; and (iii) an
annual process of selecting eligible batches of medium and large FCD/FCDI schemes located in a particular
hydrological unit.



The component would provide support for technical assistance for PSM, including screening, auditing
and training; rehabilitation and improvement works; and the incremental costs associated with
implementing the System Improvement and Management Transfer of the selected FCD/FCDI schemes.
The component would also support establishment and strengthening of Water Management
Organizations (WMOs) and subsequent mainstreaming the PSM approach to BWDB. The project would
support social mobilization and capacity building to assist WMOs to become fully functional and
sustainable and to enable BWDB field offices to be able to implement the PSM approach. The WMOs
would be established under the Cooperative Societies Act. The WMOs will consist of, depending on
the size of the FCD/FCDI schemes, WMG (Water Management Group), WMA (Water Management
Association) or WMF (Water Management Federation).
Component 2: O&M Performance Improvement (Total Cost of US$38.3 million): This component
would support measures to improve O&M performance of about 98 BWDB schemes, which are
"technically functional" and do not require maj or R&I. In order for medium and large FCD or FCDI
schemes to be included in this component, the schemes should have functioning WMOs or similar
beneficiary organizations. The component would also aim to improve culture and practice of O&M
planning and execution cycle within BWDB. The project schemes for O&M will be selected from
BWDB Circle(s) or Division(s) of the BWDB's seven Zones.
The objective of this component is to ensure the sustainability of those schemes that are currently
functioning well and have undergone major rehabilitation and improvement under component 1 (or
gone through a similar process under projects funded by GOB or other donors). The project would
finance only the physical O&M requirements on a declining basis (starting with 80% in year 1). In all
the selected schemes, Government's matching funds (100% of engineering and administration cost and
GOB share of maintenance cost) are expected to be made available on timely basis. The scheme
performance will be monitored in the year following the introduction of the O&M performance
improvement practices in the scheme. It was agreed that no further funding will be made available for
this component if GOB fails to provide the timely matching funds. Likewise, further O&M funding will
be discontinued for non-performing schemes or in case of a failure in management transfer to the
WMO. The component would also support technical assistance and training associated with O&M
improvement.
A program of new initiatives to foster improvements in O&M planning and financing would consist of
mechanisms for prioritizing allocation of expenditure between types of activities and between schemes;
improved O&M execution methods, including contracting arrangements; and monitoring mechanisms to
measure FCD/FCDI scheme performance and to judge O&M efficiency and effectiveness through
annual assessments against agreed performance standards and by third-party audit.
Component 3: Institutional Improvement (Total cost of US$18.2 million): This component would
support the institutional improvement of BWDB and WARPO, which are the two major national
Government institutions that deal with the nation's water resources. The project would also support
activities related to program coordination, monitoring and evaluation and strategic studies/fiduciary
reviews. The component would finance technical assistance, including consultancy services for
institutional improvement, change management, capacity building, training and monitoring and
evaluation; computers, office equipments, vehicles, survey and monitoring equipments, and other
required physical facilities.
2



(a) BWDB Institutional Improvement (Total cost of US$8.9 million): The project would
support implementation of BWDB reforms, focusing primarily on implementation of decisions already
made by the Government to restructure and strengthen BWDB as a water resources management
agency rather than just a development agency. It would therefore support initiatives to make the
operations more effective, efficient and transparent, including human resource development. MOWR
has already reviewed its staffing requirements and is implementing a policy decision to downsize its
staffing from 18032 to about 8860 by 2006 through attrition. However, given the types of activities that
BWDB would need to carry out now and in the future, there is an urgent need to determine the skill
requirements of BWDB and staff the organization with appropriately skilled staff with a mix of
engineering, environment, water management, drainage, community mobilization, agricultural
extension and related skills. The analysis of gaps in skill, training, capacity building and reorientation
and change management inputs to staff, along with recruitment of appropriately skilled staff, would also
be strengthened. The project would also provide technical assistance and equipment, support minor
renovation of existing training centers and strengthen the M&E as well as the fiduciary roles of the
BWDB.
The specifics of the time-bound action program agreed with IDA include: (i) further
rationalization of BWDB staffing and improvement of the staff skill-mix; (ii) design and
implementation of need-based staff training programs; (iii) phased devolution of authority to Zonal
Chief Engineers to foster the concept of integrated management of local water resources; (iv)
improvement of transparency and accountability through improved procurement system and contract
administration practices; better budgeting and financial management systems; enhanced monitoring and
evaluation functions; and timely preparation and disclosure of financial and performance information;
and (v) implementation of the initial phase of modernizing BWDB's operations through
computerization/information systems in functional areas.
(b) WARPO Institutional Improvement (Total cost of US$4.2 million): The project activities
under this sub-component would support: (i) core organization improvement and development
activities; and (ii) maintenance, updating and dissemination of the National Water Resources Database
(NWRD). It was agreed that project activities related to WARPO will be limited to the "core" function
only. The funding for the WARPO building complex is premature to consider at this time. However, it
may be considered after WARPO's enhanced role s mandated by the Government during the
implementation of the approved National Water Management Plan. Therefore, under the WARPO
component, the project would support two core activities, namely, (i) limited strengthening of WARPO
Organizational and Institutional Development and (ii) Maintenance, Updating and Dissemination of
National Water Resources Database (NWRD). The item (i) includes TA Consultancy for Institutional
Support, local and foreign training, workshops and seminars on Integrated Water Resources
Management, office equipment and facilities, and transport vehicles. The item (ii) would include a
Consultancy Service of foreign and local consultants.
(c) Program Coordination and Monitoring (Total cost of US$5.1 million): During the project
period, the coordination and facilitation of the activities would be carried out by a Program
Coordination Unit (PCU). This sub-component would support the establishment, operation and
facilitation of the PCU by providing office equipment and transport facilities. The innovative PSM
approach to the rehabilitation and improvement, operation and maintenance and integrated approach to
water management within BWDB schemes will require a systematic Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)
as well as learning activities. For that a TA consultancy team of international and national experts
would be provided under this sub-component. As per the new fiduciary requirements proposed under
the Bangladesh Public Procurement Reform Project, all procurement activities executed in BWDB have
to undergo annual ex-post reviews of at least 20 percent of its annual contracts. The project would
3



therefore support selective strategic studies, fiduciary reviews like annual ex-post procurement audit
reviews and other thematic studies which may be needed from time to time.
A.4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis.*
The existing FCD/FCDI schemes are dispersed throughout the country, where the priority schemes are
likely to be in areas more prone to floods and cyclones. The schemes for rehabilitation/improvement
under the project are to be selected by using a set of 'selection criteria' where local demand and
existence of water management organizations are the two vital criteria for selection of specific schemes.
As planned, FCD/FCDI schemes for the project require that sufficient progress is made with
strengthening of the WMOs. The rehabilitation/improvement works will mostly be carried out on the
existing schemes. Use of private lands, wherever needed, will be in strips along the existing facilities.
Land requirements are also likely to be limited where embankments, if any, are to be retired, and the
associated impacts are unlikely to be severe because of the linearity of the embankments. Since the
project is designed to rehabilitate/improve the existing schemes, it is not expected to have any major
environmental impacts; rather the project will mitigate any adverse impacts that may have been caused
under the existing FCD/FCDI schemes.
B. Check Environmental Category A [ ], B [X], C [],Fl []
Comments: The proposed project is not expected to have any major environmental impact since it is
designed to rehabilitate and improve the existing FCD/FCDI schemes and strengthen institutional
capacity related to environmental assessment and protection.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Yes              No
Environmental Assessment (P/BP/GP 4.01)            [x I             I I
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                     [x]               [ ]
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                          [x]              [ ]
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03-)     []              [x I
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)              [ x]            [I 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                       [ ]               x]
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                               [ ]              [x]
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                        rII [x]
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)         [ ]              [x]
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)  [x I           [I 
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues.
D.1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The activities under the project are primarily a combination of institutional improvement and
rehabilitation and improvement of FCD/FCDI infrastructure to make them more environmentally and
socially sustainable, and to mitigate past adverse environmental impacts. The physical works, which will
be carried out to rehabilitate and improve the existing FCD/FCDI schemes under the project are highly
unlikely to cause any significant adverse impacts, as the civil works will largely remain limited to the
lands already used to create the physical infrastructures. It is however likely that the civil works may
temporarily affect people who may have been using the embankments, especially the sections used as
roads and pass through the villages, to live on and/or make a living from. Wherever required, lands will
be acquired from the landowners. The scale of displacement, although expected to be very limited, will
depend upon the scope of rehabilitation and improvements designed for the individual schemes. In any
case, the impacts of land acquisition, if any, are likely to be moderate because of linearity of the
embankments.
4



The potential environmental impacts are overall cumulative impacts, localized impact on natural habitats
and the potential increase in the use of agricultural pesticides. The cumulative impacts on water flow
and natural habitats from numerous sub-projects in each particular hydrological region will be examined
during the initial overall screening and selection of the sub-projects. The localized impact on natural
habitats, in particular fish spawning sites and protected areas, will be determined during the participatory
selection process of the FCD/FCDI schemes, as well as during implementation of the civil works
designed for their rehabilitation and improvement. The improved management of water flow and
drainage is expected to enhance agricultural productivity and diversity which, in turn, may bring about
increased use of pesticides.
D.2 Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area.
The project is likely to have potentially positive impacts since it is designed to mitigate past adverse
environmental impacts as well as enhance the role of local communities in the rehabilitation and O&M
of FCD/FCDI schemes.
D.3. Describe the treatment of alternatives (if relevant)
An Environmental Assessment (EA)/Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and Environment
Management Plan (EMP) for the larger hydrological regions and for each of the individual FCD/FCDI
schemes will be prepared to guide scheme (sub-project) screening and participatory mitigation planning
and implementation. The EA and EMF/EMP will be made an integral part of the participatory scheme
cycle management (PSM) to ensure that the principles will be addressed throughout the implementation
process and not as a separate exercise.
Rehabilitation and improvement works in some of the existing FCD/FCDI schemes may require a
moderate amount of private land and cause displacement of squatters, if any, from the embankments.
Although the impact details will not be known until the specific schemes are selected, a Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared to deal with the potential adverse impacts of land
acquisition and displacement, by following the Bank's OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. While the
RPF will apply to the entire project, separate Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared for each
yearly civil works program as the selection of FCD/FCDI schemes and design of the rehabilitation and
improvements proceed. In preparing the RAPs, alternative designs will be considered to minimize
requirements for additional land and physical relocation by taking into account direct inputs from
WMOs, landowners and other stakeholders, which will be generated through the PSM cycle.
D.4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard issues. Provide an assessment
of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An overall EMF has been prepared and fully integrated into the entire participatory scheme cycle
management process (PSM) both at the Government and community levels. This will include a
screening and mitigation framework and corresponding institutional framework, to be in place during
selection, implementation and monitoring and evaluation of the diverse investments.
The EIA guidelines prepared by WARPO for large FCDI schemes will be applied for the rehabilitation of
schemes between 5000 ha to 15,000 ha in size. EA will be conducted for each medium sized sub-project
by the WMO and BWDB and the mitigation activities agreed upon in a MOU. Based on the EA, an EMP
will be prepared and customized for each type, location and scale of activity. The guidelines of
community level EA have been prepared by IUCN and already field tested.
5



Monitoring of the impacts during the project will be conducted by a "monitoring team" comprising of
selected WMO members, officials from BWDB, DAE, DOF, DOE and LGI. A record of the EAs will
be kept in BWDB and WARPO. Training will be given to the monitoring team members and
appropriate members of their agencies to ensure the proper implementation of the EMF, EIA and EMP.
BWDB has made provisions to increase the number of environmental staff in BWDB to ensure
sustainability of the environmental capacity of BWDB.
With respect to actions to address specific environmental safeguard issues, any potential cumulative
impact will be addressed at the initial screening of the schemes, and any scheme that may cause adverse
impacts will not be included in the project. The potential impact to natural habitat will be mitigated
through appropriate design of the sluice gates and management of related water infrastructure. The
potential use of pesticides will be mitigated through the already on-going Government IPM program
which will also be implemented through the PSM program.
The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), contains a legal framework outlining the principles and
guidelines for land acquisition; impact mitigation principles and measures; implementation mechanisms;
monitoring and evaluation arrangements; and others to provide the bases to plan and implement
activities required to mitigate the project's adverse impacts. The RPF draws substantially on the
resettlement programs executed by BWDB under the Bank-supported River Bank Protection Project
(RBPP: Cr. 2791-BD), Coastal Embankment Rehabilitation Project (CERP: Cr.2783-BD), and several
other projects in Bangladesh.  With this RPF in place and progress in design of the
rehabilitation/improvements on the selected FCD schemes, separate Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)
will be prepared for the yearly physical works program, and will generally contain needs for any
additional land; other impact details under each scheme undertaken for rehabilitation and improvement;
implementation budget and time-schedule.
A notification exemption has been approved by the Regional Vice President for OP/BP 7.50.
D.5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key project objectives and activities are to increase stakeholder participation in water resources
management, including transfer of selected water management functions to local communities. The
'Guidelines for Participatory Water Management' provides the operational framework to include local
stakeholders in water resources management. These Guidelines provide for participation of various
categories of stakeholders (farmers, fishermen, small traders, craftsmen, boatmen, landless people,
destitute women, NGOs, etc), including their mobilization and organization into WMOs and their
constituent management associations and groups. The focus of the Guidelines is on stakeholder
participation in the entire water management cycle (identification, planning, design, rehabilitation/
improvement of FCDs/FCDIs, O&M, and monitoring and evaluation). The project would support
implementation of participatory water management using these Guidelines as also using the experience
of several similar projects implemented by BWDB and other GOB agencies with support from other
donors, such as CIDA, ADB and the Government of Netherlands.
During project preparation, scoping sessions were carried out with various stakeholder groups to better
understand the users' perspective on rehabilitation/improvement needs, problems and potential
solutions, and arrangements for project implementation, and operation and maintenance. Consultation
and discussion sessions were held during the Environmental Assessment/Environmental Management
Plan preparation process wherein safeguard policies of the Bank relevant to the project were explicitly
elaborated. A workshop was also held to provide information to, understand views of, and discuss
collaboration arrangements with, various stakeholders on the project.
6



The TOR for the EMF and EA/EMP guidelines was fornulated after consultation with various parties
involved in environmental issues in Bangladesh. Extensive consultations with stakeholders, who may be
either adversely or positively impacted from an environmental viewpoint, were held during the preparation
of the EMF and EA/EMP guidelines.
In line with the provisions of PSM cycle, the RPF requires direct involvement of WMOs, affected
landowners and other stakeholders in all aspects of the land acquisition and resettlement processes, including
compensation, grievance redress, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation. Yearly RAlPs will
likewise be prepared with direct participation of WMOs and landowners in process tasks like census,
detennination of replacement value/market prices of affected assets, and implementation and monitoring of
the mitigation measures.
E. Safeguards Classification (select one)
[ ] S,. -The project has significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; where there are significant potential impacts
related to several safeguard policies.
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited to their impact and are technically and
institutionally manageable.
S3. - No safeguard issues
[] SF. - Financial intermediary projects
F. Disclosure Requirements                     Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
Date of receipt by the Bank                   02/07/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure               02/08/2004
Date of subrnission to InfoShop               02/09/2004
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Not Applicable
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
Date of receipt by the Bank                   02/07/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure               02/08/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                02/09/2004
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:
Date of receipt by the Bank                   Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure               Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                   Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure               Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                   Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure               Not Applicable
Date of submnission to InfoShop               Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Section III - Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment:                                             Yes            No
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA report?  Yes
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?  Yes
7



OPIBP 4.04 - Natural Habitats:                                                  Yes           No
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical             No
natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-
critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to
the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management:                                                      Yes           No
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                      Yes
Is a separate PMP required?
If yes, are PMP requirements included in project design?
Draft OP 4.11 (OPN 11.03) - Cultural Property:                             Not applicable
Does the EA include adequate measures?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to miti'gate the potential adverse
impacts on physical cultural resources?
OD 4.20 - Indigenous Peoples:                                             Not Applicable
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in consultation
with the Indigenous People?
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
approved by the Regional Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement:                                         Yes            No
Has a resettlement action plan, policy framework or policy process been prepared?  Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve the plan /  Yes
policy framework / policy process?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests:                                                     Not Applicable
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints been
carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions
for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams:                                              Not Applicable
Have dam safety plans been prepared?
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts (POE)
been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements been
made for public awareness and training?



OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways:                             Yes            No
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                                    No
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification requirement, then  Y
has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared  es
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception?
Please explain: Rehabilitation/improvement of existing FCD/FCDI schemes only
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                     Yes
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas:                                    Not applicable
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the intemational aspects of the
project, including the procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared, cleared with the Legal Department and sent to
the RVP?
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the OP?
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure:                                               Yes           No
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?  Yes
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and  Yes
language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local
NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies:                                                     Yes           No
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been  Yes
prepared for the implementation of the safeguard measures?
Have safeguard measures costs been included in project cost?                Yes
Will the safeguard measures costs be funded as part of project implementation?  Yes
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of  Yes
safeguard impacts and measures?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and  Yes
the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
Signed and submitted by.                Name                                         Date
Task Team Leader:                  Mohinder S. Mudahar                           April 25, 2004
Project Safeguards Specialist 1:   T. K. Barua                                   April 25, 2004
Project Safeguards Specialist 2:   Yuka Makino                                   April 25, 2004
Project Safeguards Specialist 3:   Shankar NarayAnan                             April 25, 2004
Approved by.                           Name                                          Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Eric Bmsber     X4
Comments:
Sector Manager:                    Gaja    an     athan                        q/ 2X 6   /
Comments:
9



