Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1385 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/09/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bangladesh 
Project ID: P089634 
Project Name: Export Infrastructure Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Fabio Galli 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 9, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: February 28, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Railways (75%);Ports, waterways and shipping (25%) 
Theme: Export development and competitiveness (P);Infrastructure services for private 
sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
85.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
40.00
40.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective (PDO) is to enhance the competitiveness of the tradable 
sectors of the economy.  
 
The achievement of the PDO will be measured against the following outcome indicator: 
Regionally competitive transport costs and more reliable movement of import and export cargo 
in the DC transport corridor.  The intermediate outcome indicators include: (a) increase in the 
number of containers moving by rail in that corridor; (b) modal shift for import/export cargo 
from break bulk movement by truck to container movement by rail; (c) development of modern 
and seamless intermodal transport; (d) higher quality freight and passenger train services; and (e) 
private sector development through commercialization of the planned ICD operations.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would include the following four major components:  
 
-
Construction of a modern ICD near Dhaka.  Fund the construction of a new ICD near 
Dhirasram to meet the burgeoning demand for container services on the DC transport corridor, 
Page  2
with a planned capacity of about 200 thousand TEUs/year.  To ensure that the new ICD is 
operated efficiently, it will be operated commercially via either a leasehold or concession 
contract.   The estimated cost of this component is about US$70 million, which includes land 
acquisition and the construction of a BR rail network spur.  
 
-
Rehabilitation of existing railway track infrastructure on the DC corridor.  Complement 
already planned port and railway infrastructure planned by ADB, BR and CPA on the critical DC 
transport corridor.  The planned investments would be limited to the re-construction of existing 
lines/sidings between Port of Chittagong and Fauzdarhat station which would provide additional 
reliable train paths to handle projected increasing container/freight traffic.  The estimated cost of 
this component is about US$25 million.   
 
-
Procurement of dedicated locomotives and specialized wagons.  Assist in the 
procurement of about 10 dedicated locomotives and about 200 container flat wagons and/or other 
specialized wagons to be used by BR exclusively on the DC transport corridor.  The estimated 
cost of this component is about US$20 million.  
 
-
Technical Assistance (TA) and consultant services.  Assist BR in implementing part of 
the organizational reform program which consists of: (a) reorganizing BR along lines of 
business; (b) transforming BR into a corporate entity; (c) upgrading BR?s financial management 
and accounting systems; and (d) improving BR?s operational effectiveness.  Furthermore, assist 
BR/CPA in concessioning/leasing out the new ICD near Dhirasram and in preparing the requisite 
detailed engineering/specifications for the planned project investments.  Finally provide funding 
for the supervision of the planned infrastructure civil works.  The estimated cost of this 
component is about US$10 million.  
 
Total estimated project cost.  The total estimated cost of the proposed project is about US$125 
million. The proposed project investments would leverage about US$400 million of 
complementary investments from GOB and ADB.  
 
Lending instrument.  A Sector Investment Loan (SIL) is probably the most appropriate funding 
instrument for the proposed project, as it will allow IDA to remain flexible at this stage of our 
dialogue and re-engagement in the sub-sectors. The lending operation will be supported on a 
project-approach, rather than a Sector-wide Approach (SWAP).  This is because there are 
significant differences between the country-based fiduciary and safeguard systems and those of 
the Bank?s policies, and harmonizing them is just beginning.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The proposed locations of the planned physical investments to be funded under the proposed 
project are as follows: (a) 30 km north of Dhaka (near Dhirasram) for construction of proposed 
new ICD; (b) 30 km north of Dhaka (near Dhirasram) for construction of proposed new rail spur 
to connect new ICD with the existing Pubail railway station: and (c) near Chittagong for 
rehabilitation of existing meter gauge railway line from Chittagong Port to Fauzdhrhat station.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  3
The last IDA funded port project that the borrower implemented was in 1992 and the last railway 
project was in 1970.  This makes it difficult to assess the borrower?s institutional capacity to 
prepare and implement the planned social safeguard component for the proposed project.  
Evidence shows that the borrower has been able to meet the safeguard requirements of the ADB, 
in the preparation and initial implementation of a port and railway project.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The construction of the proposed new ICD near Dhirasram and associated rail spur will 
require the conversion of about 100 hectares of agricultural land into transport infrastructure.  
Furthermore, the construction of the proposed new ICD will cause induced development and 
urbanization in the area around the facility.Finally, once the facility is in operation, it will 
generate vehicular and railway traffic in the area which will increase the levels of air, water and 
noise pollution in the area.  That is why OP/BP4. 01 will be triggered.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
OP4.11/OPN11.03 will probably be triggered.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The construction of the planned ICD near Dhirasram and associated rail spur will require the 
acquisition of about 100 hectares of land 30 km north of Dhaka.  This will mean that about 100 
hectares of agricultural land will need to be acquired and people will need to be resettled and 
rehabilitated.  That is why OP/BP 4.12 will be triggered.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/11/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The social and environmental screening for the proposed ICD at Dhirasram will be part of 
the techno-economic feasibility studies required for the construction of the proposed ICD.  
The study should start by end-2005 and be completed by mid-2006.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Fabio Galli 
05/02/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
05/09/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
05/02/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
