Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1525 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/23/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Belarus 
Project ID: P095115 
Project Name: Post-Chernobyl Recovery Project 
Task Team Leader: Maha J. Armaly 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 17, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: May 30, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: District heating and energy efficiency services (80%);Other social services (20%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Access to urban services and housing 
(P);Natural disaster management (S);Pollution management and environmental health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
45.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
7.00 
 
FOREIGN MULTILATERAL INSTITUTIONS (UNIDENTIFIED) 
2.00
9.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project objective would be to revitalize the districts affected by the Chernobyl 
accident by improving local people's living conditions, while reducing their exposure to harmful 
levels of radiation.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Optimizing Provision of Heat.  The Government requested assistance in two areas:  (i) 
connecting houses to the gas pipeline to substitute for the utilization of potentially harmful 
contaminated wood currently being used in household furnaces increasing exposure to 
radioactive contamination, including through the disposal of ash. The request includes 
connection of a total of about 12,000 residential houses and the extension of around 335 
kilometers of the tertiary pipeline; and (ii) energy efficiency measures focused on replacing or 
upgrading boiler houses, substations, and building insulation improvements including lighting.  
This component will target public institutions with emphasis on educational and health facilities.  
The upgrading of the heating system is necessary in the regions visited, given the severe weather 
Page  2
conditions during winters and the deteriorated state of energy infrastructure due to years of lack 
of maintenance or replacement.  The government is committed to the provision of gas to the 
region as another means of mitigating the human exposure from burning contaminated wood in 
individual homes or boilers.  Several of the houses which have requested to be linked directly to 
the gas system are currently being heated by stoves using either wood or peat (contaminated as 
well as not), and in some cases electricity or mazut.  The extensive forest and wood industry 
resources in the affected area provide an opportunity for their use in heat supply (from areas with 
limited contamination) provided measures to mitigate radioactive exposure is undertaken.  
Technology for such mitigation exists and the centralization of utilization of these resources will 
increase the chances for managing the impact from flue gases and ash disposal.   Finally, the 
utilization of biomass resources will contribute to the area's economic revitalization and to 
Belarus's overall objective to reduce dependence on imported energy.  The Bank will need to 
take into account international radiation safety standards with regard to wood burning boilers in 
contaminated areas.  The International Atomic Energy Agency will be a partner providing the 
Bank and the Government with the advice on all issues related to radioactive contamination.  
 
Supporting Activities.  In addition to these activities the project design would need to address 
various support activities.  These include the need for advice to the Government on how to 
harmonize its national radiation safety standards with the international ones because current 
inconsistencies, especially among Belarus's neighbors, limit and complicate international trade, 
and furthermore because some national standards need updating to reflect current international 
knowledge and consistent logic about exposure risk from various radiation sources. It also 
includes the need for radiation monitoring and communication to increase the knowledge of and 
trust in clean production options and market opportunities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will take place in the contaminated area of the two oblasts most affected by the 
Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant Accident; i.e. Mogliev and Gomel.  The project will not 
undertake any work in the most contaminated and excluded zones.  It will address both urban 
and rural areas where the needs are highest.  Provision of gas is likely to be in the smaller towns 
and rural areas, while energy efficiency measures will address needs in the social sector, 
particularly education and health.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The country has a positive track record in environmental assessment, and environmental 
management including forest management and natural habitat protection.  The Ministry of 
Nature Resources, responsible for environmental assessment, has a well qualified, capable staff 
and a sound regulatory framework.  From the environmental management point of view, the 
Government also has taken seriously the special issues associated with the areas affected by the 
Chernobyl accident, as demonstrated by the public expenditures program.  To the extent that the 
Government has a capacity limitation, it is in the area of fiscal constraints affecting the 
availability of budget.  The Bank's past involvement in the forestry and energy efficiency sectors 
demonstrated the government's commitment and capacity.  The Bank-financed forestry project 
was preceded by a special environmental assessment focused on radiation contamination of 
wood, and implications for forest management, timber and other forest product harvesting, and 
Page  3
associated processing.  A PHRD grant is financing a study to align Belarussian standards for 
biomass burning boilers with those of the EU.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The environmental assessment will be triggered to the extend that normal civil works will 
take place during pipeline construction to connect homes to the gas pipeline.  This impact is 
expected to be moderate and routine, and Belarus would have the capacity to address any 
environmental issues that might arise, inlcuding safety, noise and disposal of debris.  
 
Concerns on radioactive impact during construction or other activities during the project are 
not expected to be large, but they will be reviewed and considered by the International Atomic 
Energy Agency (IAEA).  If the project finances any biomass boilers (particularly wood), the 
competencies of the IAEA will be called upon for maximum mitigation needs.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/15/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  09/09/2005 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An Environmental Management Plan will be developed for the project addressing both 
components, identifying potential environmental impact, the mitigation plan, and the 
capacity and responsibility of government to handle.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maha J. Armaly 
04/25/2005 
Approved by: 
 
R
egional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
04/26/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Peter D. Thomson 
04/28/2005 
Comments:   
