                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                                                   Report No.: 126127
.




Date ISDS
                            2/16/18
Prepared/Updated:
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                     Belize                                Project     P132098
                                                                       ID:
    Project Name:                Promoting Sustainable Natural Resource-Based Alternative Livelihoods
    Task Team Leader:            Keiko Ashida Tao
    Appraisal Date:              N/A                                   Board       N/A
                                                                       Date:
    Managing Unit:               GENDR                                 Lending Grant
                                                                       Instrume
                                                                       nt:
    Sector:                      General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%), Public administration-
                                 Agriculture, fishing and forestry (50%)
    Theme:                       Climate change (40%), Biodiversity (30%), Environmental policies and institutions
                                 (20%), Natural disaster management (5%), Other environment and natural resources
                                 management (5%)
    Financing (in USD Million)
        Financing Source                                                                                          Amount
        Borrower                                                                                                     0.00
        Japan Social Development Fund                                                                                2.80
        Total                                                                                                        2.80
    Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project? No
.


.




    2. Project Objectives

    The Project Development Objective is to promote viable and sustainable natural resource-based livelihoods
    for poor communities in Belize and thereby reducing anthropogenic pressures on the key natural resources.
    The Project would achieve this through: (1) support for social mobilization, facilitation, and community co-
    management, (2) development of community-based sustainable livelihoods of non-timber forest products
    (NTFPs) in and around the selected protected areas, (3) support for innovative models of green livelihoods
    for fishing communities through mari-culture development, and (4) community-led natural resources
    awareness and knowledge dissemination.
The main expected key results are:
   •   At least 3,250 participants, 30% of which are women, directly engaged in community-based
       sustainable natural resource-based alternative livelihoods, utilizing new knowledge and skills;
   •   In all 8 locations, the household income of participants increased through sustainable community-
       and natural resource-based alternative livelihoods;
   •   In all 8 locations, increase in the area effectively managed by communities under the community co-
       management mechanism supported by the Grant;
   •   Other non-Grant communities interested in community-based sustainable use of natural resources
       models; and
   •   Lessons learned, compiled, and submitted as recommendations for a national policy and regulatory
       framework to facilitate community-based natural resource management (NRM) supported under the
       Sustainable Natural Resource Management and Climate Resilience Technical Assistance Project
       (TA).
The Project supports the Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy (FY12-FY15) which focuses on supporting
the Government to achieve “Inclusive and Sustainable Natural Resource-Based Growth and Enhanced
Climate Resilience? by helping improve growth prospects and benefit the poor who tend to depend on natural
resource-driven sectors in Belize. Under the CPS, the Management and Protection of Key Biodiversity Areas
in Belize Project (funded by the Global Environmental Facility) and the Marine Conservation and Climate
Adaptation Project (funded by the Adaptation Fund) also support alternative livelihoods in respective target
locations (specific communities to be identified during the preparation). This programmatic approach would
institutionalize the income generation in rural areas other than traditional subsistence agriculture and fisheries
at a scale that is unprecedented in Belize and would provide a strong incentive for local communities to
participate in sustainable natural resource management. The three projects are overseen by the Steering
Committee led by the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development and the Ministry of Fisheries, Forestry
and Sustainable Development while the executing agency for the JSDF project is Belize Enterprise for
Sustainable Technology (BEST) and for the GEF project and the AF project is the Protected Areas
Conservation Trust (PACT). Safeguards instruments are developed specifically for each project with a
possibility to share same instruments where appropriate to ensure consistency.

3. Project Description

The project is financed by a US$2.8 million JSDF grant. The proposed project design includes four
components:
Component 1: Community Management Support (US$325,000)
The objective of this component is social mobilization, facilitation, and community co-management to
precede the livelihood investments under Components 2 and 3. The component would finance the following
activities:
Sub-component 1.1 Community Mobilization and Co-management
Community Alternative Livelihoods Plan: Community workshops would be undertaken in each target
community to discuss and develop plans for specific livelihood activities to be supported. Using participatory
approaches, alternative livelihoods would be selected and validated by communities in the targeted areas to
invest in livelihood enhancing activities that support the functional integrity of the ecosystems. Once
activities are selected, targeted engagement with communities, employing capacity building techniques and
technical training would be used to support the communities in the implementation of their projects.
Arrangements would maximize synergies for capacity building using the existing Community Based
Organizations (CBOs) to support community projects. This would provide an efficient, multisectoral delivery
mechanism for community-based natural resource-based alternative livelihood interventions.
Community-based decision making: This component would also support the development of mechanisms to
ensure that local preferences dictate terms, roles, responsibilities, and program parameters subject to co-
production rules. The process of community-based decision-making would be facilitated by a social
development expert and supported by a local coordinator for each community throughout the implementation
period.
Gender Analysis: A focused gender analysis would be conducted on a range of livelihood plans to ensure
that gender equitable objectives are met. Gender issues would be incorporated into several aspects of NRM,
including (i) diagnosis of groups (men, women, and youth; ethnic groups; and various economic activity
groups), (ii) gender-specific training, (iii) participation in the decision-making process, (iv) representation in
each NRM activity, and (v) management and leadership.
Sub-component 1.2 Training
Training: A comprehensive training program targeting men, women and youth would be implemented to
facilitate the transition to the selected alternative livelihoods in order to strengthen the resilience of local
communities and their livelihoods as they depend on the natural resources. Sustainable natural resource
management activities led by local communities would allow the poorest members of the communities to
realize benefits from their efforts in managing and conserving these resources. Exposure and dialogue with
communities to arrive at appropriate community interventions depend partly on encouraging peer-to-peer
technology transfer from experienced groups and technical training to be provided under the Grant.
Natural Resources Awareness Teams: Awareness Teams are being developed in each geographical area. The
purpose of the Awareness Teams is to sensitize communities surrounding the targeted protected areas on the need
for conservation and protection of the natural resources. The Teams consist of interested villagers from the
twenty-five targeted communities surrounding nine protected areas. Villagers are invited whom have an interest
in the conservation and preservation of their surrounding natural resources. These villagers are trained to
participate in research and educational activities. The Awareness Teams operate strictly on a voluntary basis and
do not have any enforcement powers. They partner with relevant government departments such as the Forestry
Department, Agriculture and Fisheries Department and the Department of the Environment. Involvement of local
communities in monitoring and sensitization is an approach that can have a significant long-term impact. A well
organized and highly motivated group can assist conservation efforts in a number of other ways, such as assisting
scientists in research and monitoring activities, control and surveillance work (preventing fires) and reforestation.
The Awareness Teams would support the official authorities and can be a good social platform for people from
the community who want to protect their natural surroundings.
Component 2: Sustainable Use of Non-Timber Forest Products and related activities (US$1.251
million)
This component is aimed at supporting the community-based sustainable use of non-timber forest products
(NTFPs) in and around the selected protected areas. The Grant would support the full cycle of
commercialization of NTFPs, i.e., planning, production, processing, packaging, branding and marketing, and
distribution. The target communities are those residing in the buffer zones of protected areas where the people
are poor and deforestation and overexploitation are a major threat to the natural resources.
Sub-component 2.1            Participatory NTFP Management Sub-projects
The Grant would support innovative NTFP activities that involve local communities in conservation by
demonstrating direct links between sound development and conservation at a local level, and at the same
time, showing potential for generating environmentally sustainable sources of income for targeted
communities. This activity would use the participatory approach to empower local people and develop and
administer sustainable NTFP management, including collection and/or cultivation, production, processing
and storage, packaging, and marketing of products. It is intended to motivate local people to explore and
decide on sustainable NTFP management options, recognize and reduce conflicts by negotiating agreements,
and legalize/ratify community agreements at a local level where applicable. Technical assistance would be
provided by the Forestry Department (e.g., targeted resource based surveys, information management) and
the Department of Environment (e.g., environmental screening of investment activities). The NTFPs that are
suitable for cultivation/domestication and other natural resource-based livelihoods (e.g., mangoes, peppers,
pig rearing and tilapia farming) would also be supported to demonstrate a reduction in harvesting pressures
on wild resources. The investments include support for building community farms/nurseries as well as for
purchasing adequate equipment for cultivation, harvesting and/or processing.
Training: The communities would be provided with training to foster local trainers who would in turn train
other participants of the NTFP activities. Training would cover the production techniques, development of a
management plan, harvesting techniques, quality control, information systems, and product processing (see
Section 6.4 on monitoring below).
Technical Assistance: The Grant would take advantage of existing knowledge by partnering with local
organizations and the relevant ministries to provide technical assistance, information, and seeds and plants
to the participating communities. The Grant would also finance the identification and sharing of best
practices, promotion of greater collaboration in areas such as marketing to build synergies, and improve
capacity of communities. Permits and certificates required for the collection of NTFPs would be obtained
from the Forestry Department and the Belize Agricultural Health Authority (BAHA) where appropriate.
The Forestry Department would also provide support for a resource base assessment necessary to determine
the availability of the non-timber forest resources, harvest sustainability and re-stocking rates.
Sub-component 2.2           Business development and marketing
This activity would assist the communities in the development of the business plan for NTFPs for each
location. Included in this process would be the product and resource base information, marketing plan,
organizational plan, operating plan, and financial plan. The business plan is essential in various aspects: to
commercialize the production; to rationalize the management structure; to develop an efficient operation; to
understand the risks and have a plan to deal with them; to identify their niche and explore new markets; and
to inform investors and attract investment into the production. A marketing expert would assist in the
marketing of NTFPs including the identification of the potential markets, development of the marketing
materials, and identification of potential business partners and distributors where possible.
Component 3: Marine-based Sustainable Alternative Livelihoods (US$924,600)
The objective of this component is to support innovative models of green livelihoods for fishing communities
in Toledo, Corozal, and Stann Creek Districts through mari-culture development. The Government of
Belize has placed a very high priority on supporting measures that would provide viable livelihood
opportunities for those communities that are heavily reliant on reef areas targeted for enhanced protection.
This component would specifically support (a) development of viable marine-based business plans, (b)
targeted skills training, and (c) a provision of financial resources for initial capital investment in the selected
viable options, thereby creating jobs. This activity would be implemented by the local fishermen cooperatives
in the three proposed locations of Placencia, Punta Gorda and Sarteneja in partnership with local populations,
the private sector, micro-lending institutions, NGOs (Southern Environmental Association, TIDE, WWF,
and TNC), the Government of Belize, and technical experts in mari-culture.
Sub-component 3.1       Participatory Marine-based Sustainable Livelihoods Sub-projects
Investments and training are provided to marine-based sustainable livelihoods activities, selected and
validated by the participating communities. With fish stocks being depleted as a result of overfishing,
pollution, climate change and other factors, mari-culture is not only an alternative means of economic benefit
for the communities, but also a means of reducing pressure on the wild populations and to fill the demand
for these products while keeping the communities’ sea faring traditions alive. The main thrust of t his
component is poly-culture which is the growing of one or more species in conjunction with the primary target
species of cultivation. In this case seaweed (the primary species) would be grown in conjunction with lobsters,
sea cucumber, conch, and crab. This is possible because the area is an appropriate benthic habitat for all of
these species. In addition, the Grant would support an innovative technique known as ‘shades’ which are
concrete shelters used as lobster aggregating devices; they have been shown to be successful in Mexico and
trials have shown that they would work well in Belize. In addition, the ‘shades’ could be used as the anchors
for the seaweed farms (which are just cement blocks right now weighing about 200lbs). Cultivation of oysters
in mangroves would also be supported in the coastal areas. The approach would be an integrated system
(poly-culture) where the cultivation of seaweed, crab, conch, lobster, and sea cucumber are undertaken in the
same location in order to maximize returns from the same unit of area. This approach not only maximizes
effort and returns, but also affords the communities the opportunity to reduce risk in the event one of the
products does not perform well at the cultivation or commercialization stages. Other potential marine-based
activities for Grant support include the harvesting of crab claws, crab farming, and tourism.
Sub-component 3.2       Business development and marketing
This activity would assist the communities in the development of business plans for each mari-culture
production. The same approach as NTFPs would be envisioned, including a marketing plan, organizational
plan, operating plan, and financial plan. A marketing expert would assist in the marketing of products
including the identification of the potential markets, development of the marketing materials, and
identification of potential business partners and distributors where possible. The mari-culture production
would be undertaken at scale in order to ensure maximum returns and benefits for the communities and the
environment. The Grant would support an awareness campaign to inform the Belizean consumers of the
products availability. The seaweed market demand currently consists of local beverage vendors and “high
end? resorts both in the Placencia area as well as in Ambergris Caye and Caye Caulker in addition to inland
areas.
Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge Dissemination
(US$299,400);
Project Monitoring and Evaluation and Knowledge Dissemination
Participatory Performance Monitoring: Community members are trained to monitor progress and
performance of the activities. The information collected by the community is used as inputs to the regular
supervision reports to be compiled by the Project Management Unit (PMU).
Baseline, Mid-term and Final Impact Evaluation Surveys: Multi-stakeholder surveys are/will be conducted
at the start, mid-term, and end of the project to collect adequate data to monitor the performance of the Grant
activities using the key outcome and output indicators. The information will be incorporated into the regular
progress reports to be prepared by the PMU. The information will also be utilized in the Implementation
    Status Reports (ISRs) of the Bank to monitor progress towards achieving results.
    Knowledge Dissemination for Replication: The Grant would support community-to-community exchange of
    experience gained through the implementation of sub-projects. This would not only benefit the communities,
    but also foster ownership of the communities. Experience and knowledge gained through the activities will
    be disseminated to non-participant communities and to the public through dissemination notes and workshops
    in collaboration with the relevant authorities.
    Dissemination of Project Results: At the end of project, an event to disseminate results and lessons learned
    will be organized. The target audience is relevant government officials, policy makers, media and NGOs in
    addition to the project participants.
    Project Management and Administration
    The PMU, housed in BEST and consisting of a full-time Project Coordinator and the minimum required staff,
    has been formed to oversee the execution of the Grant including activity coordination, monitoring and
    reporting. The PMU coordinates with key ministries in order to promote alignment of the Grant activities
    with the existing programs. The PMU is supported by a steering committee to be established with
    representatives of the Ministry of Forestry, Fisheries, and Sustainable Development, Ministry of Natural
    Resources and Agriculture, Ministry of Finance and Economic Development, and of the participating
    communities. The operational manual has been developed before Grant signing. Annual audits are performed
    by an external audit firm according to terms of references approved by the Bank.

    4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

    Based on the in-country consultations with various stakeholders, the following 8 locations have been agreed
    upon:
    Inland (terrestrial) areas to be targeted for sustainable use of Non-Timber Forest Products (NTFPs) and
    associated activities include: Chiquibul National Park in the southern portion of Cayo District, Payne’s Creek
    National Park in Toledo District, Rio Bravo Conservation Management Area (RBCMA) in Orange Walk,
    Spanish Creek Wildlife Sanctuary (SCWS) in northern Belize, and Community Baboon Sanctuary (CBS) in
    Belize District.
    Coastal areas to be targeted for marine-based alternative livelihoods include: Placencia Village in Stann
    Creek District, Punta Gorda in the southern Toledo District, Sarteneja Village in the northern Corozal District.
    Communities to participate under the Project have been selected and agreed upon through the mobilization
    workshops in these 8 locations (Component 1) and conforming to the procedures defined in the Operational
    Manual.

.




    5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
    Clarisse dall Acqua (Sr. Environmental Specialist, GENDR)
    Kimberly Vilar (Sr. Social Development Specialist, GSURR)
.




    6. Safeguard Policies                    Yes    No
    Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01      X
    Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04               X
    Forests OP/BP 4.36                        X
    Pest Management OP 4.09                         X
    Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11    X
    Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10             X
    Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12             X
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                       X
    Projects on International Waterways             X
    OP/BP 7.50
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60     X
.




II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any
    potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
    The Project would support the appropriate and sustainable exploitation of Non-Timber Forest Products
    (NTFPs). The ecological sustainability of NTFP extraction, with respect to resource populations, dependent
    animal species and ecosystem functioning is not likely to cause any ecological damage, considering the
    uncontrolled clearing of forests facing the protected areas. The data on regeneration and population densities
    of some NTFP species would be collected and used as the basis for the development of business plan. The
    monitoring would also check damaging harvesting practices and accompanying anthropogenic disturbances
    such as fire, hunting, grazing, and fuel wood collection. Efforts to use and incorporate Traditional Ecological
    Knowledge (TEK) into the harvesting, collection and production of NTFPs would be fully explored. In the
    case of coastal zones, potential alternative livelihoods activities include seaweed farming combined with
    cultivation of other marine products (e.g., conch, lobsters, sea cucumber, and crab) in an integrated cultivation
    system. Other NTFP products and marine-based activities would also be selectively supported by the Project
    based on their economic viability and sustainability. Seaweed as a commercial product is deemed sustainable
    in the sense that the original ‘seed’ starters are never trimmed or removed, because growth and harvest occurs
    from the starter fragments. In addition, new farms can always be created from the original seed stock.

    No large-scale or long-term environmental and social impacts are foreseen from project activities. The Project
    will likely enhance the environmental and social management capacity of participating communities. The
    Project finances specific livelihood diversification options with local communities (to reduce the
    encroachment pressure on forest resources and the anthropogenic threats on marine resources, at the same
    time to enhance the socio-economic existence between protected areas, natural resource management, and
    local communities).

    The project’s ESMF includes a specific section that includes a screening procedure to screen out activities
    that would trigger OP 4.12. Furthermore, each EMP prepared under the project also includes the same
    screening procedure.
Regarding land use and ownership for sub-projects, a Voluntary Land Donation/Use Protocol (VLD) was
prepared as part of the ESMF. It establishes the conditions, process, and elements through which Voluntary
Land Donation (VLD) is reached and ascertained. Furthermore, a Voluntary Land Donation/Use Agreement
has been documented and added as an annex of each sub-project’s Environmental Management Plan.

This project is classified as Category B, as the potential adverse environmental impacts from these supported
livelihood activities on human populations or environmentally important areas are site-specific, reversible
and can be readily mitigated.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04
This project would not support or lead to the conversion of natural habitats. In fact, it would help protect
critical ecosystems, which are important to preserve local biodiversity and the quality of water resources.
While the ESMF explicitly forbids significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats, OP4.04
is triggered as a precaution. As critical natural habitats are targeted for NTFP management, sub-projects are
consistent with park management plans and be designed and monitored appropriately. Also, the promotion
of pigs and tilapia within or around protected areas are considered carefully (sub-component 2.1). Capacities
of Forestry Department and the Belize Agricultural Health Authority (BAHA) are supported and strengthened
as appropriate in addition to the measures for community monitoring and management. In regard to fisheries
activities, the ESMF provides adequate analysis and background including fish aggregators/shade devices
and potential impacts on populations of commercial and other species.

The ESMF was prepared in 2013 and completed and disclosed on January 30, 2014 at the World Bank’s
Infoshop; it was subsequently disclosed on the Belize Department of Environment’s (DoE) website on
August 3, 2015. Consultations were part of the preparation for the ESMF where sub--projects as well as their
potential impacts were identified, prioritized and chosen through community consultation. The EMPs for the
sub-projects were developed in late 2015 and 2016 and were cleared by the Bank and disclosed in country
and in the Bank web site on March 10, 2018. The consultation requirements to the Sub-project EMPs without
significant impacts were limited to consultations between the PIU and DoE and further consultation of the
EMPs was not deemed necessary (Section 6.6 page 41 of the ESMF).

Forests OP/BP 4.36
This project will not lead to the destruction of forests and forest ecosystems and in fact will support protection
of critical forest ecosystems through community-based activities. Similar to the natural habitats, the ESMF
explicitly forbids any project activities in areas supporting destruction or conversion of forests and forest
ecosystems. In this light, the non -timber forest products used as part of this project must ensure that products
are sustainably harvested by the landowners and delivered for processing to the community. Impacts from
harvesting like destruction of forests and indiscriminate clearing may be screened by the project team.
However, due to the presence of forest ecosystems at potential sites, OP4.04 is triggered as a precaution. The
project activities would be carried out consistent with the policy requirements to be incorporated into the
ESMF. NTFP sub-projects would be designed and implemented consistent with the forests policy (time-
bound plan for achieving standards of policy) with regard to sustainability and community-based
management of forest resources.

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11
This project is not expected to have negative impacts on cultural property, including movable or immovable
objects, sites, structures, groups of structures or natural features or landscapes with archeological,
paleontological, historical, architectural, religious, aesthetic or other cultural significance. However, “chance
findings? during implementation of activities could be possible. The policy is triggered as a precaution.
During the early stage of implementation, possibility that the Project affect known archeological sites or
chance finds has been evaluated.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10
This policy was triggered given that the project targets indigenous peoples as one of their beneficiary
populations. Consequently, and given that the project areas were already identified and a call for proposals
was already underway, BEST prepared an Indigenous Peoples Plan (titled “Culturally Appropriate
Consultation and Participation Plan?). This was the only instrument prepared under this policy. Given
that the project was already under implementation, an original social assessment was not commissioned.
Instead, baseline information was taken from the IP instruments for the Marine Conservation and Climate
Adaptation Project (MCCAP) and the Key Biodiversity Areas Project (the IP instruments for the projects
were disclosed on November 14, 2014 and July 31, 2014 respectively). The IPP was consulted originally
during the proposal preparation phase with beneficiary groups in 2013 along with the ESMF and disclosed
online on August 10, 2017 on the grant recipient’s website and on the Bank’s website on December 12, 2017.

Amongst the eight preselected project areas, Garifuna communities are concentrated in the Stann Creek,
while the Maya communities are located predominantly in Cayo and Toledo districts. Given that the main
project activities consisted of developing viable subprojects for financing alternative livelihoods, the main
purpose of the IPP was not to prevent harm to indigenous communities but rather to ensure their inclusion in
project benefits and culturally-appropriate consultation. Specifically, the IPP establishes appropriate actions
to be taken by the implementing agency to proactively promote the preparation of sub-project proposals by
indigenous communities living in the eight target areas as well as to mitigate any barriers to entry that
indigenous communities could face in presenting proposals. Currently 4 out of 17 sub-projects receiving
funding from this project are benefitting indigenous Maya and Garifuna men and women in the Toledo
District.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12
The policy is not triggered, as no involuntary taking of land is foreseen. The project’s ESMF includes a
screening procedure to screen-out activities that would trigger OP 4.12. Furthermore, each EMP prepared
under the project also includes the same screening procedure (list).

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60
This policy is triggered in the context of Belize and Guatemala having a longstanding territorial dispute and
having signed a Special Agreement to submit (12/2008), after ratification via referenda, to the International
Court of Justice regarding this dispute. The Project does not support any activities that would cause any harm
to the interests of either party. By supporting the Project, the World Bank does not intend to make any
judgment on the legal or other status of the territories concerned or to prejudice the final determination of the
parties’ claims.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project
area:
None are foreseen.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts:
Minimizing impacts through eligibility criteria: The mechanism to minimize adverse impacts has been
built into the selection criteria to choose the alternative livelihood subprojects that are funded. Therefore,
the Operational Manual has defined social and environmental criteria for the subproject selection based on
BEST’s existing policies and procedures in order to help avoid or minimize subprojects that could
adversely impact project populations. Specifically, the Project will not support activities that trigger
OP4.09, OP4.12, OP4.37 or OP7.50.

4. Describe measures taken by the grantee to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:

Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Environmental Management Plan (EMP)
Since the exact location and/or nature of potential small investments to be financed under this project were
not determined during the project preparation, an ESMF has been prepared to conform to Bank safeguard
policies. Once the sub-projects were approved, the EMPs were developed for each sub-project before any
investments were made. The ESMF refers to the WBG Environmental Health and Safety Guidelines on
Aquaculture and Mammalian Livestock Production given the activities related to pig rearing and tilapia
farming. The framework includes an identification of potential environmental impacts and associated
mitigation measures spelled out in an EMP.

BEST is responsible for environmental and social management during project implementation. The Project
Implementation Unit (PIU)’s technical officer works with the project coordinator on the environmental and
social aspects of the project to assure adequate management of these areas along the project cycle.
Implementation builds on an existing framework currently used by the BEST in execution of other activities.
The Department of the Environment (DoE) under Ministry of Forestry, Fisheries and Sustainable
Development is responsible for monitoring the implementation of the Environmental Protection Act and for
taking necessary actions to enforce its provisions including EIA. The DoE works closely with other agencies
to ensure that environmental concerns are considered in development programs. DoE provides the
environmental checklists for various types of projects. The ESMF takes into account and build upon these
existing instruments. Locally, communities are being sensitized on their responsibilities for environmental
compliance within the Project. Based on the diagnosis and environmental analysis for subproject, a series of
recommendations are made to help in strengthening the environmental management capacity of the
participating communities for the execution of subprojects.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:
The key stakeholders related to safeguard issues to be covered under the ESMF include: the Government of
Belize, BEST, the World Bank and other funding agencies/donors that may be involved in financing activities
in the participating communities, the fishers cooperatives, co-management NGOs of the targeted protected
areas, the Project Steering Committee members (MFED, MFFSD, MNRA, Ministry of Tourism), central
government officials responsible for environmental planning and management, civil society, indigenous
communities and the private sector to be involved in the selected subproject activities. Public consultations
have been carried out during the ESMF process. The techniques for the public consultations included group
discussions, public meetings with key stakeholders, workshops, and interviews with key stakeholders. The
    issues raised during these consultations have been documented and incorporated into the ESMF and
    Indigenous Peoples Plan (Culturally Appropriate Consultation and Participation Plan) respectively.

    Regarding the Voluntary Land Donation Protocol, its conditions were discussed with each beneficiary group
    who required voluntary land donation or use agreement to carry out their subproject. It was discussed in
    the context of preparing a Voluntary Land Donation Agreement amongst its members. BEST reported on
    these discussions as they occurred. Currently the project has 17 Voluntary Land Donation/Use agreements.

.
    B. Disclosure Requirements
    If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues
    are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
    If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

.




    C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the
    project decision meeting)
    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World      Yes [ X ]   No [     ]   NA [ ]
    Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place    Yes [ X ]   No [ ]       NA [ ]
    in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to
    project-affected groups and local NGOs?
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional             Yes [ x ]   No [ ]       NA [ ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the   Yes [ X ]   No [     ]   NA [     ]
    project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the Yes [ X ]     No [     ]   NA [     ]
    monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard
    policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the     Yes [ X ]   No [     ]   NA [     ]
    borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
    documents?
.
.




III. APPROVALS
.




    Task Team Leader:              Name: Keiko Ashida
    Approved By:
    Regional Safeguards            Name: Noreen Beg                             Date: January
Coordinator:                               29, 2018
Practice Manager:   Name: Valerie Hickey   Date: February
                                           6, 2018
