Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC402 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: January 30, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Benin 
Project ID: P081484 
Project Name: NATIONAL CDD 
PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Serge Theunynck 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 23, 
2004 
Estimated Board Date: May 27, 2004 
Managing Unit: AFTH2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (50%);Sub-
national government administration (50%) 
Theme: Participation and civic engagement 
(P);Rural services and infrastructure 
(P);Small and medium enterprise support 
(S);Decentralization (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 35 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN] 
 
Development objective
: The project would increase access of poor communities to basic social 
infrastructure and economic opportunities in response to their identified needs and in accordance 
with local governments’ plans and with a national CDD policy, in turn improving local 
government capacity for planning, monitoring and maintaining community-based services.   
 
Specific objectives
: (i) develop a national CDD policy fully integrated into sectoral and 
decentralization policies; (ii) support, on a mutually reinforcing manner and according to their 
comparative advantage, sub-projects implemented by communities and local governments 
(
communes)
 to improve the access of poor people to basic infrastructure, social services, 
economic opportunities and microfinance services; (iii) build the capacity of communities and 
communes
 to plan, implement, support and monitor the above.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN] 
 
Component 1:
 
Capacity
 
Building.
  Funding will be provided for: (i) 
central government
 to 
develop a national CDD policy in the context of decentralization and sectoral deconcentration, 
Page  2
 
 
and related implementation mechanisms; (ii) 
communes 
to produce Communal Development 
Plans (CDP) in a participatory manner, implement multi-village investments within their CDP, 
and support communities implementing community-level investments within the CDP; (iii) 
communities 
 to develop village/neighborhood development plans (within CDP framework), 
prioritize, prepare, implement and maintain small scale sub-projects; (iv) 
departments
 to monitor 
development plans at lower levels. A specific “speak-up” sub-component will (a) promote 
outreach to the most vulnerable/marginalized groups to encourage their active participation, and 
(b) facilitate discussion on highly sensitive issues that do not easily come out during 
participatory planning (e.g., child trafficking). 
Component 2: Improving the poor’s access to social services and basic infrastructure. 
Grants will be provided to: (i) 
communes
 for multi-community investments identified in the 
CDP; and (ii) communities for community-level investments prioritized in the 
village/neighborhood development plans and included in the CDP.  Targeting will be guided by a 
poverty map.  All sub-projects will be carried out in a participatory manner and according to the 
subsidiarity principle, with special attention given to the inclusion of women and of the most 
vulnerable groups. 
Component 3:
 
Improving the poor’s access to income generating activities (IGA) and 
microfinance services. 
This component will need to be further defined in light of an assessment 
of microfinance services and needs. It will be developed in coherence with Bank/CGAP 
Guidelines on MicroFinance in Social Funds and CDD projects. For the moment, 3 sub-
components are envisaged: (i) 
grants to the poorest communities
 currently out of the reach of 
microfinance institutions (MFI) to set up IGAs, while pursuing linkages with an MFI to ensure 
reliable access to financial services; (ii) 
social intermediation
 to help poor communities gain 
access to banking services; (iii) 
capacity support to MFI
s to enable them to put in place new 
products and mechanisms to reach  the targeted poor population.
  
Component 4: Support to CDD institutional structures
. This component will support: (i) 
AGeFIB to provide services to the local governments for the management and financing of 
communes’
 and communities’ sub-projects. The role of AGEFIB carrying out almost all 
functions of the sub-project cycle at the beginning of the project would be gradually phased out 
as responsibilities are transferred to 
communes
 in response to demonstrated increases in capacity, 
while keeping the responsibility of the Credit. The status and modus operandi of the Agency will 
be adjusted before project implementation, to reflect its new accountability to communes; (ii) 
local governments to gradually take over responsibilities in carrying out CDD programs as their 
capacities are built up under component 1.  
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
Location of the activities of the project cannot be known at the stage of project preparation, since 
sub-projects will be determined by communities during project implementation.
  
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
The project requires an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The ESMF enables communities and communes to 
screen their sub-projects for potential environmental/ social impacts and to develop/implement 
Page  3
 
 
appropriate mitigation measures, and includes guidance for pest management and 
implementation of small dams safety measures. These documents were prepared through 
financial support from the SF Project. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[ X] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[X] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[ X] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ X] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that 
EA category (mandatory): 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared.  
February 15, 2004 
 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS. 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
All studies have been launched by November 10, 2003 and have been completed on January 
26, 2004, when ASPEN issued it’s final clearance (clearance received on January 23, 2004 
under the condition that the last comments be incorporated). The studies have been disclosed 
both in-country and at the InfoShop on January 26, 2004. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Serge Theunynck 
2/3/2004 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Thomas E. Walton  
2/3/2004 
Comments 
 
 
 
 
Sector Manager: 
Alexandre V. Abrantes  
2/3/2004 
Comments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
wb22371 
Q:\BEN-CDD-PCN-ISDS-30jan04.doc 
2/3/2004 4:48 PM
                                                
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
 
