Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/09/2005 
Report No.:  AC1748
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Benin 
Project ID:  P071579 
Project Name:  Community-Based Coastal and Marine Biodiversity Management Project 
Task Team Leader:  Remi Kini 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 15, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: November 29, 2005 
Managing Unit:  AFTS3 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Environmental policies and institutions (P);Biodiversity (P);Other environment 
and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
4.20 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed Benin Community-Based Coastal and Marine Biodiversity Management 
Project aims to maintain the biological diversity and ecological functions of coastal 
wetlands and other ecosystems in the coastal zone, while supporting the livelihood and 
economic opportunities of the communities living in these areas.  The project will 
achieve this goal by (i) strengthening the capacity of national and local institutions to 
develop, test, and evaluate methods and tools to effectively manage coastal resources and 
integrate environmental protection into economic development planning, and (ii) 
establishing ?biological? reserves (reserves biologiques (BR)); in highly diverse 
biological areas all located within the two Ramsar sites of the country.  More specifically, 
the proposed project will (i) assist local communities and municipalities in the 
formulation and implementation of sustainable resource management plans (improved 
practices and adequate institutional arrangements); (ii) support alternative livelihoods that 
take pressure off the coastal resources; and (iii) support priority conservation activities in 
the coastal corridor.  
 
The main activities to be implemented by the project include the following:  
Page  2
a) 
Establishment of an institutional framework for integrated management of coastal 
resources in line with the mandates and responsibilities of the organizations, agencies, 
and stakeholders identified in the Coastal Zone Master Plan;  
 
b)
Implementation of management plans for the Ramsar sites including the proposed 
the reserves;  
 
c) 
Identification, restoration and protection of critical biodiversity resources through 
community-based conservation plans supported by necessary actions at the national and 
regional levels;  
 
d)
Strengthening of capacity of relevant agencies to address urgent coastal erosion 
and other resource degradation issues through the identification of cost-effective 
technical solutions;  
 
e) 
Support for sustainable livelihood options for local populations; and  
 
f) 
Development of an environmental monitoring system and an information network 
to support coastal wetland and marine resource management.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project activities consist of four interrelated components aimed at creating the 
technical, institutional, organizational, socio-economic and governance conditions needed 
to ensure an increase of economic benefits flowing from coastal natural resources, while 
protecting the productivity and biological diversity of the coastal ecosystems.  These 
components include  
 
(i) 
Institution and Capacity Building for Coastal Zone Management  
 
(ii) 
Community-Based Biodiversity Conservation,  
 
(iii) 
Monitoring & Evaluation of Coastal Wetlands and Marine Biodiversity, and  
 
(iv) 
Project Management and Coordination.  
 
Component 1: Institution and Capacity Building in Coastal Zone Management  
 
The activities of this component are of two types.  The first category of activities aim to 
put in place coordination mechanisms for effective integrated coastal zone management 
and environmental management activities.  These activities will consist mainly in 
bringing together all the public agencies involved in coastal zone management through an 
institutional arrangement that allows effective collaboration in the use and management 
of coastal zone resources.  Specific activities will include:  
 
1. 
Establishing mechanisms to ensure that the policies and decisions of all relevant 
line ministries and agencies and all levels of government are harmonized and consistent 
with the Coastal Zone Management Master Plan, the National Wetlands Strategy and the 
Integrated Water Resources Management Plan (GIRE) ;  
 
2.
Assisting municipalities in the development and implementation of a compliance 
and enforcement plan in order to control the main sources of threats; and  
 
3.
Building local capacity for enforcement of existing and newly enacted regulations 
on effluent emission standards, land use zoning, fishing and aquaculture technologies.  
 
The second category of activities will support a smooth start in the implementation of 
the coastal zone master plan through (i) the support of participatory processing at 
community and municipal level, and the provision of legal and technical assistance to 
Page  3
municipalities, NGOs, and communities in the implementation of activities complying 
with the master plan.  Specifically, GEF resources will allow for implementation of the 
following activities:  
 
?
Finalization, strengthening and expansion of consultations via workshops among 
communes and sectoral line ministries over the initial 12 months of the project period;  
 
?
Technical assistance and capacity building for local communes and employees of 
the relevant line ministries; and  
 
?
A
biodiversity overlay of the Coastal Zone Master Plan, ensuring biodiversity 
conservation considerations are adequately included.    
 
Component 2:  Community-Based Biodiversity Conservation  
 
The objective of this component is to preserve  globally important biodiversity  by  
insuring the protection of key areas, and improving the management of natural habitats.  
The coastal zone of Benin is caracterized by a  succession of sand dune, lagoons, 
wetlands, mangroves and lakes that harbour globally important biodiversity resources in 
need of protection and management.  Several areas have been identified within the two 
Ramsar sites located in the coastal zone.  The activities of this component evolve around 
two axes: (i) the identification, demarcation and conservation of Biological Reserves 
through a participative process, and (ii) the development of alternatives livelihood 
productive activities and the provision of other incentives that will decrease human 
pressure on coastal biodiversity resources.  
 
The proposed activities aim at ensuring the long-term ecological sustainability and 
biological diversity in the coastal zone.  This will be done the creation of biological 
reserves (BR) within the two Ramsar sites.  The activities will draw upon the technical 
studies and the public consultation carried in the project areas (around potential sites) at 
the time of the identification and dedication of the Ramsar sites and during the PDF-B 
stage, as well as those done for the development of the government?s Coastal Zone 
Master Plan. The project will facilitate the formulation of local development plans 
(PLAGE) which integrate the conservation objectives of the management plans of the 
Ramsar sites, but have a broader objective of sustainable development of the 
representative municipalities within the coastal zone.  The management plans at local 
level for the reserves, will be based on a formal agreement (charter - ?charte de gestion 
des reserves biologiques?) between the local communities and the Government, 
represented by the implementing agency.  The charter will describe the responsibilities of 
each party with respect to the management and protection of designated resource areas 
for community conservation.  
 
The importance of  sustaining the livelihoods of residents in the coastal zone is critical 
to achieve the long-term sustainability of resource use in Benin and to reduce immediate 
pressure on vulnerable ecosystems.  The second set of operations of this component aims 
to secure the livelihoods of coastal communities by providing concrete incentives for 
local communities to engage in production activities and resource exploitation practices 
that are consistent with the conservation of the resource base of the coastal zone.  More 
specifically, the project will help the individuals or social groups who rely on non-
Page  4
sustainable exploitation of natural resources (in the biodiversity rich areas) to engage in 
income generating activities that are consistent with the objective of biodiversity 
conservation at the local level (GEF alternative).  In so doing, the project will help relieve 
human pressure on the resource base.  
 
In addition to providing working capital for alternative economic activities, the project 
will support training activities that will help the interested individuals to start alternative 
activities or adopt sustainable use practices for those who will continue to rely on the 
exploitation natural resources for part of their living.  The types of activities identified 
during project preparation include:  (i) exploitation of non-timber forest products; (ii) 
production of handicrafts using native materials; (iii) processing of food products, (iv) 
sustainable farming of native fish species; and (v) establishment of nurseries and 
maintenance of medicinal and other useful plants for sale.  Other activities may be 
identified during the course of the project life.  
 
Component 3:  Monitoring and evaluation (M & E) of coastal wetlands and marine 
biodiversity  
 
The objective of this component is to develop an M & E system that will track the status 
of biodiversity resources as well as the changes in threats and the effectiveness of the 
project activities in mitigating these threats.  The monitoring and evaluation of the project 
outcomes and impacts will be done by measuring key indicators covering all the areas 
that are relevant to the achievement of biodiversity conservation objectives.  Performing 
monitoring and periodic evaluation will play a key role in ensuring that this innovative 
community-based conservation and community development project is delivering the 
expected results. Because of importance of this activity for the performance and success 
of the project, both the design and the operation of the monitoring and evaluation system 
will be as participatory as possible.  
 
Most of the detailed monitoring data will remain at the local level (municipality and 
village) where they will help adjust work programming, inputs, and improve the 
performance of local actors.  The data and performance indicators kept at the central level 
will be related to those related to the key activities and indicators included in the project 
logical frame.  Special emphasis will be on water quality, productivity of fisheries, 
coastal erosion, biodiversity status, and change in socio-economic of status of households 
in the project areas.  Two main categories of activities will be undertaken under this 
component: the design of the framework and implementation of the M&E activities, and 
the monitoring of the coastal environmental. Feedback from the component activities will 
be used for adaptive management throughout the course of the project.  
 
Component 4:  Project management and coordination  
 
Project management and coordination will be assured by the implementing agency, i.e., 
the Benin Environmental Agency (ABE).  In addition to accounting, financial reporting 
and arrangements, ABE will assure two main tasks:  (i) effective coordination of project 
activities, and (ii) information dissemination.   
 
Page  5
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located in five to seven sites of the Benin coastal zone.  The final number 
will depend on the unit cost of management activities.  These sites are of relatively small 
size (3-100 hectares), but they harbor biodiversity resources of high regional and global 
value.  In general, these sites are located in areas that are not currently used for farming 
or other uses.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Yves Andre Prevost (AFTS4) 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The potential environmental effects associated with the planned operations are related to 
component 2 of the project.  More specifically, these effects relate to the establishment of 
the biological reserves, and the financing of micro-projects for alternative livelihood 
means.  
 
In compensation for controlling some activities that may not be compatible with the 
conservation of globally important biodiversity resources, the project will provide 
financial and technical support to individuals and social groups in order to help start 
alternative economic activities.  The types of activities identified during project 
preparation include: (i) exploitation of non-timber forest products; (ii) production of 
handicrafts using native materials; (iii) processing of food products, (iv) sustainable 
farming of native fish species; and (v) establishment of nurseries and maintenance of 
medicinal and other useful plants for sale.  Other activities that comply with the criteria 
of selection (compatibility with sustainable use of resources) may be identified during the 
course of the project life.  
 
Page  6
The selection criteria to be used by the selection committee of these micro-projects will 
include both environmental and social aspects, and the total amount of the financing to be 
approved will take into account any environmental and social remediation costs.  From a 
biophysical standpoint, the financing of the micro-projects may have only limited adverse 
impacts.  In order to prevent such impacts, the Borrower will prepare two safeguards 
documents.  The first one, an environmental management framework (EMF) will guide 
the selection and implementation of the micro-projects with the aim to mitigate their 
negative environmental impacts.  In particular, it will describe the potential adverse 
biophysical effects associated with the micro-projects, and will provide specific 
mitigation measures for each type of impacts, as well as the means and responsibilities 
for undertaking such measures). The second document is the process framework (PF).  
The creation of the community conservation areas (biological reserves) in inhabited areas 
will not require the resettlement of the populations currently living in these areas.  
However, resource exploitation options may be regulated in order to encourage 
sustainable of natural resources.  These regulations that are necessary to prevent over-
exploitation and to avoid the depletion of the resource will apply in demarcated areas 
when necessary. These regulations may result in reduced levels of resource use for some 
members of the local communities.  This situation may have adverse effects on the home 
consumption of specific goods or income earning opportunities in local markets.  The 
socio-economic studies conducted during the preparation of the projects already 
identified the instances where such effects may arise.  
 
The PF will describe (i) the project activities that may restriction on natural resource use 
and the process by which the affected people participate in the design of the project, (ii) 
the criteria for eligibility of the affected people, (iii) the measures to assist these people, 
(iv) the process for resolving potential conflicts in affected communities, (v) the 
administrative and legal procedures applicable, and the monitoring arrangements to 
ensure the effectiveness of compliance with the above measures.  The ultimate objective 
of the Process Framework is to ensure that the community members who would be 
adversely affected by the project are effectively compensated for losses of consumption 
and income attributable directly to the project.  This objective is pursued by (i) providing 
the affected people with designating replacement sites in the project area where resource 
exploitation is not restricted, and (ii) providing alternative livelihood means through the 
provision of direct assistance to the affected people through the formulation and 
implementation of actual resettlement action plans during the project activities.  It should 
be stressed here that the resources allocated to the development of alternative livelihood 
means aim primarily to help the affected community members to cope with this change in 
their living conditions.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
At this stage, there are no potential direct or indirect long-term impacts that would result 
from future activities in the project area.  If implemented effectively, the master plan for 
coastal zone management should keep development options with adverse irreversible 
environmental and social impacts in check.   
 
Page  7
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The initial project idea was based on a biodiversity conservation option that relied on the 
integral protection of demarcated areas without much permissible use rights for local 
populations.  The conservation approach now used by the project is one that is more 
flexible and sensitive to local livelihood needs.  It allows the sustainable use of resources, 
and would provide technical assistance and resources to affected parties to develop 
alternative livelihood means.  The concept of parcs r?gionaux (regional parks) that 
guided the design of this project is borrowed from the French experience where local 
governments have developed biodiversity and rural landscape conservation areas in 
which human settlements are tolerated under conditions of sustainable use of natural 
resources.  In fact, the implementing agency of proposed project is currently benefiting 
from technical and financial assistance from the French cooperation for the 
implementation of activities related to the proposed.  Through this collaboration several 
mayors of the project area visited France in order to learn from their experience in the 
management of ?regional parks?.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Benin has adopted an environmental assessment (EA) law since 1999, and the 
Government has made substantial efforts since this period towards enforcing this law.  
The Benin environmental agency (ABE) which is the technical arm of the government in 
overseeing compliance with the environmental assessment requirements is the 
implementing agency for the proposed project.  ABE has also implemented an IDA 
Environmental Management Project in which the communes benefited from substantial 
capacity building activities in environmental management, including EA.  This project 
supported the preparation and implementation (in some cases) of municipal 
environmental action plans.  EA was part of the training activities provided to local 
officials (prefectures) and NGOs.  The small infrastructure investments financed by the 
project through the municipal action plans followed both national and Bank EA 
requirements.  The municipalities covered by the proposed project were also part of the 
previous IDA project (closed 2001). Overall, ABE, i.e., the implementing agency will 
retain full responsibility for ensuring compliance with the recommendations of the 
process framework and the environmental management framework through the (i) 
inclusion of the relevant requirements in the implementation manual and the monitoring 
and evaluation manual, and (ii) the provision of monitoring indicators for the social and 
environmental impacts of the proposed investments.  The quarterly progress reports of 
the progress as well as the aide-memoires of Bank supervision missions will include an 
assessment of the compliance with the environmental and social safeguards requirements. 
The training of the municipality staff and the community biological reserve management 
units will include modules dealing with environmental and social safeguards so that these 
partners for implementation are well equipped with the minimum skills needed to apply 
the recommendations of the environmental and social safeguards documents..  Finally, 
the implementing agency will also be involved in supervising the compliance with the 
environment and social safeguard requirements of the Community-Driven Development 
project and the Second Decentralized City Management Project that both have activities 
Page  8
planned in the same areas as the proposed project.  This will allow a more comprehensive 
and elaborate mitigation of the potential cumulative effects.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
This project has three main categories of stakeholders: (i) the central government 
represented by the implementing agency and the sectoral ministries, (ii) the local 
governments (communes/municipalities, and (iii) the local communities directly involved 
in project implementation.  The preparation process of both the coastal zone master plan 
and the project involved all three categories of stakeholders.  The central government 
prescribed the overall policy for managing the resources of the coastal zone, and provided 
guidance to other stakeholders for implementing the master plan (including the protection 
and sustainable of biodiversity resources).  Representatives of the local governments of 
the project area, and local communities were consistently consulted by the consultants 
preparing the environmental and social assessment studies.  Consultations with different 
social groups of the participating communities, including farmers, fishermen, religious 
leaders, women, and local business men were held to discuss the planning of the project, 
the nature of activities envisaged, the selection f the conservation sites, and the 
alternative production activities that the project could support.  The results of these 
studies will be discussed and shared with all the participating communities and 
municipalities.  The EMF and the Process Framework will be disclosed in the mayors? 
office, in the participating communities, and at ABE (representing the government).  It 
will also be disclosed in the World Bank InfoShop, and in the documentation center of 
the Benin Country Office in Cotonou prior to apparaisal.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/20/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/29/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/15/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/02/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/29/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/15/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  9
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
No 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Remi Kini 
08/04/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Yves Andre Prevost 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
08/08/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Joseph Baah-Dwomoh 
08/05/2005 
Comments:   
