                              Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)

                                                                                                 Report No: AC1179
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/06/2004
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: BENIN                                                 Project ID: P069896
Project: Forests and Adjacent Lands Management                 Task Team Leader: Clotilde Ngomba
Program
Authorized to Appraise Date: December 13, 2004                 IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: March 8, 2005                                   IDA Amount ($m):
                                                               Global Supplemental Amount ($m): 6.00
Managing Unit: AFTS3                                           Sector: Forestry (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)             Theme: Environmental policies and institutions (P);
Status: Lending                                                Biodiversity (P); Other environment and natural
                                                               resources management (S)

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The project development objective is to promote: "Socially, technically and economically viable
management of forest and adjacent land resources by communities, within a strengthened institutional
framework".

The proposed project contributes to a countrywide National program which is for a 15 years duration, over
three phases. The program duration is dictated by the time required for improved management approaches
to yield significant changes on environment. The project covered by the current proposal will be
implemented over five years, with GEF financial support. This project supports key PRSP goals and is
fully linked to the approved poverty reduction support credit (PRSC). The proposed project is directly
connected to pillars ii, iii, and iv of Benin's PRSP. It aims at strengthening the institutional capacity of the
forestry administration as well as others stakeholders, promoting the participation of Community Based
Organizations (CBOs) in the management of forest and adjacent lands, and sustaining contribution of forest
resources to the well being of local population. The following activities are covered by the PRSC in the
area of forestry and adjacent land management: (i) recruitment and training of additional foresters, and
provision of sufficient funding and adequate equipment to the forest service, (ii) improving timber pricing,
(iii) withdrawal of the State from timber plantations and processing, and iii) the review and update of
forestry legislation. Thus the PRSC provides an excellent basis for the proposed project.

The project is designed to build upon the promising experiences of the Natural Resources Management
Project (Projet de Gestion des Resources Naturelles ­ PGRN) which closed in June 1999 . The PGRN 1


successfully tested a number of inter-related pilot activities consisting of community-based management of
watersheds, wildlife reserves and gazetted forests. The successful approaches of the wildlife component is
being replicated with the support of the Bank and the Global Environment Facility (GEF), French
Development Agency (AFD), European Union (EU) and the Dutch Development Agency.                             The
Government, GTZ and AFD have replicated the community-based watershed management component
through a stand-alone project (Programme de Gestion des Terroirs et des Ressources Naturelles ­ PGTRN)
from 1999 to 2003. The African Development Bank is implementing a stand-alone project for the
participatory management of the forests of D'Agoua, Monts Koufe and Wari-Maro.

                                                         2
                                                                                                            ISDS


Since the closing of PGRN, the Government has asked the Bank to assist them to scale-up the
community-based forest management component of PGRN to the remaining gazetted forests in Benin,
forest adjacent lands and four forest plantations in the urban landscape around Parakou, Abomey, Djougou
and Natitingou. This is the objective of the proposed PGFTR (Projet de Gestion des Forêts et des Terroirs
Riverains). Meanwhile, the Government has maintained activities in 6 sites formerly assisted by PGRN
and GEF/UNSO projects, including Tchouarou-Toui -Kilibo, Ouémé Supérieur Ndali, Dogo Kétou,
Goungoun, Sota and Ouémé-Bokou. Participatory forest management plans were prepared and adopted by
communities before the end of the project. Minimum assistance was still being provided until 2002 to
forestry staff to continue implementation of the management plans and avoid losing this experience. So far
the country has shown strong ownership of the program. In 2003, PGFTR was chosen by the Government
of Benin as one of the two sector programs to be financed as associated programs of the PRSC (Poverty
Reduction Support Credit). Since then, the project has been funded from the national budget. Focus has
been put in continued consultation process for the creation of forest user associations as partners to the
co-management schemes between the forest service and local communities living on adjacent lands. In
FY03 and FY04, the program received an annual budget of about US $2.4 million, an amount never
reached by the forestry sector over the past decade.

2. Program global objective

The global objective is to assist Benin in its efforts to resolve problems preventing shifts to integrated forest
and adjacent land ecosystem management and thus strategically influencing ecosystem management trends,
over the medium and long term. This is to enable targeted contributions to the GEF objectives in the
following focal areas: Climate Change, Biodiversity, Land (land degradation) and Water (International
Waters). The specific global benefits are outlined in Annex 4 (Incremental Costs):

To achieve these global benefits, the following operational goals are pursued: (i) to enhance the carbon
storage capacity by increasing the range of activities to be supported in the program intervention area and
focusing on forests and adjacent land with low actual production/high ecological, cultural or religious
importance, (ii) to enable protection of biological diversity within sustainable multiple-use production
forests and explore suitable areas and/or species for ecotourism (iii) to prevent land and water degradation
in forests and adjacent lands, (iv) to preserve genetic diversity within forest species that are collected by
rural populations for medicinal and consumptive uses by evaluating and conserving indigenous knowledge,
(v) to improve the use and efficiency of traditional energy by developing and implementing a national
fuel-wood master plan, (vi) to develop innovative monitoring and evaluation methods and systems for
future use in the target regions by local communities and national authorities, demonstrating changes in
ecosystem management patterns and related global benefits, and (vii) to develop a communication and
extension strategy in rural and urban areas to raise awareness and to promote integrated ecosystem
approaches, and also to reduce national demand for exploitative forest-based products that are not
produced on a sustainable basis.


I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
Provisionally, it is anticipated that the project will intervene in 22 nationwide forests, with various sizes
and socio-cultural, economic and environmental characteristics. These include 15 gazetted natural forests,
four forest plantations in the urban landscape, and three sensitive "protected forests" in fuel-wood
producing areas. The GEF proposed project components are linked to the Bank-supported country PRSC
and MTEF. The components of the project are as follows:

(i) Institutional Support and Capacity Building: This component aims at strengthening the technical

                                                        3
                                                                                                          ISDS


capacity of the forestry administration, and other participants involved in forest management. This will
include the adoption and implementation of a new forestry administration organizational structure at the
                                                                                                       2


central, departmental and local levels,    including establishing and operationalizing a unit responsible for
planning, monitoring and evaluation; making available information and the tools necessary for management
and decision-making to all the stakeholders. There will also be a modest increase in staffing, primarily at
the departmental and local levels, recycling and training of existing staff to enable them to work more
effectively in partnership with communities and secure biodiversity in gazetted forests. The training
program to be adopted during the first year of program implementation will also cover private operators
and NGOs intervening in the sector in order to ensure the judicious and sustainable management of
renewable natural resources. Some essential infrastructure such as forest posts offices and essential office
equipment (few cars and computers) will also be financed.

Communication Program
In order to ensure widespread public understanding of project objectives and facilitate sharing of
experience, the program will finance a public awareness, information and communication program at the
national level which will publicize the implications of institutional changes to the general population and
raise their awareness of participatory forest management.

Monitoring and Evaluation System
The PGFTR monitoring and evaluation system will have three related sub-components including: i)
monitoring of global environmental services and carbon sequestration to help establish baselines and
monitor national trends in the quality and status of Benin's ecosystems and its management of natural
resources. Emphasis in measurement will be put on carbon sequestration capacity, and biodiversity, using
the results of baseline studies; ii) community-based monitoring and evaluation of program activities based
on program indicators, iii) monitoring of institutional capacity covering procurement and financial
management indicators.

GEF specific activities under this component comprise: strengthening capacity for forestry administration
and private operators in integrated ecosystem management approach, that secure biodiversity conservation
in productive forests; establishment of a sustainable mechanism for community-driven information
sharing, awareness raising and communication concerning opportunities for integrated ecosystem
management and related benefits; development and implementation of a monitoring and evaluation system.

(ii) Community-Based Management of Forest Resources:              This component aims at optimizing the
ecological, social, and economic services from the ecosystem. The approach piloted under the PGRN for
the evolution and implementation of collaborative forest management plans between forest communities and
DFRN will be enhanced. In collaboration with the Centres d'Action Régionale pour le Développement
Rural (CARDERs), the program will also support promotion of improved agricultural techniques in
agricultural splots within the gazetted forests as well as in adjacent lands. The process of developing and
implementing forest and adjacent land management plans includes: diagnostic of social characteristics, and
multi-resource inventory; training of communities in sustainable resource management; establishment of
community-based organizations (CBOs); pilot action with communities and establishment of essential
infrastructure; evolution of a draft management plan including management activities (e.g. enrichment
planting, early fires, forest paths), identification of most used forestry products, identification of eligible
economic enterprises; negotiation and joint adoption of the participatory forest management plans by
communities, DFRN and DFPRN; creation of a Forest Management Fund (FMF), development and
implementation of annual work programs and participatory monitoring of adherence to those plans. The
FMF is an important economic variable as it comprises the main source of funding for the implementation

                                                      4
                                                                                                          ISDS


of forest management plans.The final forest management plan of individual forest would take into
consideration the level of encroachment, the extent to which encroachment can be stabilized as suggested
by the EA. Enrichment planting will be done in degraded portions of gazetted forests while trees plantations
will be developped in unforested sites in adjacent lands. In planting activities, communities will be
associated in the choice of species in order to avoid invasive species and species which may threaten
biodiversity. The area of forest adjacent lands to be covered by the PGFTR will be defined with
communities and councils. Land use plan will be adopted in accordance with local development plans and
take into account individual property whose limits will be negotiated and registered as part of the program
activities. Based on the results of the multi-resources inventories, and observations made during PGFTR
preparation phase, a detailed fauna inventory will be carried out in certain forests likely to contain special
habitats. Conservation areas as well as incentives for their protection will be included in the management
plan. Incentives will be defined with communities to ensure their support.

Activities eligible for GEF funding in this component include mainly: land use planning, enrichment
planting, baseline studies for carbon sequestration and biodiversity in selected sites, additional inventory of
fauna and medicinal plants, anti-poaching program, specific training and organizational support for
forestry staffs and CBOs, promotion of alternative sources of income.

(iii) Sustainable Fuelwood Production and Marketing. The project will pilot an approach to promoting
production and utilization of wood fuel from the sustainably managed forests. The approach will involve
elaborating wood fuel supply plans for the north and south of the country. This will identify the sources of
supply for the major urban areas. The implementation of this component will coordinate with ongoing
projects such as the AfDB funded fuel-wood plantations, and the Bank-led "Sustainable and Participatory
Energy Management Project " under preparation and to be implemented by the Directorate of Energy. In
the 22 forests covered, the program will promote community-based management plans for forests resources
including re-planting programs for fuel-wood preferred species. More energy efficient technologies for
charcoal production will also be promoted. It is envisaged that some producers groups (CBOs) would
travel to neighboring countries (such as Senegal) to learn from their experience in that area. In order to
stimulate demand for wood fuel from sustainably managed sources, the program will also promote fiscal
and regulatory changes (e.g. tax differentials to make wood from sustainable sources more attractive to
consumers). Furthermore, the program information, education and communication campaign will help to
generate further demand for wood fuel from sustainable sources. Commercialization of fuel-wood and
charcoal from the program sites will be organized through the creation of rural fuel-wood rural markets, in
connection with the regional supply plans.

GEF supported activities include: development and promotion of energy efficient technologies, planting in
forest adjacent lands of species favorable for carbon sequestration but whose rate of growth may not be
attractive to communities. Associated with this component would be included plantations and reforestation
areas in preparation of a possible admission of Benin in the clean development mechanisms.

Components:


(i) Strengthen the managerial and technical capacity of the forestry administration (at the central and
departmental levels), NGOs, and private operators involved.
(ii) Development and implementation of participatory management plans for forests and adjacent lands.
(iii) Sustainable system of fuelwood production and marketing

                                                        5
                                                                                                          ISDS


I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
     The scope of the proposed operation is not location-specific, but rather national. The project will
     strengthen national institutions, Community-Based Organizations and the civil society, and improve
     regulations in ways that can facilitate Integrated ecosystem management.

     Forests in Benin are located in various landscapes delimited by "Agro-ecological regions".
     Geographical boundary of PGFTR intervention will target 6 of the 8 designated agro-ecological
     regions. Provisionally, it is anticipated that the project will intervene in 22 nationwide forests, of
     various sizes and socio-cultural, economic and environmental characteristics, for integrated ecosystem
     management. These include 15 gazetted natural forests, 4 forest plantations in the urban landscape,
     and 3 sensitive "protected forests" in fuel-wood producing areas. The sequencing of PGFTR
     intervention defined under PRSC1 will be confirmed in light of the biodiversity study completed in
     2004. The selection was based on criteria such as rate of degradation, level of human pressure to the
     forest, potential connectivity for fauna migration, ongoing community management activity, readiness
     of surrounding communities. The following is a subset of the priority network for the first 2 years of
     GEF intervention: FC Goungoun, FC Sota, FC Tchaourou Toui-Kilibo, FC Oueme Superieur Ndali,
     FC Trois Rivières, FC Kilir, FC Dogo- Kétou, PR Abomey. Already, the firts 4 forests listed have a
     management plan adopted under PGRN which need to be revised in light of the recent biodiversity
     study. The remaining forests are also covered by the continuing IEC and few activities undertaken by
     the forestry administration under PRSC program.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: Through its focus institutional strengthening of the forestry administration and for other sector
stakeholders and its integrated approach to ecosystem management nationwide, the project is expected to
induce a positive impact on the environment. In addition, the project is not a Biodiversity Conservation
operation per see and will not lead to any displacement of people. Finally, the recent biodiversity study will be
a basis for more detailed fauna inventory prior to the design of all management plan. The expected results will
help locate critical habitats and integrate them in the forest management plan. These reasons justified the
choice of a type B Environmental Assessment which was completed in 2000.

The EA analysis has proceeded in parallel with project preparation so that findings have been incorporated into overall proje
MAEP's and other agencies' capacity to monitor, evaluate and mitigate environmental impacts of activities taking place in th

There is no need to update the global EA report for the 22 forests. This was confirmed by a biodiversty study completed in
the level of forest encroachment. The steadiness of the situation is a result of the continuing IEC program and the
administration in the field. However, the project will conduct a specific individual EA prior to the adoption of the man
Béninoise pour l'Environnement) has already been approached for this task. The project team will ensure that the individ
EMPs prepared by ABE are satisfactory to the Bank.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                      Policy                                          Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                         Yes      No      TBD
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                 Yes      No      TBD
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                  Yes      No      TBD
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    Yes      No      TBD

                                                        6
                                                                                                          ISDS


    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                Yes     No       TBD
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                 Yes     No       TBD
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        Yes     No       TBD
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                            Yes     No       TBD
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                 Yes     No       TBD
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                      Yes     No       TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Significant issues. PGFTR seeks to strengthen the capacity for forestry administration and private
operators in integrated ecosystem management approach, that secure biodiversity conservation in
productive forests; develop and promote energy efficient technologies, develop alternative (to forest)
sources of income, promote plantations in degraded forest adjacent lands of species favorable for carbon
sequestration. In that sense, PGFTR and its different activities are likely to have no significant undesirable
environmental and social impact.

An overview of the provisions to ensure project compliance with applicable social and environmental
safeguard policies suggests that Operation Directive OP 4.01 fully applies to this operation. However,
other safeguards would eventually bring enhancement to project. Therefore OP 4.04 and 4.36 are also
considered.

 Environmental Assessment As far as the environmental safeguards are concerned, and in line with
requirements under environmental category B, an EA study were conducted in 2000. The EA covered the
22 forests of PGFTR and revealed that the program will have a positive environmental impact and help
reduce forest degradation in Benin. The main recommendation made in the subsequent mitigation plan
include few measures which aim at maximizing the Project potential impact. The measures suggested are
all related to capacity building for both the forestry administration and the Community-based
organizations. This has been integrated in project component I. However, given the level of detailed
information required for the integrated ecosystem management approach, individual EAs will be completed
during the preparation of each forest management plan.

Natural habitat. The integrated ecosystem approach to be implemented in PGFTR area is expected to
reduce forest degradation and stop losses in biodiversity overtime. No adverse impact on natural habitat is
expected. This is confirmed by the global EA which recommendation focuses on the staffing required to
ensure proper management of eventual natural habitats in the gazetted forests. A biodiversity study
completed in 2004 have provided information on flora and fauna species in the 22 forests to be covered.
Detailed information on natural habitats will also come from the planned multi-resources inventory which
precedes the establishment of each management plan. Although this operation is not a biodiversity
conservation project per see, the relevant information will be used in the preparation of forest management
plans. Special provisions will be made towards perpetuity and special uses of the portion of forests with
special habitat.

Forestry. The activities relevant to this safeguards will mainly be: i) enrichment planting with indigenous

                                                      7
                                                                                                          ISDS


species in degraded or harvested portions of gazetted forests, ii) introduction of trees in farm landscape tree
plantations in degraded lands outside gazetted forests. These activities cannot lead to any negative impact.
They do not require any forest clearing, rather they seek to increase the area under forest coverage and are
expected to contribute to greater capacity for carbon sequestration. In addition, communities will be
associated in the choice of species in order to avoid invasive species and species which may threaten
biodiversity.

Social safeguards. As far as social safeguards are concerned, the initial social assessment and the global
EA completed in 2000 showed different levels of encroachment in the PGFTR proposed forests. As
mentioned, the situation has not worsen since then.The relative stability observed since 2000 is due to the
return of the forestry administration to the field and the continuing IEC campaign implemented in
collaboration with local radios. No particular gender issue was raised concerning gender in the social
assessment. In addition, experience from joint field visits suggests that, apart from the traditional division
of tasks in rural areas, women have the same access to authorized activities than men and obey to the
same management rules set by the community based organizations to which they belong.
Conflicts between forest users are common in the project area. Conflicts mainly oppose farmers
and nomad pastoralists and result from damage caused to crops by cattle and fires, quarrels over
land, and protest against newcomers. Also preparatory studies have mentioned farmers'
grievances against wildlife (elephants) in some areas.

Indigenous Peoples. There are no indigenous people as defined in OP/BP 4.20 in the PGFTR proposed
area. Rather, there are vulnerable groups with different characteristics. These groups will participate in the
management of the gazetted forests and adjacent lands, in accordance with their socioeconomic and cultural
specificities.

Involuntary Resettlement. It is unlikely that activities financed under PGFTR will result in the
involuntary resettlement of individuals. Rather, the improved agricultural and            pasture management
techniques proposed in PGFTR will contribute to the stabilization of local people. To that end, it has been
agreed that the preparation and implementation of forest management plans will integrate the encroached
areas as agricultural or pasture plots. However, land tenure and property right in Benin are regulated
under national land tenure system, and coexists with traditional land tenure systems at community level.
Consequently, stabilization of agriculture and regulation of activities in legally gazetted forests may cause
limitations to traditional rights. To mitigate the impact of such limitations, a Process Framework (PF) has
been prepared under PGFTR, in accordance with the policies and principles of the World Bank,
namely OP/BP 4.12 (paragraph 31 and Annex A paragraphs 26 & 27). The Process Framework
suggests that the main measure to fully restore the income base of people who will loose access to
resources is the promotion of alternative sources of income. The related micro-projects may
include, but are not limited to, carbonization, tree-nursing, logging, bee-keeping, breeding wild
animals (auladiculture), processing and storage centers for cassava, off-season production of
vegetables through small scale irrigation.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
 This project was designed to promote socially, technically and economically viable management of forest
and adjacent land resources by communities, stop land and forest degradation and biodiversity loss, within
a strengthened institutional framework.

                                                       8
                                                                                                          ISDS


The Environmental Impact Assessment did not identify any specific cumulative impacts due to the
implementation of the PGFTR. However, during implementation, special attention will be given to the
interactions between PGFTR activities and other rural development projects such as the CDD under
preparation. Participation of the stakeholders will be promoted in both projects and coordination has to be
established as soon as possible between the implementation structures -at all levels (national and local)- to
avoid adverse impacts due to conflicting approaches.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
The EIA has not identified potential long-term undesirable impacts as a direct or indirect consequence of
this project but highlighted the fact that frustration of beneficiaries could derive from insufficient budget
and supervision of activities by the forestry administration.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
No alternative project designs were considered on the environmental grounds, as no negative environmental impacts are ex
alternative was considered on grounds other that negative environmental impact. It is the one of no-project scenario. In tha
support the forestry sector through the ongoing PRSC. Through the annual budgeting process (MTEF), the Bank will ensure
budget allocations that will finance the baseline activities such as strengthening the capacity of the forestry administr
minimum equipment and training. However without GEF financing, global environmental benefits such carbon sequestrat
emissions, land and water degradation reduction and biodiversity loss would not be addressed to the same extent and not e
the development and implementation of a new monitoring and evaluation system for integrated ecosystem management.

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
An overview of the provisions to ensure project compliance with applicable social and environmental
safeguard policies suggests that Operation Directives OP 4.01, OP 4.04 and 4.36 apply to this operation.
As far as the environmental safeguards are concerned, and in line with requirements under environmental
category B, an EIA study was conducted in 2000. The EIA revealed that the program will have a positive
impact and help reduce forest degradation in Benin. The subsequent mitigation plan include few activities
which aim at maximizing the Project potential impact by improving management capacity in the forestry
administration and ensuring proper management of natural habitats. These have been incorporated into
PGFTR. Experience from Ex-PGRN suggests that detailed information on natural habitats will come from
the planned multi-resources inventory which precedes the preparation of each management plan. This
information is already available in some forests (such as OSN) and the associated management plans
include special measures towards perpetuality and special uses of the concerned area.
As far as social safeguards are concerned, the initial social assessment and the EA completed in 2000
showed different levels of encroachment in the PGFTR proposed forests. However, given that the primary
objective of the 22 forests is not formal conservation, there will be no need to displace people. That means,
no involuntary resettlement is foreseen. Rather, the improved agricultural and pasture management
techniques proposed in PGFTR will contribute to the stabilization of indigenous people and friendly
relationship between farmers and nomad cattle breeders.It has been agreed that the preparation and
implementation of forest management plans will integrate the encroached areas as agricultural or pasture
plots. If for currently unexpected reason, communities face a loss of access to resources that they exploit,
then the project would have to prepare an Indigenous People Development Plan (IPDP) acceptable to the
Bank.




II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

                                                       9
                                                                                                           ISDS


Key stakeholders include: the Benin population at large, national institutions and NGOs, local councils,
forest neighboring villages and communities, small rural forest related enterprises. The participatory
approach will build upon the experiences of the PGRN. The approach will consist of formulating a forest
management plan involving all the stakeholders and especially communities that are already living in the
forest, as well as those living on the periphery of the forest who regularly use forest resources, or forest
land. The participatory dialogue and evolution of management plans will commence with each ethnic
group at the sub-village level. Subsequently, all the villages within and on the periphery of the forest will be
required to form village management committees. These committees will be grouped into management
blocks, and then ultimately the management plan for the whole forest will be evolved. The management
plan will be implemented by a Council whose members are the village management committees. In this way
the plans will be evolved from the bottom-up, along with a series of nested organizational structures to
implement the plan.

The management plan will specify zones of management together with detailed information on tree
harvesting rotations, hunting quotas, corridors for pasture, maintenance of fire-breaks, replanting, weeding,
coppicing areas for exploitation for charcoal, honey production, etc. Areas that have already been
encroached by agriculturists will be delimited and included into the management plans. Community
agreements comparable to rental contracts will be established. Farmers will be required to commit to stop
any further encroachment in return for the right to continue to occupy and crop land within the gazetted
forest boundaries, and have access to revenues from sustainable forest based enterprises such as wood and
charcoal production, honey production, cashew production, etc. A management fund to implement aspects
of the management plan requiring collective action or purchase of inputs will also be established and
augmented by taxing enterprises that generate revenues through utilization of forest resources.

Experience suggests that there is no single mechanism for conflicts resolution applicable to all cases.
Rather, it is advisable that the mechanism for conflicts resolution be discussed with concerned
communities, then included in the contractual agreement between the Forestry administration and
beneficiary communities. Conflict resolution mechanisms already exist for the 4 forests which management
plans were adopted during the closed PGRN. The mechanisms were discussed during the preparation of the
participatory management plan and can be can be changed during the revision of the plan, or anytime if
need be. The conflict resolution mechanism for TTK is included in annex, as an example.


E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
          management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
          projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
          issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                         Expected           Actual

                                                    10
                                                                                                    ISDS


Date of receipt by the Bank                                              9/3/2000        9/3/2000
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          10/29/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           11/20/2004
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive        Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              1/10/2005
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          1/17/2005
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           1/17/2005

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                     Clotilde Ngomba                                    11/30/2004
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

Approved by:                         Name                                                Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Thomas E. Walton                                        12/01/2004
Sector Manager/Director               Joseph Baah-Dwomoh                                 12/01/2004

