Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC769 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: April 9, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bolivia 
Project ID: P083051 
Project Name: BO Rural Space 
Task Team Leader: Ethel Sennhauser 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 17, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 29, 2005 
Managing Unit: LCSER 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and 
forestry sector (30%);Sub-national government 
administration (30%);General transportation 
sector (20%);Agricultural marketing and trade 
(20%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure 
(P);Rural policies and institutions (P);Rural 
non-farm income generation (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  A. Zarzar 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 20 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 5 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives  
 
The project’s objective is to improve the income of poor rural producers (and particularly the ones with 
indigenous background) in 2-3 selected sub-regions of the country.  To achieve this, the project will (i) 
promote strategic productive alliances between different economic players at the local level, (ii) empower 
rural producers through the development of self-managed grass-root organizations, (iii) increase access to 
productive assets and technology, (iv) promote more effective, responsive  and accountable service 
organizations at the local level, and (v) provide an enabling environment for productive alliances and 
local economic development.   
 
 
C.  Project Description  
 
Following a rural space approach, the project will operate in 2-3 geographical areas selected during 
project preparation according to their productive potential and poverty status. In these areas, the project 
will promote the efficient use of resources through the support to rural productive activities which will 
have potentiality to be converted into economic returns for poor farmers.  Although the final design will 
be determined during project preparation, possible project components to assist with this are:  
 
A. Local Economic Development component: 
  support to the local economic development process 
and the promotion of strategic productive alliances. It would include:  
(a)  establishment of demand driven productive alliances: support to “alliance brokers”, information 
sharing among beneficiaries (including communications strategy), mobilization and screening of 
interests from potential participants, pre-investment assistance, and evaluation of proposals.   
Page  2
 
 
(b)  support to participatory local economic development planning: local economic development plans 
(“alliance plans”) would be developed to respond to the compromise undertaken in a productive 
alliance by all parties involved. The “alliance plan” would describe the investments and activities 
required to be done (i) by the supply side (groups of producers) and local governments to ensure a 
continuous and good quality supply of products, and (ii) by the demand side to ensure that quality 
requirements are understood, and fair returns are provided to producers.  This subcomponent 
would also provide the necessary technical assistance and services to prepare alliance plans.  
(c)  technical assistance to the private sector to take up proposals which enable them to increase value 
added from existing products or develop new enterprises and joint ventures.  
 
B. Producer organizations component
: a community driven development component to promote 
local empowerment and productive investments but for farmers participating in productive alliances.  
It would include:  
(a) Producer groups and capacity building: development of self-selected and self- managed grass-
root organizations (“producer groups”) and the capacity building of their members in technical, 
managerial and leadership areas, as well as building skills within their organizations to access 
information and services, negotiate with service providers and be a recognized player within a 
productive alliance. The subcomponent would encourage development of networks of producer 
organizations which are able to sustain and take independent initiatives after the project is over.  
(b) Productive assets and services: support to services, goods and productive infrastructure to rural 
producers for the implementation of “alliance plans”. The activities to be included would depend 
on the geographical areas to be supported (and still not defined), but might likely include on-farm 
infrastructure (irrigation, storage facilities, community centers for product processing, water 
harvesting structures, etc), soil conservation measures (terracing, land leveling, watershed 
treatments), goods (equipment, machinery, vet supplies, seeds and other vegetative material, 
agriculture inputs, etc), and services and technical assistance (in market and marketing, IT, 
surveys, laboratory tests, insurance, and other technical productive services). The subcomponent 
would be implemented by the producer groups, and will be subject to cost sharing arrangements. 
An additional output is the creation of a  financing mechanism to support the productive 
investments made by producer groups. 
  
C. Project Management
: This component would aim to clarify responsibilities between different 
agencies and levels of government and increase their capacity in supporting productive investments, 
and in delivering services to the rural poor. It would include: (a) capacity building and organizational 
support to establish a project coordinating group at the center and regional level,  (b) monitoring and 
learning (including establishment of a management information system to support communications 
between the participants of productive alliances, service providers and project authorities), and (c) 
provision of goods, equipment and incremental operational costs for the coordinating group.  
 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
 
The project will be located in 2-3 geographical areas, which are in the process of being identified, 
based on criteria representing both good productive potential and important levels of poverty.  To select 
these areas, a preparation team is currently working in (i) identifying the variables to measure productive 
potential and levels of poverty, (ii) developing potential scenarios in a GIS system, and (iii) completing 
final selection.  The work is expected to be completed in June 2004. The final areas for project 
intervention will however exclude protected areas and critical natural habitats.  
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies  
 
Page  3
 
 
The overall institutional capacity to address safeguard policies will be better assessed during preparation.  
Provisions have however  been made to (i) hire a safeguard coordinator/social scientist with PHRD 
resources to work in the preparation team, (ii) ensure that the environmental and social assessments to be 
undertaken during project preparation assess this institutional capacity and develop measures to enhance 
it as needed, and (iii) initiating the capacity building of the whole preparation team, through an initial 
safeguard workshop organized by the Bank and completed as part of the identification mission (with the 
distribution of appropriate material to all workshop participants).  
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[YES] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
No large-scale impacts are expected given the limited, community-based nature of project 
activities. However, an EA will be done as part of project preparation to identify the 
project’s potential environmental impacts, to develop appropriate mitigation measures for 
negative impacts, and to recommend enhancement measures for positive impacts. These 
mitigation and enhancement measures will be summarized in an Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) that will include screening criteria and environmental 
procedures. The EA will also evaluate whether other “environmental” safeguards are 
triggered,  and develop appropriate procedures, if necessary.  
[ ] 
Natural Habitats
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[YES] 
Pest Management
 (
OP 4.09
) 
 
A participatory Integrated Pest Management strategy will be incorporated in the EA if 
needed. 
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[YES] 
Indigenous Peoples
 (
OD 4.20
) 
 
Because the areas for the implementation of the project have not been selected yet and 
because the project is demand driven (CDD), we cannot state ex-ante which Indigenous 
Peoples will become beneficiaries and therefore we cannot prepare an IPDP before 
appraisal. However, as stated in the PCN it is the project’s intention to reach Indigenous 
Peoples as beneficiaries. For these reasons, an Indigenous Peoples Development 
Framework (IPDF) will be prepared during project preparation and will be ready before 
appraisal. If the bulk of beneficiaries are Indigenous Peoples, the project itself will be 
considered and developed as an Indigenous Peoples Development Project (IPDP). 
[ ] 
Forests
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property
 (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that EA 
category (mandatory): 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would 
be prepared. 
 
• 
QER Target date: November 2004. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS 
 
• 
Not applicable 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  The 
specific studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
• 
Target start date for safeguard assessments is May 2004.  Safeguard assessments should 
be completed by December 2004 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Ethel Sennhauser 
April 19, 2004 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards 
Coordinator: 
Juan Quintero 
April 19, 2004 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Mark Cackler 
April 19, 2004 
Comments 
                                                          
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
 
