Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1178 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: February 28, 2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bolivia 
Project ID: P083965 
Project Name: BO-Secondary Ed. for the 
Poor 
Task Team Leader: Carlos A. Rojas 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 24, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: February 23, 2006 
Managing Unit: LCSHE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Secondary education (100%) 
Theme: Education for all (P);Education for 
the knowledge economy (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Nicole Nucinkis, Consultant 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 30 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
B.  Project Objectives  
 
During the early and mid nineties, Bolivia engaged in and reaped the benefits of 
comprehensive reforms in economic restructuring, decentralization, popular participation, and 
social policy.  Economic growth averaged 4.7% from 1993 to 1998 and poverty as measured by 
an unsatisfied basic needs index fell from 71% in 1992 to 59% in 2001.   
In 1999, however, the effects of the devaluation of the Brazilian real and the ensuing 
crisis in Argentina put an end to this relative prosperity.  From 1999 to 2003, Bolivia’s GDP 
grew at a mere 1.88% with GDP per capita declining by 0.57% per year on average.  The first 
effect of this was a deterioration of public finances: the overall budget balance, which averaged –
3.6% of GDP from 1995 to 1998, had fallen to –7.9% by 2001, and the central government debt 
had risen to 70% of GDP.  This placed pressure on all sectors, including education, to cut 
spending.  More seriously, this prolonged economic crisis led to a political crisis which 
culminated in the violent overthrow of the second Sanchez de Lozada administration in October 
of 2003. The present context is still characterized by political and institutional instability, 
although there are signs of economic improvement as GDP is expected to grow by 4% or more 
this year.   
In education, during the last decade the Government implemented a comprehensive 
change in the system called the Education Reform Program.  This Bank-supported effort changed 
Page  2
the whole educational institutional framework through: (i) changes in teacher compensation, 
revision of initial teacher training, and various attempts at creating an in-service training system; 
(ii) major curricular changes, both in bilingual education and in changing the traditional 
repetitive learning approach to a constructivist one; (iii) decentralization, incentives for popular 
participation, and the creation of a network of school, municipal, and departmental education 
councils; and finally (iv) the creation of evaluation, monitoring, and information systems.  The 
reform was financed with resources from IDA, IDB, SIDA, KfW, the Netherlands, UNICEF, 
DANIDA, and  other members of the donor community. This support was coordinated by the 
Ministry during the beginning of the process. Unfortunately, towards the end, donor support 
became uncoordinated and multiple procedures were implemented.  
The results were very positive.  Near universal access to primary education was achieved 
by 1999, with enrollment rates for children aged 7 to 10 at 96%.  Fifth grade completion rates 
increased from 72% in 1994 to 95% in 2002 in urban areas, and from 28% to 72% in rural ones.  
The average amount of years it takes to finish the first five grades of school has been reduced 
from 8 to 6 years from 1992 to 2001, and the annual primary dropout rate has been reduced from 
9.4% to 5.9%.  The gender gap in enrollment was eliminated and even the stubborn ethnic gap 
was reduced, although it remains high.  Ethnic equity is still an important issue in Bolivia. 
The success of the reform in primary education has created challenges in secondary.  
Primary (eighth grade) completion rates are at 71% and are expected to reach 80% by 2007.  
Coupled with demographic growth and led by urban enrollment, this has led to a doubling of the 
number of students in secondary schools in the past 10 years.  A majority of these adolescents 
are studying in schools with inadequate infrastructure, outdated materials, and a curriculum that 
does not address the needs of the labor market faced by them.  In addition, 45% (70% in rural 
areas) of secondary school teachers are not trained to teach at this level.  In rural areas, 
enrollment has lagged but is expected to double by 2007.  This means that although gross 
coverage is still only 67% and net coverage 51%, both are expected to increase.  In 2001, 49% of 
adolescents finished the secondary school level.  
Eleven percent of secondary graduates aged from 18 to 25 are unemployed.  Of those 
who do work, 53% are underemployed with no labor contract.  These young adults place 
pressure on the Ministry of Education (MOE) to provide technical and technological education 
so as to guarantee their employability.  This means that efforts should be made by the Ministry to 
provide an education that can develop the skills needed by the labor market as well as those 
needed to continue on to higher education.  
Educational decentralization is also a crucial issue in Bolivia.  The Popular Participation 
and Education Reform Laws have decentralized the provision and maintenance of educational 
infrastructure to municipalities.  Municipalities today receive 20% of tax income in the form of 
coparticipaciones (revenue-sharing), which they are free to spend as they please.  HIPC funds are 
also channeled directly to municipalities.  Twenty percent of these must be assigned to 
education, 10% to health, and 70% to productive infrastructure, but within these categories 
municipalities can spend them as they please.  Municipal visits and anecdotal evidence show that 
municipal and school district spending could be improved as much is spent on infrastructure, 
neglecting pedagogical needs.  In addition, only about 74.5% of these funds are executed 
annually.  Finally, the 
Fondo Nacional de Inversión Productiva y Social (FPS) channels 
approximately US$100 million per year to municipalities in the form of the Política Nacional de 
Compensación (PNC). 
Page  3
In education planning, the Reform set up schools, nuclei, and municipal education 
councils which are responsible for planning education at their corresponding levels.  In 
particular, the PROMEs (
Proyectos Municipales de Educación) have provided the municipal 
education community with the opportunity to engage in educational planning. 
Finally, it appears that Bolivia is embarking upon an irrevocable path towards further 
decentralization.  All sides of the political spectrum agree that Bolivia’s nine departments will 
sooner or later count on elected governors and many argue for a full-blown federalization of the 
country.  The MOE, in spite of the strong steps towards decentralization of the Reform, is still 
equipped to run a centralized system and not yet ready to assume a regulating, financing, and 
complementary role.   
In conclusion, the Educational Reform had huge achievements, particularly in basic 
education, but strong challenges remain.  These challenges include providing access to quality 
education to children currently finishing primary and strengthening the decentralization process.   
 
C.  Project Description  
The Ministry of Education has designed and is in the process of consulting with key 
stakeholders a national education strategy (Programa Operativo Multianual 2004-2008). All 
donors, including the Bank, are committed to supporting this strategy and nothing else in 
education.  
While the Strategy is a somewhat general document, in some areas it has been further 
detailed.  In secondary and technical education, a detailed draft Program with concrete actions 
has been developed. This Program has been presented to the international community for 
economic and technical support. Specifically, the Bank, French Cooperation, and JICA have 
committed to support actions in secondary and technical education. Sweden and Denmark are 
also considering focusing their support at this level. Other donors will target other areas in 
education. If the project is approved in FY05, it will be financed through IDA funds, but if it is 
approved in FY06, the source of funds will be IBRD.  
Within the proposed Program, the following three components have been developed 
based on country proposal, a recent Policy Note prepared by the Bank, and discussion with MOE 
staff during the identification mission.  
The first component relates to Access and Permanence at the Secondary School Level.  
This component will support efforts by MOE to: (i) promote expansion of access and attainment 
in secondary education (grades 9 through 12); (ii) implement alternative secondary education 
models to reach excluded youth in rural and marginal urban communities; and (iii) provide 
economic incentives to those students at risk of deserting the system due to their need to 
participate in the labor market or those who are already out of the system.  
The second component relates to the Quality and Relevance of provision of education 
services.  This component will focus on curriculum and teachers as factors directly affecting 
quality.  The program will support: (i) development and updating of the secondary school 
curriculum to replace the present obsolete program dating from 1975; (ii) provision of basic 
didactic materials including textbooks, libraries, and equipment to old and new schools/students; 
(iii) designing a labor competence certification and normalization system; and (iv) redesigning 
and improving the initial teacher training programs as well as in-service training systems.   
Page  4
The third component relates to Strengthening of Management Systems and the 
Decentralization Processes.  As the Ministry of Education moves towards the full 
implementation of a SWAp, this component will focus on the need to improve the capacity of the 
MOE to improve its financial and accounting practices at the central, departmental, and 
municipal levels and revise its procurement and financial management norms in accordance with 
international standards.  Specifically, the program will support: (i) provision of technical 
assistance to improve the planning and implementation capacity at the central, departmental, 
municipal and local levels; (ii) designing systems aimed at providing basic information about the 
sector for monitoring and evaluation purposes; (iii) designing a communication strategy; and (iv) 
rationalization and strengthening of human resource management and the development of basic 
processes of human resource management.  
In line with the apparently irrevocable decentralization path of Bolivia, the project will 
involve municipalities as key actors. The considerable HIPC and revenue-sharing  funds at the 
disposal of municipalities will help leverage Bank and MOE resources and allow for 
considerable popular participation through their Municipal Education Plans. Even though the 
recently approved country financing parameters do not require cofinancing, the project will try to 
use municipal resources as counterpart funds.     
Based on previous discussions with the Government and the donor community it has 
been agreed that during a first phase, Bank assistance would be structured with disbursements 
against individual pre-identified transactions and broad coordination with the Bolivian donor 
community. During this time, in addition to technical support to enhance secondary education, 
the project will support specific activities aimed at enhancing financial, accounting and 
procurement practices which will contribute to strengthening the harmonization of procedures 
among the donor community.  Once these procedures are in place, and after a comprehensive 
midterm review at the end of the second year of execution of the project or earlier as conditions 
allow, the Bank could join other donors in moving towards a full basket-funding mechanism as 
far as possible during the last two years of execution of the project. The two-year time frame is 
only indicative and will depend crucially on progress in implementation.   
Since the primary beneficiaries of the project would be  rural indigenous communities, an 
“Indigenous People Development Framework-IPDF” would be prepared.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
This is a Nationwide project. 
 
E.   Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies  
 
Full capacity. 
 
Page  5
II. 
SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
There will be mainly rehabilitation/additions, very few schools will be constructed. 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[x ] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
[
]
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
[
]
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
[
]
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
[x ] 
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
[
]
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
[
]
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
[
]
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
[
]
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[
]
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
Environmental Assessment Category:    
[
]
A
[
]
B
[X] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that 
EA category (mandatory): 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared. 
May 20, 2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  6
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.   
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.                             
 
May 15, 2005 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Carlos A. Rojas 
03/02/05          
Date 
Approved by: 
 
 
Regional Safeguards 
Coordinator: 
Jean-Roger Mercier, Acting QAT 
Coordinator, LCSES 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
03/02/05            
Date 
Comments 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
