Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/30/2005 
Report No.:  AC1938
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Bosnia-Herzegovina 
Project ID:  P096200 
Project Name:  Land Registration 
Task Team Leader:  Gavin P. Adlington 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 5, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: April 27, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Housing finance and real estate markets (50%);General public administration 
sector (40%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (10%) 
Theme:  Land administration and management (P);Personal and property rights 
(S);Administrative and civil service reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00
2.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
Facilitate the orderly development of transparent land markets through registration of real 
estate rights and complimentary policies that enable transactions to be made with security 
and efficiency.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Registration component will help to improve the transparency, speed and accuracy of 
transactions. The Cadastre will improve the efficiency and speed of providing data on 
property. The Policy and Project Management Component will develop policies, 
implementation strategies and legislation required to remove the current impedimaents to 
business development and economic growth in the land administration sector.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will operate across the country, in both Entities. This will involve 48 land 
registry offices for Component 1. For Component 2: the Geodetic Administration and all 
of their 60 municipal offices in SR will be included as SR has a centralized structure; and 
Page  2
the Geodetic Administration in FBiH and a selection of municipalities in FBiH will be 
included (there is a decentralized cadastre in FBiH).  The systematic mapping and 
situation analysis under component 2 will operated in eight sites selected based on their 
relatively high potential for an active land market, while the other subcomponents of the 
cadastre component (service standards, map digitization, information communication 
technology, technical assistance and training) will operate country wide. It is not planned 
to include any forested areas, wetlands or areas of natural habitats in the project, nor to 
include any privatization of State lands or forest. The project will only be involved with 
persons who already have legal rights who wish to be involved in the real estate market 
and there will be no resettlement (voluntary or involuntary) involved.  However 
components 2 and 3 will contribute to better understanding of issues relating to illegal 
occupation of state land, and if necessary will include development a good-practice 
strategies to address these issues in a subsequent, future phase of the long-term program.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Mirjana Karahasanovic (ECSHD) 
Mr Miroslav Ruzica (PA9SS) 
Ms Jessica Mott (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed project is expected to be positive from an environmental standpoint.  Based 
on the experience of similar land administration projects, the increased tenure security 
and improved land allocation is likely to induce environmentally positive behavioral 
changes among property owners.  The project is also likely to contribute to improvements 
in information and the regulatory framework that should facilitate better public sector 
management of land use.  
 
Any adverse environmental effects of the project will be minor and indirect.  Other than 
renovation of office space, the project will not support civil works, land conversion, 
resource extractions or any other activities that could potentially damage the 
Page  3
environment.  In accordance with the Environmental Management Plan, contracts for 
civil works under the project will be subject to screening for environmental impacts by 
the responsible authority.  All civil works contracts will include measures to minimize or 
mitigate environmental damage, and maximize cost-effective energy efficiency.  
Standard operating procedures will include measures applying to construction in general, 
such as measures to control dust, noise, and traffic at construction sites, and guidelines 
for controlling erosion and clean-up after construction.  
 
If any cultural heritage elements (e.g. wall frescos) are encountered during the 
implementation of civil works, the Environmental Management Plan specifies that the 
contractor will cease works, notify the compentent authorities and comply with their 
instructions.  
 
The systematic mapping activities will focus on eight specific urban and peri-urban 
areas and therefore the project as a whole will not involve surveying or delineating forest 
lands or protected areas.  Therefore the forests and natural habitat safeguards do not 
apply.  
 
The project will not support land acquisition and associated involuntary resettlement.  
The project will also not change ownership or use rights in forest lands or protected areas.   
The project also does not support eviction or similar enforcement of laws addressing 
illegal occupation of state land.  However, the project will begin to assess the magnitude 
and nature of the illegal or other informal occupation and settlements, and develop a 
strategy to address these issues in a future, follow-on phase of the long-term program.  
This strategy will take into account good practice and lessons learned from OP 4.12 
implementation in other countries.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The inclusion of large-scale systematic cadastre production work in the project was 
considered and rejected. This would entail reducing the scope of the project as the funds 
available through IDA would be insufficient for such a large program. It would also 
entail a much longer preparation period while agreement is reached on the methodology 
and regulatory changes (including those related to involuntary resettlement of illegal 
encroachers that may be associated with systematic registration) that would be necessary 
for such a program to be implemented responsibly (from a practical and fiduciary 
perspective). However, the registration system was ready to be implemented immediately 
and had been developed to such a stage through other donors that delays in 
implementation of the full program would be highly damaging to the credibility of the 
registration system and the property market. Also, implementing the registration system 
would have an immediate beneficial impact on the majority of the population. Thus, it 
was agreed to go ahead with the registration activities and undertake the necessary 
Page  4
investigations and initial work for improvement of the cadastre including systematic 
registration, and other hurdles to the land market and development.  
 
The option of pressing for a single agency model was considered and rejected. The 
Bank 'best practice' model is to have registration and cadastre in a single agency. 
However, the government had attempted to implement this model in the late 1980's and 
1990's through cadastre agencies and progress had been so poor that they reverted to a 
dual agency model. This was partly because of their historical experience with the dual 
agency model and partly through a desire to emulate the systems seen in their 
neighborhood, including the established systems in Austria, Switzerland and Germany, 
and the developing system in Croatia. A great deal of preliminary work through donors 
had been done based on the dual agency model and a new law had been passed. At this 
stage pressure to revert to a single agency model would have met with strong opposition 
at all levels. However, the situation will be reviewed at the mid-term review stage.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has developed an acceptable Environmental Management Plan addressing 
environmental and cultural heritage issues associated with civil works. The two entity-
level governments, the cantons, and the municipalities have sound legal frameworks, 
clear allocation of responsibilities, and sufficient oversight capacity to implement this 
Environmental Management Plan.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The social assessment has initiated a process of consultation with beneficiaries and other 
stakeholders, and the process will continue throughout project implementation, especially 
under the policy component.  The main project beneficiaries will be those people and 
businesses who want security in their land or real property holdings. Other stakeholders 
include some professional groups (notaries, lawyers, real estate brokers), research 
community, some associations that support certain vulnerable groups(rural elderly, 
refugees, internally displaced persons, Roma and other ethnic minority groups and certain 
groups of women), some special interest groups (former private owners, private business, 
apartments associations), and government institutions (e.g. municipalities, courts, etc.).  
The framework Environmental Management Plan (EMP) is a summary of how existing 
laws and regulations will be applied to the project renovation works.  These laws were 
developed based on discussions and decisions of entity and cantonal level parliaments. 
The EMP has been posted on the World Bank website as well as in-country web-sites 
concerned with land administration.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/01/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/17/2005 
 
Page  5
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/21/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gavin P. Adlington 
11/11/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Mirjana Karahasanovic 
11/11/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Jessica Mott 
11/11/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Miroslav Ruzica 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
11/21/2005 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards and from this point on tranferrred to Task Team and Sector 
Manager for further review and clearance. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
 
Comments:   
