Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/29/2005 
Report No.:  AC1598
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Bosnia-Herzegovina 
Project ID:  P095382 
Project Name:  SOLID WASTE MGMT SUPPLMT 
Task Team Leader:  Seema Manghee 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 18, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 30, 2005 
Managing Unit:  ECSIE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Solid waste management (97%);Central government administration (3%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P);Other urban development 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.30
1.30 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project objectives of the additional financing would remain the same as the original 
project.  The main objectives of the original project are to: (a) cost effectively improve 
solid waste services in participating priority areas; (b) increase administrative and 
technical capacity for solid waste management at the local and Entity level; (c) improve 
cost recovery in the sector and encourage private sector involvement; and (d) correct 
environmental problems and reduce health hazards caused by inadequate waste collection 
and disposal systems.  Specifically, the additional funding would be sought for the 
following: (1) technical assistance/engineering services and; (2) investments to 
rehabilitate regional landfills and clean up of wild dumpsites.   
 
3. Project Description 
Regions included in the original project at preparation were: Banja Luka, Mostar and 
Tuzla.  An unallocated amount of US$4.60 million was set aside to add regions during 
the first year of project implementation.  Bihac, Bijeljina, Sarajevo and Zenica were 
added during implementation.  Despite the waiting list from other regions to be included 
in the project, it was agreed with the Government that no additional regions can be added 
to the project at this stage due to the current financing gap with the regions already in the 
project.  As a result, the additional financing of US$8 million will be allocated between 
Page  2
the regions already in the project:  US$2.5 million for Bijeljina; US$1 million for Bihac; 
US$2 million for Mostar; US$1 million for Tuzla and US$1.5 for Zenica.  
 
Nationwide Solid Waste Management Strategy.  The European Union (EU) funded 
preparation of a Nationwide Solid Waste Management Strategy in BiH that was 
completed in August 2000.  The Strategy was the first think piece on solid waste after the 
war.  It recommends a wide range of technical, institutional and financial upgrading 
measures over the next 15-20 years.  The key part of the Strategy centers on the 
management of household and similar wastes.  It is based on the establishment of multi-
municipal districts covering a minimum of 200,000 persons each, which would be 
responsible for the operation of regional waste transfer, treatment, and disposal facilities.  
Waste collection responsibility would remain with individual municipal Communal 
Services Departments, with collection operations carried out under service contracts with 
Communal Enterprises or private operators.  In the short- and medium-term, the strategy 
emphasizes the goals of universal collection coverage, the introduction of regional 
sanitary landfills, and the closure and rehabilitation of open dumps.  In the long run, it is 
believed that less populated regions would also join and waste would be transported to 
fewer but larger landfills.  Recycling, composting, waste-to-energy options and 
introduction of clinical waste incineration are also contemplated.  However, the 
Government recognizes that the integration of these components into the BiH waste 
management system will require at least 10 years or more and needs to build upon much-
strengthened waste collection and disposal capacities.  
 
The Government is hampered by the limited funding available to the sector.  Thus, the 
Government intends to proceed with a priority first phase (2001-2008), a second phase 
(2008-2013) and a long-term plan (2013-2018).  The Government asked the World Bank 
to assist with the first phase focusing on landfill rehabilitation; safe methods of disposal; 
public awareness; training of sector staff; and extending waste collection to those areas 
that are not currently serviced.  The original Solid Waste Management project is assisting 
the Government with the first phase.  
 
The project components are:  
 
Component A. Waste Management Component  
 
Rehabilitation of existing disposal sites: rehabilitation of landfill sites to meet sanitary 
standards, including upgrading of infrastructure.  
 
Wild Dump closures: equipment and civil works needed to permanently close wild 
dumpsites in an environmentally sound way and institute long term environmental 
monitoring. The goods used for this component would eventually be reassigned to other 
landfill sites once the closures are complete.  
 
Collection Infrastructure and Support Equipment: finance equipment such as collection 
bins, support vehicles, and other related equipment.  
Page  3
Transfer Stations: finance a limited number of economical transfer stations handling 
residential, commercial and institutional waste for consolidation to regional landfill sites.  
 
Component B. Institutional Strengthening  
 
Community Participation and Public Education Program: support community activities 
required for efficient operation of the solid waste system.  This will include professional 
training to personnel the sector, public awareness and introduction of environmental 
subjects in education programs on the need for safe collection and disposal of household 
refuse and potential health/environmental problems created by inappropriate disposal of 
wastes in wild dumps, rivers and mines.  
 
Business Plan - medium term: includes a Government strategic plan for the medium-
term development of the SWM system.  The plan would address the medium-term 
approaches and investments required to maintain the SWM system, enforcement and its 
upgrading to international standards.  This subcomponent would also involve 
development of financial management capacity for the system to operate on a commercial 
basis and measures to be taken to be ultimately privatized as appropriate.This would 
include training related to disposal, landfill operations and closure and design of future 
landfill designs.  
 
Project Assistance and Management: assist project management activities to include 
financial management, preparation of bidding documents to purchase goods and 
implementation of works, as well as hiring of consultants to carry out the various studies 
under this sub-component.  
 
Component C: Engineering Services/Technical Assistance  
 
Engineering Services/Technical Assistance: This component will finance technical 
assistance for the feasibility studies, and the financial, environmental and social 
assessments of landfill sites yet to be identified.  It will finance preparation of the final 
designs and bidding documents; and provide support with the bidding procedures, for the 
investments and services provided under Components A and B.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The regions included in the original project at preparation were: Banja Luka, Mostar and 
Tuzla.  At the time of appraisal, an EA was prepared for the project with specific 
Environmental Mitigation Plans (EMPs) for each site.  These were disclosed in country 
and made available through the INFO Shop.  An unallocated amount of US$4.60 million 
was set aside to add regions during the first year of project implementation.  Bihac, 
Bijeljina, Sarajevo and Zenica were added during implementation.  EMPs were 
completed for the additional sites with full Environmental Assessments prepared where 
the investment required rehabilitation of a landfill. These documents were also disclosed 
in country by the Federation Ministry of Physical Planning and Environment.  The EMPs 
Page  4
do not require ex ante clearance but as part of regular supervision, ex post reviews would 
take place.  
 
Each of the landfill sites has a technical and design study that reviews the environmental 
issues such as groundwater quality, surface water quality, soil quality and leachate 
quality.  The studies have been prepared by qualified international and local 
environmental specialists.  Feasibility studies on the clean up of the wild dumpsites are 
starting up but the actual works will not commence until the latter phase of the project 
after the landfills have been rehabilitated.  
 
Despite the waiting list from other regions to be included in the project, it was agreed 
with the Government that no additional regions can be added to the project at this stage 
due to the current financing gap with the regions already in the project. However, should 
any additional sites be identified for inclusion in the project at a later date, the 
Environmental Covenant in the Legal Agreements confirms that EAs/EMPs must be 
prepared for those project regions/landfills and the same analysis as that used in the 
EA/EMPs must be conducted as part of project preparation, and the EMP will be applied.  
Local disclosure of any such documentation will be provided.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Mr Bernard Baratz (EASEG) 
Mr Philip W. Moeller (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
None.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
 
Page  5
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The implementation arrangements for the additional financing, including overseeing 
safeguard policy issues, will be similar to the original credit.  A Project Management Unit 
(PMU) established in the Federation for implementation will supervise adherence to 
safeguard policy, using the EMPs for each site.  Any contracts for works with possible 
environmental impact will include safeguard clauses, and the PMU in collaboration with 
the Project Implementing Teams (PITs) located in the Solid Waste Utilities managing the 
landfill sites will be responsible for ensuring compliance with these terms.  Certification 
of compliance will be provided by the project manager for each site, and all 
documentation will be kept on file by the PMU/PITs.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the citizens of the regions to be serviced by the project's 
rehabilitated sanitary landfills.  During project preparation stakeholders, including local 
and national NGOs, were involved in workshops, local level community meetings, and 
public consultations. The project includes a sub-component on "Community Participation 
and Public Education" which will foster communication between the communities and 
the SWM authorities. The EA and EMP were discussed during project preparation at 
stakeholder workshops and have been publicly disclosed.  The documentation for the 
projects identified during the first year of the project has also been disclosed and is 
available at the PMU.  
 
(Note:  The project involves the same sites identified before appraisal or during the first 
year of implementation of the original project.  Since these are solid waste sites that have 
no illegal squatters, OP/BP 4.12 is not triggered.  A Status Report on safeguard 
compliance has been provided to the Regional Safeguard Coordinator).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/08/2002 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/04/2002 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/14/2002 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  6
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Seema Manghee 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bernard Baratz 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Philip W. Moeller 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
05/29/2005 
Comments:  This is cleared for safeguards 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Sumter Lee Travers 
05/27/2005 
Comments:  Cleared 
Page  7
