Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Report No.:  AC1119 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: November 30, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P092990 
Project Name: BR 
–
Trade Logistics 
SWAp 
Task Team Leader: Aymeric-Albin Meyer 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 21, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 2, 2005 
Managing Unit: LCSFT 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Export development and 
competitiveness (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  Juan D. Quintero and Flavio Chaves 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 300 
Other financing amounts by source: n.a. 
($m) 
B. Project Objectives 
1. 
The Project is proposed to support reduction of logistic costs, one of the four pillars of 
the Government’s Growth Agenda, with the objective of increasing competitiveness of Brazil on 
the external markets and of less competitive regions of Brazil in the domestic and regional 
markets.   
 
2. 
The Project would have as development objective the reduction of road transport costs, 
through rehabilitation of the federal paved road network to a satisfactory condition  The 
emphasis on the road mode is justified given: (i) the heavy predominance of the road mode 
relatively to other modes (70% of goods and 95% of passengers are transported by road), which 
implies that road transport costs constitute most of the transport-related logistic costs; and (ii) the 
substantially higher cost-benefit ratio of interventions in the road sector (low-cost investments 
and widespread, immediate financial and economic benefits), when compared to priority 
interventions in other transport sectors. 
 
Page  2
3. 
The Project would support the Government’s Federal Road Rehabilitation Program, 
which aims at improving 
1
the federal paved road network’s condition over a 6-years period, for 
a
cost of US$2 billion.  Over the decade of the 1990s, outputs from road rehabilitation and 
maintenance activities remained modest, as a result of both an ineffective implementation 
strategy, and overall low and erratic levels of financing.  To remedy the situation, the Ministry of 
Transport (MT) and the federal transport administration (DNIT) have, over the last 4 years and in 
partnership with the Bank, 
2
undertaken a series of significant changes including: (a) a reform of 
the federal transport administration (over the 2001-2003 period), and (b) under the Federal Road 
Rehabilitation Program, the successful piloting of long-term, output-based contracts for road 
rehabilitation and maintenance, and the preparation of a national road management policy, which 
foresees: (i) the continuation of the decentralization and concession processes so as to reduce the 
size of the federal network under direct, federal, administration, (ii) the expansion of the use of 
long-term, output-based contracts, to undertake the maintenance and rehabilitation of most of the 
remaining network, and (iii) a series of institutional strengthening initiatives, so as to reinforce 
the efficiency of public expenditures in the sector. 
 
4. 
The implementation of the above changes have allowed for a substantial optimization of 
road rehabilitation and maintenance activities, in terms of: (a) reduction of output unit costs, (b) 
improved responsiveness of the federal transport administration, and (c) higher adaptability to 
fiscal constraints.  Such changes have been included in the design of the Federal Road 
Rehabilitation Program, and institutional strengthening activities under the Project will allow for 
further improvements.   
 
5. 
Overall, the implementation of the Federal Road Rehabilitation Program would result 
into: (i) direct benefits, in the form of a decrease of vehicle operating costs of at least US$400 
million p.a., and (ii) indirect benefits, in the form of support to regional development (with a 
view to decreasing regional disparities) and to improved trade.  The Project will include the set-
up of an evaluation system to monitor the evolution of such benefits over time.
 
C.  Project Description  
6. 
The proposed Project will have two components: 
 
Component 1:
 
support to the Federal Road Rehabilitation Program (US$290 million)
 
This component will allow to: (i) improve the quality of public expenditures in the road sector, 
through (a) expansion of the use of long-term, output-based contracts, (b) streamlining of 
DNIT’s procedures to manage contracts, including revision of design, procurement, contract 
award and supervision, as well as payments, and (c) strengthening DNIT’s contract supervision 
capacity; (ii) support the gradual decentralization of the federal road network to states with 
adequate road network management capacity (e.g. Minas Gerais, Goias and Rio Grande do Sul); 
(iii) ensure that an adequate level of resources to be allocated to the federal road maintenance 
and rehabilitation program to improve the road network condition to economically-optimized 
levels; and (iv) support the resolution of low-cost, priority road capacity bottlenecks for trade, 
1
Improvements include maintenance, rehabilitation of existing lanes as well as high priority, low-cost expansion 
(essentially widening of lanes and shoulders), strengthening of bridges, and improvements of curves and 
intersections. 
2
Under the Federal Highway Decentralization and Rehabilitation Program, co-financed by the Bank. 
Page  3
through addition of traffic lanes (within existing road rights-of-way), especially at cities 
entries/exits, and access to ports.   
 
Component 2: strengthening of planning, evaluation, regulatory social and environmental 
management capacity in the transport sector (US$10 million) 
This component would finance technical assistance activities in the above-mentioned areas, with 
the following objectives:  
·
improving quality of public expenditures
,
through: (a) improvement of planning and 
project evaluation capacity at the sector and central levels, including provision of 
training, definition of evaluation processes and criteria, and set up of related systems, (b) 
set up of a transport program monitoring system, (c) streamlining of budget allocation, 
contract and payment management procedures, and (d) introduction/dissemination of 
more cost-efficient concepts such as output-based contracts and value-engineering, 
·
fostering private sector participation in the transport sector
,
through: (a) further 
strengthening of the regulatory framework, (b) development of a capacity to analyze and 
structure projects with private sector participation, (c) feasibility studies (from the 
engineering, financial, economic, social and environmental points of view) for proposed 
PPP projects, and (d) set-up of a public capacity to foster improvements in transport 
modes productivity and development of multimodality, 
·
improving use and quality of infrastructure in the port sector, 
through (a) support to the 
definition of the second phase of the Government’s ports reform agenda, (b) evaluation of 
main ports’ performance, constraints to further output and competitiveness growth, (c) 
definition of clear criteria for attribution of responsibilities to the public and private 
sectors, and (d) strengthening of port authorities and port activities information systems, 
and 
·
promoting the social and environmental sustainability of transport investments, 
through 
(a) improvements to the social and environmental assessment and mitigation frameworks 
in use in the road sector, (b) support to the set-up of procedures for realization of strategic 
environmental assessments and resolution of specific environmental issues (road 
licensing and related mitigation of rehabilitation, maintenance and expansion 
environmental impacts), and (c) streamlining of social and environmental concerns in 
planning, execution and monitoring stages of transport sector activities. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
7. 
The activities to be supported by the Project would be carried out within the 56.000 km 
of paved highways of the Brazilian federal highway network (figure 1). More specifically, 
project works would take place in federal highways’ rights-of-way (ROW) and in the sites 
associated with roads civil works. The ROW consists of the paved strip and the entire area 
reserved for the construction, operation, and maintenance of the roadside. The sites associated 
with road projects include: deposits, borrow sites, materials treatment areas, quarries, access 
roads, and facilities provided for project workers.  
Page  4
1
2
5
3
4
Figure 1: The Brazilian paved highway network. Brazilian geographic regions are: 1, The North; 2, the Northeast; 3 the Southeast; 4 the 
South;  and 5, the Center West. Note that the network is denser in the most populated regions. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies  
8. 
Prior experiences under the other Bank financed projects
3
demonstrated that the Ministry 
of Transports (MT) and its executive agency, the National Department for Transports 
Infrastructure (DNIT), have adequate capacity to effectively manage environmental and social 
safeguard policies. In addition to both institutions regulations and procedures, Brazil has a well 
developed legal and institutional framework for ensuring the social and environmental soundness 
of transportation projects. 
Environmental safeguards 
9. 
In 1996, DNIT’s precursor, DNER, prepared with the Bank’s support
4
,
environmental 
standards and guidelines for the transport sector in general and for the highway sub-sector in 
particular. DNER also developed a methodology to assess environmental degradations along 
existing highways, and prepared and put in effect a manual of environmental norms and 
instructions. Since then, the necessary corrective designs and solutions are incorporate into 
3
The Federal Highways Management and Rehabilitation Project (Loan 3169-BR) and the Federal Highway 
Rehabilitation and Decentralization Project (Loan 4188-BR).  
4
Under the Highways Management and Rehabilitation Project (Loan 3169-BR). 
Page  5
highway engineering and works contracts. These improvements on the transport sector 
environmental management system are still in use and are being enhanced.  
10. 
Recent developments in DNIT’s environmental management system include the creation, 
in 2003, of a General Coordination for the Environment
5
(CGMAB). CGMAB is responsible for: 
i) formulating DNIT’s environmental management policy; ii) coordinating the environmental 
management activities in transports infrastructure projects; iii) and managing environmental 
restoration activities in all transport modalities. To assist in the environmental management of 
the highway network CGMAB created a geographic information system with information on the 
federal highway network (SAGARF). At the MT an Advisor for the Environment, linked to the 
Minister’s office, was established to enhance MT’s capacity to deal with environmental and 
social matters.  
Social safeguards 
11. 
Although there is not a single comprehensive rule for Indigenous Peoples and Involuntary 
Resettlements equivalent to the Bank’s policies, Brazil has an well developed set of rules which 
pursue the same purposes. The defense of indigenous peoples and Quilombola’s
6
rights is part of 
the Brazilian Constitution. The Federal Public Prosecutors Office (MPF) may take action to 
ensure the defense of indigenous people’s rights and compliance with the Constitution and 
associated laws. In regard to involuntary resettlement, appropriate procedures have foundation in 
the Constitution
7
and other laws that mandate the adequate compensation for people affected by 
government projects. The social soundness of projects is assessed also at the Environmental 
Evaluation. 
Brazilian institutional framework 
12. 
In addition to MT and DNIT’s environmental management system Brazil has a well 
developed institutions and a comprehensive legal framework
8
to ensure the social and 
environmental soundness of infrastructure projects. According to Brazilian legislation any major 
civil works projects is subject to an environmental impact assessment to measure its likely 
effects on the inhabitants and on the natural environment. Thus, for investments likely to have 
social and environmental adverse impacts, mitigatory actions have to be included into project 
design. 
13. 
To enforce these rules the Ministry of Environment (MMA), the Brazilian Institute for 
the Environment and Natural Resources (IBAMA) the MPF and the Federal Court of Audits 
(TCU) oversee actual compliance with social and environmental regulations. These institutions, 
specially the MPF, have a set of remedies to promote the compliance with social and 
environmental regulations. Remedies range from corrective interventions such as the 
Termos de 
5
Estrutura Regimental do DNIT, Decreto n.° 4.749 de 17 de junho de 2003. 
6
Quilombos are the remnants of fled slave communities. The people who live in these communities are called 
Quilombolas. 
7
Constituição da República Federativa do Brasil, Art. 5, inc. XXIV. 
8
Key policy regulations include the Constitution, the Law n.°6938/1981, The National Policy for the Environment; 
Law n.°9605/1998, The Environmental Crimes Law; Law n.° 9985/2000, The National System of Conservation 
Units; Resolução CONAMA (National Environment Council), n° 237/1997 ruling environmental licensing 
requirements. 
Page  6
Ajustamento de Conduta,
 in which the MPF allows incompliant agents to correct social and 
environmental wrongs at project level, to more radical measures such as halting projects 
implementation and/or operation with police force. At the state and municipal levels equivalent 
institutions may play a similar role. 
14. 
In order to make the paved federal highways compliant with the federal environmental 
standards, the MT and the MMA have entered into agreement for creating a National Program 
for Regularization of Environmental Compliance of the Federal Highways
9
.
Because many of the 
existing paved highway were constructed at a time when environmental licensing was not 
required they do not comply with contemporary environmental standards.  This Program will 
promote the gradual compliance of the federal paved network through corrective environmental 
licensing procedures (including the 
Termos de Ajustamento de Conduta
). Hence, the corrective 
licensing will allow the maintenance, rehabilitation and expansion works and the environmental 
restoration of the entire paved highway federal network. In order to precisely locate the places 
needing environmental restoration DNIT contracted a detailed environmental quality survey of 
the federal network. 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
Environmental assessment of civil works of all road sections to be supported by 
the Project will be conducted according to Brazilian procedures and are part of the 
regular procedures of the Borrower.  
[
]
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
[
]
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
[X] 
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
The Involuntary Resettlement safeguard policy is unlikely to be triggered given 
the low probability of having people dwelling at
 the projects’s locations. 
Nevertheless, an assessment of Brazil’s policies and procedures with respect to 
involuntary resettlement will be carried, and as needed, an Involuntary 
Resettlement framework will be prepared. 
[X] 
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
An assessment of Brazil’s policies and procedures with respect to indigenous 
people protection will be carried, and as needed, an Indigenous Peoples 
Development Plan will be prepared to promote that indigenous and quilombola 
populations benefit from project and to minimize or avoid possible negative 
impacts caused by project activities upon these populations  
[
]
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
[
]
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
9
Programa Nacional de Regularização Ambiental de Rodovias Federais, created by the Portaria Interministerial n.° 
271 de 3 de novembro de 2004. D.O.U. (Brazilian Official Gazette) Secção 1. 
Page  7
[X] 
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 
–
OPN 11.03
)
The EA will document the adequate “chance finds procedures” that DNIT has for 
contractors to follow. 
[
]
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[
]
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[
]
A
[X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
Description of the projects environmental impacts
.
17. 
The natural ecosystems that once stood in the ROW have already been modified by road 
construction. Induced land cover land use changes at the roads environs have also taken place. 
For that reason, activities supported by the project are not likely to cause significant additional 
impacts on ecosystem’s structure and functions neither at the ROW nor at the sites associated 
with road projects. The projects direct, indirect and cumulative environmental impacts are 
specific to each of the supported activities: expansion and rehabilitation and maintenance.  
18. The 
expansion works
 consist of widening lanes and shoulders (in particular climbing 
lanes), strengthening of bridges, improvement of curves and intersections. Usually road 
expansion activities and their 
likely direct negative impacts 
on
the environment are: 
·
Construction camp establishment.
 Construction camps include workers’ living 
and eating areas, and the grounds where equipment is stored and serviced and 
materials are stockpiled. Poor construction camp design and management can lead 
to: i) sewage and garbage pollution; ii) depletion of fauna and flora through 
poaching; iii) overloading of health services, sewage treatment, schooling and law 
enforcement; and iv) spills from construction equipment operation and servicing. 
·
Equipment servicing and fueling.
 Great quantities of petroleum products are 
transported and used throughout the work site. Chronic or acute oil pollution may 
take place, because of improper handling, haphazard storage and leakage causing 
surface and ground water contamination.  
·
Site preparation and clearing.
 Site preparation may involve demolition of 
buildings, clearing of vegetation, temporary rerouting of utilities, topsoil 
stripping, and diversion or re-channeling of waterways. This may increase water 
runoff and cause the erosion of exposed ground, stored topsoil, consequently 
silting watercourses. The use of herbicides to eliminate vegetation on the ROW is 
a
potential source of contamination. The use of heavy equipment on steep slopes 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  8
to clear construction corridors can result in serious compaction and erosion 
problems. 
·
Earthworks
.
The removal and placement of earth can bring further risks of soil 
erosion. Alignments through the upper parts of watersheds often encroach on 
groundwater aquifers, sometimes seriously affecting local groundwater recharge, 
well-water supply, and water quality. In steep terrain, material taken from cuts 
may be pushed over the edge of the road bed, and travel down-slope, destroying 
trees and stream channels in the valleys below. Construction machinery moving 
around the ROW and work sites can create soil compaction, which may harm the 
soil’s natural regeneration potential, impair drainage, and increase the risk of 
flooding.  
·
Quarries and borrow sites.
 These facilities, which are the sources for road-
building materials, can have substantial environmental impacts on soils, water, 
and the natural environment. Impacts range from air quality and noise impacts 
(during works) to chronic erosion and aesthetic disturbance of the landscape. 
19. 
The rehabilitation and maintenance works 
are related to the existing platform of the 
highway, mostly to the pavement. As with other road construction activities, road maintenance 
and rehabilitation works can cause soil erosion, disturbance of water flows, chemical pollution, 
traffic disruption, noise, and other impacts on surrounding communities and natural life. Two 
issues are especially relevant: 
·
waste materials from drain clearing, pavement reconstruction, and other activities 
that may find their way into waterways or contaminate the soil; and 
·
displacement of existing dwellings and businesses resulting from shoulder 
improvements and widenings. 
With respect to weed control, the use of herbicides is not allowed by DNIT on the federal 
highway network.  Current practice of road maintenance consist of mechanical weed control. 
20. 
Roads rehabilitation and maintenance may also have 
positive environmental impacts,
 
which include: environmental restoration works that may correct drainage systems and avoid 
uncontrolled erosions, and in restoration of degraded areas. In some intensively farmed 
agricultural areas, roadside environments provide important habitats for local wild plant and 
animal species. These can be preserved and enriched through appropriate maintenance actions. 
Maintenance work can also generate positive impacts by eliminating or reducing environmental 
problems caused by the deterioration of road surfaces, drains, and shoulders. 
21. 
Induced impacts
,
such as the increase in the pace land cover land use changes (LCLUC) 
are characteristic of road construction. Regarding road maintenance, rehabilitation and expansion 
linkages with LCLUC are deemed to be modest since the highway network has been in place for 
decades and impacts have already occurred. 
Page  9
22. 
Consequently, most of above mentioned project impacts would be site specific and would 
not significantly affect human populations or alter environmentally fragile areas. This evaluation 
is comforted by experience gained with the implementation of about 140 road maintenance and 
rehabilitation contracts in Brazil under various Bank-financed operations over the last 7 years: no 
significant environmental and social impact has been observed during or following execution of 
these contracts.   
23. 
Few, if any of the impacts are irreversible and mitigatory measures can be readily 
designed. Appropriate mitigatory measures for this impacts are well known and do not represent 
a
difficulty for project implementation. It is worth notice that the Project will allow the 
environmental restoration of a significant part of the federal paved highway network. 
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
24. 
A methodical evaluation of the Borr
ower’s systems of social and environmental 
assessments applicable to the rehabilitation, maintenance and expansion of highways will be 
carried out by the Borrower with the Bank’s support. The evaluation will assess if the country 
systems are equivalent
10
 to the Bank’s own policies and procedures, and if they can be utilized 
under the Bank’s project in lieu of a traditional safeguard policy approach. These assessments 
will be submitted as the project’s safeguards documents (e.g. EA, RAP and IPDP) in the case 
that country systems are found to be equivalent to the Bank’s safeguard policies. 
25. 
Possible improvements in the Borrower’s systems will be also raised by the above-
mentioned assessments. Improvements in the current systems, that may be supported by the 
Project, will then be included into the projects activities under a Technical Assistance 
component.  
26. 
The SWAp’s disbursements will made based on outputs. Improvements on the 
institutional and policy frameworks, agreed upon on project preparation, will be accounted as 
output indicators for disbursement purposes. This shall create a favorable incentive for sector 
reforms directed to further mainstreaming social and environmental concerns into transport 
sector policies, programs and projects. 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  February 15, 2005.  
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS. 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
11
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. December 
15, 2004 - March 15, 2005. 
10
 The term equivalent is used according to the definition set forth in OPCS’ paper ‘Issues in Using Country Systems 
in Bank Operations’. OPCS, August 20, 2004. 
11
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  10
IV. APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Aymeric-Albin Meyer 
Date: 12/14/2004 
A
pproved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Jean-Roger Mercier 
Date: 12/15/2004 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Jose Luis Irigoyen 
Date: 12/16/2004 
Comments 
