Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/30/2005 
Report No.:  31942
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P075379 
Project Name:  Rio de Janeiro Sustainable Integrated Ecosystem Management in 
Productive Landscapes of the North-Northwestern Fluminense (GEF) 
Task Team Leader:  Alvaro J. Soler 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 24, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2005 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (80%);Other social services 
(10%);Sub-national government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Other environment and natural resources management (P);Participation and civic 
engagement (P);Biodiversity (P);Land administration and management (P);Climate 
change (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
6.73 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.84 
 BORROWING 
AGENCY 
1.20 
 LOCAL 
COMMUNITIES 
0.56 
 
NON-GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION (NGO) OF BORROWING 
COUNTRY 0.26
7.86 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the proposed project is to promote an integrated ecosystem 
(IEM) approach to guide the development and implementation of sustainable land 
management (SLM) practices in a geographical area containing highly threatened 
biodiversity of global importance, to support long-term conservation and rehabilitation of 
agroecosystems.  
 
The global environmental objectives are to: (i) address threats to biodiversity of global 
importance, (ii) reverse land degradation in agricultural landscapes, (iii) enhance carbon 
Page  2
sequestration, and (iv) increase awareness at all levels of the value of adopting an IEM 
approach in the management of natural resources.   
 
3. Project Description 
For a detailed description of project components, see Annex 4 to the PAD.  
 
The proposed project would be implemented over a period of five years in 5 watersheds 
in the NNWF and the 24 municipalities that overlap with the NNWF region (two of these 
municipalities belong to the Regi?o Serrana administrative region of RJS) .  Within these 
five watersheds, on-the-ground pilot activities will be supported in approximately 50 
microcatchments.  The project would achieve environmental, financial, institutional and 
social benefits at four levels: individual farmers and farmers groups; rural communities 
living in project-supported watersheds; municipal and regional offices and individuals 
and groups that they service, and state offices; and the general public living in the NNWF 
regions.  
 
Component 1 ? Planning for Sustainable Land Management Actions (US$0.94 million, 
6.3% of total project cost): This component is intended at providing national stakeholders 
(state institutions) and beneficiary stakeholders (producers and rural communities at 
large), with a strengthened framework at state and local levels to support IEM approaches 
aimed at promoting sustainable rural development and the protection of critical 
ecosystems). The main subcomponents and activities foreseen cover support for 
improved policy formulation and, mainly, action planning of IEM/SLM activities to be 
carried out in Component 2.  There are two subcomponents: (i) Inputs for the 
Development of improved Policies, Regional Plans and Regulations and (ii) Local Land 
Management Planning.  
 
Component 2 - Support Systems for the Adoption of IEM/SLM practices (US$8.80 
million, 58.9% of total project cost): This component aims to provide technical and 
financial support to small farmers and other relevant ecosystem managers to move from 
conventional, unsustainable smallholder agriculture to sustainable livelihood activities 
which enhance biodiversity and carbon sequestration in the agricultural landscape. It has 
two sub-components: (i) Financial Support Program for Sustainable Agriculture and (ii) 
Support to Adaptive Management Practices.  
 
Component 3 ? Organization and Capacity Building for Integrated Ecosystem 
Management (US$2.47 million, 16.5% of total project cost):  This component would 
include training, education and community engagement efforts to facilitate the formation 
and strengthening of rural organizations for self-management of natural resources.  They 
would complement productive and commercialization group activities encouraged by the 
ongoing Rio Rural and PRONAF programs.  Its sub-components are: (i) Community 
Organization, (ii) Training of Project Executors, and (iii) Training and Environmental 
Education of Beneficiaries.  
 
Component 4 ? Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$2.74 million, 
18.3% of total project cost):  The objectives of this component are to ensure the effective 
Page  3
implementation of project activities and management of resources; to monitor whether or 
not the project is achieving the desired results or would need to be adjusted or changed; 
and to increase the potential for repeating project lessons and transferring experiences at 
state, national and international levels. There are three sub-components: (i) Participatory 
Management of the Project, (ii) Participatory Monitoring and Evaluation, and (iii) Project 
Dissemination.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located in North and Northwestern Fluminense (NNWF) regions of Rio de 
Janeiro State. The project would be implemented in five watersheds (total of 6,579 km2) 
representative of the four major ecosystems of global significance in the Atlantic Forest 
biome situated in the NNWF. These ecosystems are: (i) floodplain forests; (ii) tropical 
semi-deciduous forests; (iii) tropical moist broadleaf forests; and (iv) coastal ecosystems.  
 
This richness of the NNWF can be perceived in the extraordinary wealth of its 
ecosystems characterized by a number of distinct natural aquatic and terrestrial habitats, 
endemic biodiversity. In addition to forest habitats, this region holds one of the best-
preserved restingas of Brazil (Jurubatiba), which also support important endemics. The 
Jurubatiba National Park is considered a refuge for species already extinct in other 
regions of Rio de Janeiro where restingas are degraded or have already disappeared. The 
NNWF holds an important portion of Serra do Mar Corridor, a subregion of the Atlantic 
Forest with the greatest concentration of i) endemic species for many groups and ii) 
threatened species of birds. The Corridor presents one the most important network of 
protected areas of the Atlantic Forest, including Desengano State Parks located in the 
NNWF that harbor an extremely high concentration of endemic and endangered species.  
 
Selection of target watersheds and microcatchments. Targeting of project watersheds 
and their  
 
priority microcatchments is based on the application of criteria that combines social and  
 
environmental considerations. Watersheds selection criteria include: environmentally 
sensitive  
 
or
critical areas, particularly those which are highly vulnerable to erosion; land use 
patterns;  
 
presence and size of sites considered as national conservation priorities; presence of 
Protected  
 
Areas; natural vegetation cover; rural poverty; percentage of rural population; and the 
percentage  
 
of
small producers among all producers. Microcatchments will be selected based on the 
following criteria: level of biodiversity, degree of existing community organization, 
concentration of agricultural families, and number of inhabitants who get their water 
supply from waterways that feed into the microcatchment.   
 
5. Environment & Social Specialist's Team 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.  
 
Environmental Assessment.  The project was classified as a Category B.  It was 
designed to ensure compliance with the requirements of the Bank umbrella policy on 
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01).  Despite the largely positive or neutral project 
impacts anticipated, submission of an EA and respective EMP was considered prudent to 
ensure conformity with the aforementioned Bank policy.  The GoRJ submitted the final 
draft EA/EMP report in November 2004 and the document was publicly disclosed in 
February 2005 after adjustments were made following Bank comments.  
 
Natural Habitats - The proposed project would support natural habitat conservation and 
improved land use by integrating the conservation of natural habitats and the maintenance 
of ecological functions into regional development programs as well as by promoting the 
rehabilitation of degraded natural habitats. Project activities would not significantly 
modify or degrade natural habitats. In terms of policy dialogue, the project would assist 
the GoRJ in incorporating an analysis of any major natural habitat issues into its rural 
development strategies, including identification of important natural habitat sites, the 
ecological functions they perform, the degree of threat to the sites, priorities for 
conservation, and associated recurrent-funding and capacity-building needs.  
 
Forestry - The proposed project primarily supports environmentally protective activities 
and those which are supportive of small farmers (e.g., farm and community forestry).  
Moreover, there will be no commercial harvesting of native forests, and all activities 
involving forested areas (e.g., agroforestry) would comply with OP 4.36.  
 
Pest Management ? The project will not procure pesticides or pesticide application 
equipment, nor is it expected to affect pest management in a way that harm could be 
done. The project will adopt IPM measures; however, in a few specific instances and in 
Page  5
compliance with Brazilian law, the short-term use of small amounts of pesticides may be 
necessary to implement Sub-component 2.1 subprojects for: (i) control of leaf-cutter ants 
during the first two years of seedling establishment in severely degraded riparian areas; 
(ii) control of invasive grasses in riparian areas under restoration, (however, manual 
weeding will be the preferred option, instead of herbicides); (iii) control of invasive 
grasses during the implementation of zero tillage systems in productive areas (again with 
manual weeding as the preferred option). Specific mitigation measures associated with 
the use of pesticides will be adopted. The hazards associated with the storage, handling, 
use, and disposal of pesticides were identified and assessed, and the Operational Manual 
includes measures (in compliance with Law 7802/89) to reduce these hazards to a level 
that can be managed by their users. The Operational Manual also establishes that the use 
of pesticides should be limited to low toxicity products according to Class IV of Decree 
98816/90, which is equivalent to WHO Class "U" (unlikely to present acute hazard in 
normal use) or, if appropriate "U" products are not available, use of Class III products 
(slightly hazardous) may be necessary.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No cumulative or long term impacts are foreseen.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not required.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
See PAD section D.6 Safeguard Policies  
 
Mitigation measures will be integrated into the screening, evaluation, approval, and 
monitoring procedures for small investments/"sub-projects" supported under Component 
2. Depending on the nature and magnitude of their potential impacts, "sub-project" 
proposals would be classified into a specific category of impact (for example, no adverse 
impacts, low impacts, or moderate impacts), so as to determine related requirements to 
reduce or eliminate potential environmental impacts. Screening and approval procedures 
would be incorporated into the project design. They will be built in the management of 
the financial instrument to be adopted under Component 2 (that is, integrated into sub-
project screening, evaluation, and monitoring procedures), so that mitigation measures 
proposed are cost-effective and not overly burdensome. The EMP will also include 
specific responsibilities for EA and institutional arrangements, as well as provisions for 
strengthening EA capacity within SEAAPI and establishing mechanisms to monitor 
implementation and measure impacts.  
 
Social Aspects:  
 
During project preparation, national and beneficiary stakeholders were identified by the 
local Rio Rural Program and participated in numerous consultations associated with the 
Socio-Economic and Environmental Diagnostic Studies and the Social Assessment. In 
addition, the project team organized a series of project preparation meetings and 
workshops with key state, municipal, and beneficiary stakeholders.   
Page  6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Stakeholders include national and beneficiary stakeholders. National stakeholders 
comprise the following: state institutions (Environment, Agriculture, Water Resources, 
Public Defender's Office and Universities); federal institutions (Embrapa, National Water 
Agency, Ministries of Environment and Agrarian Development, and Universities); 
municipal organizations (Sustainable Rural Development Councils, Municipal 
Secretariats of Agriculture and Environment), national and local NGOs; and the private 
sector.  Key beneficiaries include small and medium size farmers, rural youth, school 
teachers, and community leaders.  
 
National and beneficiaries stakeholders will actively participate of project 
implementation. Both training and implementation support for stakeholders would 
emphasize the mechanisms, entitlements, obligations and skills implicit in fully 
participatory development.  Project operational procedures would rely upon demand-
driven mechanisms in order to ensure a participatory mode of operation.  
 
The EA was disseminated among the executing agencies, and printed and electronic 
copies were distributed to the environmental state entities (Environment Secretariat and 
its agencies FEEMA and IEF) for public disclosure in their libraries and web-sites.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/14/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/13/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/29/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N?A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Page  7
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
No 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
No 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
No 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alvaro J. Soler 
03/29/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Maria Isabel Junqueira Braga 
03/29/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Judith M. Lisansky 
03/29/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
03/29/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Abel Mejia 
03/29/2005 
Comments:   
