         The World Bank
         Brazil - Upper Secondary Reform (PforR + IPF) P163868




               Appraisal Stage Integrated Safeguards Datasheet




Jul 28, 2017                                                     Page 1 of 12
         The World Bank
         Brazil - Upper Secondary Reform (PforR + IPF) P163868


 BASIC INFORMATION

 OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA
  A. Basic Project Data

   Country                            Project ID                    Project Name                Parent Project ID (if any)
   Brazil                             P163868                       Upper Secondary Reform
                                                                    Program
   Region                      Estimated Appraisal Date             Estimated Board Date        Practice Area (Lead)
   LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN 2-Nov-2017                                                       Education

   Financing Instrument               Borrower(s)                   Implementing Agency
   Hybrid Program for Results and     Government of Brazil          Ministry of Education
   Investment Project Financing

 Proposed Development Objective(s)
 To strengthen the capacity of the state secretariats of education to implement the upper secondary reform,
 including in disadvantaged schools, and to increase the Index of Basic Education Development in targeted
 full-time upper secondary schools.

 Components
 Component 1: Supporting the New Upper Secondary Education - P4R
 Result Area 1. Support the implementation of the new curriculum.
 Result Area 2. Promoting the expansion of full-time schools.
 Component 2. Technical Assistance – IPF



 Financing (in USD Million)
  Financing Source                                                                                         Amount
  Borrower                                                                                                 1.327.00
  International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                      250.00
  Total Project Cost                                                                                       1.577.00

 Environmental Assessment Category
 C – Project it is likely to have minimal or no adverse environmental impacts. Beyond screening, no further EA action is
 required for a Category C project

  OPS_TABLE_SAFEGUARDS_DEFERRED
  Have the Safeguards oversight and clearance functions been transferred to the Practice Manager? (Will not be
  disclosed)
  Yes




Jul 28, 2017                                                                                                      Page 2 of 12
         The World Bank
         Brazil - Upper Secondary Reform (PforR + IPF) P163868


  Decision




 F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

   This is a nationwide Program for Results operation with the Ministry of Education to provide support for the
   ongoing Upper Secondary Education Reform, which includes a Technical Assistance Component. An
   Environmental and Social System Assessment (ESSA) has been carried out by the Bank Team to assess the
   client’s capacity to manage the potential social and environmental impacts of the Program for Results
   component. This PID/ISDS addresses exclusively the potential social and environmental impacts of the Technical
   Assistance Component.
   The Technical Assistance component will contribute to strengthening the institutional capacity of the Ministry of
   Education and the State Secretariats of Education with the objective of ensuring a proper implementation of the
   reform, including: (i) technical cooperation between MEC and SEEs; (ii) monitor and evaluate periodically the
   implementation and results of the reform; (iii) optimize existing resources and establish accountability between
   MEC and SEEs in the implementation of the reform, while ensuring proper implementation standards. For this
   purpose, the TA would provide highly specialized consulting services, including support to: (i) build capacity at
   SEEs to improve planning, management and monitoring of the reform; (ii) strengthen the technical and
   operational capacity of MEC for the design and management of the implementation of the reform; (iii) develop
   instruments, models and studies to support MEC, and the States to implement and monitor the reform and
   make changes accordingly; (iv) develop a Staff Development Program for MEC and SEEs responsible for the
   design and implementation of the reform; (v) communication campaigns and integration work among the
   various organs of the MEC and federative entities to facilitate the implementation of the new high school; and
   (vi) establish a Management Unit to strengthen the institutional capacity of SEB (Secretariat of Basic Education)
   and for the management of the project.

 G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

 Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa, Marcio Cerqueira Batitucci


 SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
 Safeguard Policies      Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)

                                       This is a hybrid operation that includes a Program for Results (PforR) component
                                       and a Technical Assistance (TA) component. The general principles of OP 4.01
                                       apply for the TA component.
 Environmental
                                       The PforR component of the operation may support the execution of civil works
 Assessment OP/BP        Yes
                                       that are localized and site specific, with impacts that are small in scale and
 4.01
                                       reversible. For this component, an Environmental and Social System Assessment
                                       (ESSA) has been carried out by the Bank Team as part of Program preparation.
                                       The ESSA addresses the institutional capacity of the Client to deal with issues
                                       related with the management of environmental and social risks that can be

Jul 28, 2017                                                                                                     Page 3 of 12
                                 The World Bank
                                 Brazil - Upper Secondary Reform (PforR + IPF) P163868


                                                               associated with the operation in a manner acceptable to the Bank. Any measure
                                                               needed to generate the desired environmental and social effects were
                                                               incorporated into the overall Program Action Plan that will be agreed with the
                                                               Client.
                                                               The Technical Assistance component of the operation is focused on straight
                                                               forward institutional capacity building activities for the Ministry of Education
                                                               (MEC) and the State Secretariats of Education (SSE) without a physical footprint.
                                                               These activities focus on (i) the hiring of consultants to provide support for the
                                                               Program’s Management Unit, (ii) the training of MEC and SSE regular staff, (iii)
                                                               the carrying out of diagnostics on the available infrastructure and qualification of
                                                               teachers and education managers to implement the Upper Secondary Education
                                                               Reform (Novo Ensino Medio, NEM), (iv) a study on the costs of the
                                                               implementation of NEM, (v) a study on the demand for evening secondary
                                                               education classrooms, (vi) the development of a digital platform to assist the
                                                               SSEs to assess and implement NEM, (vii) the development of methodologies for
                                                               monitoring and evaluate NEM and (viii) data collection for baseline and impact
For Official Use Only




                                                               analysis.
                                                               In addition, the Technical Assistance component includes activities that will help
                                                               the Borrower to strengthen its capacity and the capacity of the state
                                                               implementing agencies for managing social and environmental effects of the
                                                               Program. These agreed activities are:
                                                                   (i)    The hiring of a dedicated specialist on the management of social and
                                                                          environmental impacts and risks as part of the Program’s
                                                                          Management Unit.
                                                                   (ii) Elaboration of an Environmental and Social Management Guide,
                                                                          assembling in a user-friendly format all the Guidelines and Manuals
                                                                          required by the Brazilian legislation for each of the following themes:
                                                                          a) Preservation of archaeological, paleontological, historical, cultural
                                                                          or religious patrimony, following the applicable legislation; b)
                                                                          preservation of the vegetation of legally protected areas, following
                                                                          the applicable legislation; c) environmental impact assessment; d)
                                                                          use of toxic chemicals to control pests; e) management of
                                                                          environmental, health and safety risks; f) environmental management
                                                                          of works and buildings; g) best practices in projects of reform and
                                                                          expansion of schools (considering the sustainability of buildings); h)
                                                                          assessment and mitigation of risks of natural disasters; i) the
                                                                          necessary elements to ensure the accessibility of the reformed and/or
                                                                          expanded school buildings.
                                                                   (iii) Based on these Guidelines and Manuals, the design and
                                                                          implementation of a capacity building program for engineering,
                                                                          environmental management and health and safety teams of State
                                                                          Secretariats of Education (which are the implementing agencies of
                                                                          civil works) with lower institutional capacity.
                                                                   (iv) The designing specific procedures for assessment and response to
                                                                          natural disasters.

                        Jul 28, 2017                                                                                                      Page 4 of 12
                                 The World Bank
                                 Brazil - Upper Secondary Reform (PforR + IPF) P163868


                                                                   (v)    The design a Manual for sustainable buildings, aiming to incentivize
                                                                          energy efficiency and the rational use of water. (Solid waste recycling
                                                                          programs can also be implemented.)
                                                                   (vi)   A consultancy to develop the diagnostic of the determining factors of
                                                                          gender inequalities in education, which are particularly pronounced
                                                                          among Afro-descendant youth aimed at promoting equal
                                                                          opportunities of access to Upper Secondary Education, considering
                                                                          gender and race balance.
                                                               These activities will be developed through one or more consultancies, which are
                                                               expected to have potentially positive direct impacts and downstream
                                                               implications because they will enhance the institutional capacity of the Borrower
                                                               and implementing agencies. Following the World Bank’s “Interim Guidelines on
                                                               the Application of Safeguard Policies to Technical Assistance (TA) Activities in
                                                               Bank-Financed Projects and Trust Funds Administered by the Bank,? the team
                                                               classifies these TA activities as Type 1 TA activities, for which it is assigned the
                                                               indicative environmental Category C.
For Official Use Only




                         Natural Habitats                      Not applicable. Activities under TA component would not involve conversion or
                                                 No
                         OP/BP 4.04                            degradation of critical or other natural habitats. Thus, this policy is not triggered.

                                                               Not applicable. This policy is not triggered because the TA component is not
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
                                                               expected to have negative impacts on forest resources.

                                                               Not applicable. This policy is not triggered because the TA component will not
                         Pest Management OP                    support the purchase or increased use of pesticides and other agrochemicals as
                                            No
                         4.09                                  defined under the policy. The Project will not include any support for forest
                                                               plantations or other agricultural land use that would promote pest management.

                         Physical Cultural                     Not applicable. This policy is not triggered because the TA component will not
                                              No
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11                  have negative impacts on physical cultural resources.

                                                               Not applicable. Activities under the TA component will not have any physical
                                                               footprint. None of them interfere with Indigenous Peoples.
                                                               As analyzed and presented in the Environmental and Social System Assessment
                                                               prepared for the operation, the Brazilian legal framework ruling the education
                                                               sector defines indigenous school education as a specific modality of the national
                                                               education system. This framework was constituted with broad participation of
                         Indigenous Peoples
                                                 No            indigenous peoples and was consolidated through the establishment of a
                         OP/BP 4.10
                                                               mandatory National Curricular Guidelines for Indigenous School Education
                                                               (National Education Council Resolution No. 5/2012).
                                                               These guidelines require the free, prior and informed consultation of indigenous
                                                               peoples in the definition of the political and pedagogical plan, curriculum content
                                                               and curriculum, school schedule and timetable, school management and ethno-
                                                               educational territories.


                        Jul 28, 2017                                                                                                        Page 5 of 12
                                 The World Bank
                                 Brazil - Upper Secondary Reform (PforR + IPF) P163868


                                                               The same applies to quilombola communities, as provided for in the National
                                                               Education Council Resolution No. 8/2012.
                                                               The principles and procedures established in these guidelines are still in force and
                                                               must be fulfilled by all federated entities.
                                                               The Upper Secondary Education Reform does not alter the National Curricular
                                                               Guidelines of special modalities of education, which include the school education
                                                               of indigenous peoples, quilombola communities and itinerant groups.
                                                               With regards to upper secondary education, the Brazilian legal framework
                                                               requires that educational systems promote, through collaborative actions, the
                                                               free, prior and informed consultation of indigenous peoples about the type of
                                                               Secondary Education that is appropriate for the various indigenous communities.
                                                               It also guarantees indigenous students who enroll in non-indigenous schools
                                                               outside of their communities the right to express their ethnic-cultural
                                                               differences, to appreciate their traditional modes of knowledge, beliefs,
                                                               memories and other forms of expression of their differences. Therefore, non-
For Official Use Only




                                                               indigenous schools must develop pedagogical strategies with the objective of
                                                               promoting and valuing cultural diversity.
                                                               Therefore, neither the TA Component, nor the Program for Results component
                                                               interfere with indigenous peoples’ school education.

                                                               Not applicable. The Involuntary Resettlement Policy is not triggered because the
                         Involuntary
                                                               TA component will not require land acquisition and will not cause involuntary
                         Resettlement OP/BP      No
                                                               physical resettlement, adverse impacts on livelihoods, or restriction on the access
                         4.12
                                                               to/use of natural resources.

                                                               Not applicable. The TA component will not support the construction or
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP
                                              No               rehabilitation of dams, nor will it support other investments related to the
                         4.37
                                                               services of existing dams.
                         Projects on
                                                               Not applicable. None of the activities of the TA Component are expected to have
                         International
                                                 No            any impacts on international waterways.
                         Waterways OP/BP
                         7.50
                                                               Not applicable. Activities of the TA component will not be implemented in
                         Projects in Disputed                  disputed areas.
                                                 No
                         Areas OP/BP 7.60




                        Jul 28, 2017                                                                                                      Page 6 of 12
                                 The World Bank
                                 Brazil - Upper Secondary Reform (PforR + IPF) P163868


                         KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

                          A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential
                         large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:


                         No potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible adverse impact is associated with the Technical Assistance
                         component of this operation, because it focuses on straight forward institutional capacity building activities that will
                         enhance the institutional capacity of the Borrower to manage social and environmental effects. There are social and
                         environmental benefits that are associated with the whole operation. They include the increased access of young
                         people from socially vulnerable groups or communities to full-time high school that can help reduce dropout rates and
                         improve school achievements (the Program will double the number of students in the country attending the full-time
                         secondary education schools) Environmentally, the project will improve sanitary conditions, ventilation conditions,
                         lighting, safety and accessibility in schools.
For Official Use Only




                         The Technical Assistance component helps to address the main risk identified by the Environmental and Social System
                         assessment that may hamper the operation’s proper management of environmental and social impacts – namely: the
                         great heterogeneity between the units of the Brazilian federation in terms of its capacity to manage social and
                         environmental impacts despite of a very robust political and legal framework. As previously mentioned, the TA
                         component includes consultancies that will consolidate – in a user-friendly platform – the Guidelines and Manuals that
                         the implementing agencies have to follow to comply with legal requirements related with the management of social
                         and environmental effects as well as to promote the social and environmental sustainability of Program supported
                         activities. These consultancies comprise (i) the elaboration of Environmental and Social Management Guide, (ii) the
                         design and implementation of a capacity building program, (iii) the designing of specific procedures for assessment
                         and response to natural disasters, (iv) the design of a Manual for sustainable buildings, aiming to incentivize energy
                         efficiency and the rational use of water, and (v) a study on barriers hampering equal opportunities in secondary
                         education to socially vulnerable groups.
                         During the preparation of this hybrid operation and the required Environmental and Social System Assessment, the
                         team assessed if Technical Assistance component would interfere with Indigenous Peoples. This assessment concluded
                         that Technical Assistance activities – by their nature and scope – and the operation in general will not have direct
                         and/or downstream effects on indigenous peoples’ school education because it is object of specific legislation and rules
                         in Brazil that will remain in force after the Upper Secondary Education Reform.
                         The findings of this assessment emphasize that consultation and participation of Indigenous Peoples in the planning of
                         educational policies is guaranteed in several consultative and deliberative forums. Indigenous peoples are represented
                         in the National Education Council and in the National Education Forum. In addition, a National Commission for
                         Indigenous School Education (CNEEI) was established by Ordinance MEC 734/2010. The CNEEI is a collegiate body, of an
                         advisory nature as well as an instance of social control of the Ministry of Education, having the attribution of advising
                         the Ministry of Education in the formulation of policies for Indigenous School Education. It is composed of indigenous
                         representatives, government representatives and civil society organizations.
                         They also point out that the number of schools and enrollments in indigenous schools have grown significantly since
                         the beginning of the century. The Brazilian school network has 3,115 indigenous schools of basic education. A 123.7%
                         increase since the first specific census of indigenous school education in 1999, which identified 1,392 indigenous
                         schools and 10% since 2010. In 2016, there were 233,711 students enrolled, representing a 20% increase over 2010. In

                        Jul 28, 2017                                                                                                     Page 7 of 12
                                 The World Bank
                                 Brazil - Upper Secondary Reform (PforR + IPF) P163868


                         2010, 53.2% of indigenous schools were municipal and 46.3% state. The distribution of indigenous students by levels
                         and modalities of education shows that there is a great imbalance in the progression of the years of study. Thus, there
                         is a strong concentration of indigenous students in the first grades of Elementary School. In 2010, 77.7% of indigenous
                         students were enrolled in elementary school, almost 75% of them in the initial grades. Infant Education accounted for
                         only 10.1% of enrollments, Education for Young People and Adults accounted for 7.9% of them and High School for only
                         5.1%. The offer of secondary education in indigenous schools is a recent experience. In 2010, only 80 indigenous
                         schools offered secondary education.
                         Finally, the findings of this assessment have particularly shown that indigenous school education is ruled by a set of
                         special legislation. The indigenous school education system is organized around ethno-educational territories (Decree
                         6.861 / 2009), which contemplate the attachment of indigenous peoples to geographical areas (territories) and their
                         traditional network of social relationships (common social and historical roots, political and economic relations,
                         linguistic affiliations, shared values and cultural practices). These territorial units do not follow the political-
                         administrative division of the country in states and municipalities. The policy of ethno-educational territories is a
                         demand of the indigenous peoples of Brazil. Of the 40 ethno-educational territories already identified and proposed by
                         indigenous peoples, 25 are in place.
                         In addition, the National Curricular Guidelines for Indigenous School Education are of a mandatory nature. They ensure
For Official Use Only




                         that the principles of specificity, bilingualism and multilingualism, community organization and interculturality underpin
                         the educational projects of indigenous schools, valuing the traditional languages and knowledge of indigenous
                         communities as well as that the model of organization and management of indigenous schools takes into account the
                         socio-cultural and economic practices of the respective communities, their forms of knowledge production, their own
                         teaching and learning processes and corporate projects. Furthermore, and in relation to upper secondary education,
                         these guidelines require that educational systems promote the free, prior and informed consultation of indigenous
                         peoples about the type of Secondary Education that is appropriate for the various indigenous communities. It is
                         necessary to carry out a diagnosis of the demands related to this stage of Basic Education in each indigenous
                         sociocultural reality (Resolution CNE / CEB No. 5/2012, Article 10, paragraph 3) and it is ruled that, through its projects
                         of school education, indigenous communities have the prerogative to decide the type of secondary education
                         appropriate to their lifestyles and corporate organization (Resolution CNE / CEB No. 2/2012, § 5). The Brazilian
                         normative framework also guarantees indigenous students who are enrolled in non-indigenous schools the right to
                         express their ethnic-cultural differences, to appreciate their traditional modes of knowledge, beliefs, memories and
                         other forms of expression of their differences. Therefore, non-indigenous schools must develop pedagogical strategies
                         with the objective of promoting and valuing cultural diversity.
                         These National Curricular Guidelines for Indigenous School Education will not be affected by the changes introduced by
                         the reform of the upper secondary education in Brazil. The principles and procedures established in CNE Resolution No.
                         5/2012 require the free, prior and informed consultation of indigenous peoples in the definition of the political and
                         pedagogical plan, curriculum content and curriculum, school schedule and timetable, school management and ethno-
                         educational territories. They are and they will remain in force and mandatory to all federated entities. The same is true
                         for quilombola communities, as provided for in CNE Resolution No. 8/2012.
                         Considering all these points and the nature of the activities supported under the operation’s Technical Assistance
                         component, OP/BP 4.10 is not triggered.

                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:

                         Not applicable

                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.


                        Jul 28, 2017                                                                                                       Page 8 of 12
                                 The World Bank
                                 Brazil - Upper Secondary Reform (PforR + IPF) P163868



                         Not applicable

                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
                         capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

                         Not applicable

                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies,
                         with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                         The Ministry of Education is responsible for the overall orientation of Program. The Nacional Education Council –
                         which includes representatives of civil society, Indigenous Peoples and quilombola communities – is in charge of
                         the overall consultation process related with the new national common curriculum basis. State Secretariats of
                         Education (SSEs) also play a key role in selecting schools that will participate in the expansion of the full-time
                         schools. School communities will be consulted and will need to provide their consent to participation in the Full-
                         Time Secondary Education Fostering Program. Statewide new curriculum will be approved by State Education
For Official Use Only




                         Councils, who also count with the participation of key stakeholders (students, parents, representative
                         organizations of teachers and education workers). The financial management of PFEMTI (Full-Time Secondary
                         Education Fostering Program) is a responsibility of the National Fund for the Development of Education (FNDE),
                         which is a federal authority created by Law 5,537 / 1968. FNDE is responsible for executing the educational
                         policies of the Ministry of Education and is in charge of establishing the financing procedures, making the annual
                         transfer of funds to the SEEs and their accounting.
                         The elaboration of the National Common Curriculum Basis was highly participatory, including an on-line
                         consultation platform that received about 12 million manifestations, statewide public audiences and regional
                         seminars. This process was managed by the National Education Council and is ongoing. The first stages of the
                         consultations were attended by entities representing Indigenous Peoples, quilombola communities, traditional
                         communities, rural communities, people with disabilities, social movements affirming gender diversity and sexual
                         orientation. The MEC published a comprehensive study comparing the second and third versions of the BNCC
                         document, which demonstrates the suggestions stemming from that consultation process that were incorporated
                         and the changes that were made. As part of the review of BNCC's third version of Elementary School, two
                         technical commissions were created by the National Board of Education to deal specifically with aspects related
                         to the interaction between the BNCC and the National Curriculum Guidelines for indigenous school education
                         and quilombola education. Consultation and participation of school communities are at the heart of the Full-Time
                         Secondary Education Fostering Program.
                         The Ministry of Education is setting standalone mechanisms for (i) providing public access to information about
                         the Program’s implementation (ii) grievance redressing and (iii) monitoring and evaluation.


                          B. Disclosure Requirements (N.B. The sections below appear only if corresponding safeguard policy is triggered)

                         OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                                                                                                        For category A projects, date of
                          Date of receipt by the Bank           Date of submission to InfoShop          distributing the Executive Summary of
                                                                                                        the EA to the Executive Directors

                        Jul 28, 2017                                                                                                    Page 9 of 12
                                                     The World Bank
                                                     Brazil - Upper Secondary Reform (PforR + IPF) P163868


                            Not applicable                                          Not applicable

                            "In country" Disclosure
                            Not applicable

                         OPS_RA_D ISCLOSURE_T ABLE




                         Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process

                            Date of receipt by the Bank                              Date of submission to InfoShop
                            Not applicable                                           Not applicable

                            "In country" Disclosure
                            Not applicable
For Official Use Only




                          C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project
                          decision meeting) (N.B. The sections below appear only if corresponding safeguard policy is triggered)

                         OPS_EA_COMP_TABLE
                          OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?
                          NO
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?

                                  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?
                         OPS_ NH_COM P_TA BLE




                                  OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                                  Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats?
                                  No
                                  If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                                  project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OPS_IR_ COMP_TA BLE




                                 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                                 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                                 NO
                                 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan?

                                 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?
                                 NO
                                 Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to assets that leads to loss of income sources or other

                        Jul 28, 2017                                                                                                               Page 10 of 12
                                                 The World Bank
                                                 Brazil - Upper Secondary Reform (PforR + IPF) P163868


                             means of livelihoods)
                             No
                            yes
                         OPS_ PDI_ COMP_TA BLE




                                  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                                  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?
                                  Not applicable
                                  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language that are understandable
                                  and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                                  Not applicable Yes


                                  All Safeguard Policies
                                  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                                  measures related to safeguard policies?
                                  Not applicable
For Official Use Only




                                  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?
                                  Not applicable
                                  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                                  related to safeguard policies?
                                  Not applicable
                                  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
                                  reflected in the project legal documents?
                                  Not applicable



                         CONTACT POINT

                                   World Bank


                         Contact:                         Marcelo Becerra

                         Title:                           Lead Education Specialist

                         Tel:                             202-458-9785

                         Email:                           mbecerra@worldbank.org



                                   Borrower/Borrower/Recipient




                        Jul 28, 2017                                                                                                           Page 11 of 12
                                  The World Bank
                                  Brazil - Upper Secondary Reform (PforR + IPF) P163868


                           Contact:         Henrique de Campos Meirelles

                           Title:          Minister of Finance

                           Tel:             (61) 3412-2515 / (61) 3412-2516

                           Email:           gabinete.ministro@fazenda.gov.br



                           Implementing Agencies


                           Contact:         Jose Mendonça Filho

                           Title:          Minister of Education

                           Tel:             (61) 2022-7822, (61) 2022-7828
For Official Use Only




                           Email:           gabinetedoministro@mec.gov.br




                           FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT


                         The World Bank
                         1818 H Street, NW
                         Washington, D.C. 20433
                         Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                         Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



                         APPROVAL


                           Task Team Leader(s):                    Marcelo Becerra/ Andre Loureiro

                           Approved By

                           Practice Manager/Manager:               Reema Nayar                       11/01/2017




                        Jul 28, 2017                                                                              Page 12 of 12
