                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA19861
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Nov-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Nov-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Brazil                             Project ID:   P153012
                            Project Name:      Fortaleza Sustainable Urban Development Project (P153012)
                            Task Team          Catalina Marulanda,Emanuela Monteiro
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          05-Dec-2016              Estimated     15-Feb-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GSU10                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       146.60           Total Bank Financing:     73.30
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                                    73.30
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                       73.30
                              Total                                                                                      146.60
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project Development Objective is to: (i) strengthen the capacity of the Municipality of
                           Fortaleza for land use planning and land-based financing; and (ii) enhance urban environment and
                           rehabilitate public spaces through interventions in selected areas of the Vertente Maritima basin and
                           of the Rachel de Queiroz Park.
                            3. Project Description
                           The Project will have three components:



                                                                       Page 1 of 19
                         Component 1. Urban and Environmental Restoration. The objective of this component is to promote
                         urban and environmental restoration of selected areas of the city through investments in public
                         spaces and sanitation. Implementation of the selected activities also aims at strengthening the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Municipality of Fortaleza➢❨ s capacity for urban planning and environmental management. Sub-
                         Component 1.1 will support the environmental restoration and urban renewal of Rachel de Queiroz
                         (RDQ) Park. Sub-
                         Component 1.2 will be aimed at reducing point-source pollution along Vertente Maritima (VM)
                         coastline through a number of interventions, among which (i) financing connections of low-income
                         households to the sewage network, and (ii) conducting communication and environmental education
                         campaigns to promote a more sustainable management of pollution sources in the VM, including
                         illegal sewage discharges and solid waste management. Targeted communication media and
                         educational campaigns will be designed for various audiences (e.g. high, medium and low income
                         population, waste scavengers, and tourists).

                         Component 2. Strengthening Planning and Land-based Financing. The objective of this component is
                         to strengthen the capacity of the Municipality of Fortaleza for planning and land-based financing. It
                         will support: (i) the upgrade of planning instruments and licensing tools, including the existing
                         cadaster (to be transformed into an integrated and multipurpose tool) and the Fortaleza Online
                         platform (which is a web based platform for issuing environmental and urban permitting processes);
                         and (ii) the implementation of land-based financing instruments. Under the latter, the project will
                         finance the design and structuring of an urban redevelopment operation (Operacao Urbana
                         Consorciada, OUC) in the area of influence of the RDQ Park.

                         Component 3. Project Management. This component will support the technical and fiduciary
                         management of the project, project audits, and project monitoring and evaluation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Fortaleza is the fifth largest city in the country with a population of 2.6 million inhabitants (IBGE,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2014), who live in a territory of 315 square kilometers (population density equals 8.3 thousand
                         inhabitants/km2). The city➢❨ s Gini coefficient is one of the highest amongst state capitals (IBGE,
                         2010) and 5.46 percent of the population lives in conditions of extreme poverty (IPECE, 2014). Over
                         16 percent of the population lives in substandard settlements (roughly 509 different favelas were
                         mapped in the city in 2010). Gender inequality is also high. Women count for 51.4 percent of the
                         labor force, but women➢❨ s average earnings equal just 61.5 percent of man➢❨ s. In consequence,
                         mono-parental families headed by women with children (which count for 55.6 percent of all families
                         in the Fortaleza) are overrepresented among the low-income population (73.7 percent of all families
                         with per capita income up to one fourth of the minimum wage).

                         Inequalities are spatially distributed. In 2010, Fortaleza had the second largest slum population of the
                         cities of the Northeast, amounting to roughly 396,370 people (IBGE). The poorest areas of the city
                         are located along the main water bodies - including the Maranguapinho and Ceara rivers (in the
                         Western area) and the Coco river and its tributaries (in the Northeastern area) - as well as along the
                         beach, particularly on the Western and North Eastern side. Many low-income settlements are located
                         in areas of high risk of flooding, increasing the vulnerability of an elevated number of poor
                         households.

                         The deep inequalities that characterize the city are evident along the coastline, where wealthy
                         neighborhoods are adjacent to pockets of severe poverty. In fact, 69% of the population living in the


                                                                      Page 2 of 19
                         Northern neighborhoods of the city has levels of income at or below three minimum salaries (IBGE,
                         2010). Originally areas of illegal occupation, they are characterized by high density, disorganized
                         and unregulated land use, lack of basic services (sewerage, water, waste collection), and an overall
Public Disclosure Copy




                         deficiency of urban amenities. The poor live in precarious housing conditions located in
                         environmental degraded areas with critical levels of crime and violence. Additionally, remote, poor
                         southern areas are characterized by large low-income housing complexes built in the 1970s and
                         1980s, with very limited transportation options. In subsequent years, the city expanded fast and
                         without planning towards those areas, resulting in low-rise, low density and low-income residential
                         housing. Infrastructure for the provision of basic services is deficient, mobility remains very limited,
                         and crime rates are high. Encroachment in parks and around lagoons has essentially deprived the
                         majority of the population of access to these natural spaces.

                         The project will target its interventions in five neighborhoods in the Northwestern end of the
                         Vertente Maritima basin and eight neighborhoods around the Rachel de Queiroz (RDQ) Park. The
                         social assessment shows these neighborhoods count for approximately 13.0 percent of the city➢❨ s
                         population and 12.5 percent of its population living in conditions of extreme poverty.

                         In Fortaleza, including the targeted area, population growth and rapid unplanned urbanization
                         brought with them a number of urban, social and environmental problems. These include among
                         others: the occupation of high-risk areas, deficiencies in sanitation and solid waste management
                         systems, urban mobility bottlenecks, and environmental degradation and poor quality of green spaces
                         (as expressed by the low rate of green areas per population within the city - 4 m2 per inhabitant). The
                         deficiencies in urban infrastructure and afforestation of streets can be used as good proxies for urban
                         and environmental quality. In Fortaleza, these deficiencies are strongly associated with low-income
                         households (IBGE, 2010). Furthermore, low-income households are strongly associated with mono-
                         parental families headed by women with children. Therefore, these associations suggests the Project
                         may have positive distributional impacts.

                         Considering activities envisaged under Subcomponent 1.2 - Reducing point-source pollution along
Public Disclosure Copy




                         VM coastline, the social assessment has paid particular attention to potential impacts on waste
                         scavengers and concluded that they will not adversely affect them. On the contrary, the activities
                         supported by the project are based on a long-lasting work done by the Municipality of Fortaleza with
                         waste scavengers and will contribute to strengthen their representative organizations, improve the
                         safety and health of their labor environments, promote their access to social protection benefits and
                         enhance their living conditions. Formal organizations of waste scavengers have to follow the strict
                         Brazilian labor laws, which include among others norms and standards related with health and safety
                         of labor spaces (which follows OHSAS 18001 internationally applied standards for occupational
                         health and safety), freedom of association and labor representation, and the ban of forced labor as
                         well as child labor.

                         Compliance with labor legislation by form al organizations of waste scavengers are overseen by
                         governmental labor agencies at the municipal, state and federal level. In compensation, membership
                         to formal organizations allow waste scavengers to have access to social protection and labor benefit
                         policies. Without the creation and strengthening of these formal organizations, waste scavengers
                         work in very tough conditions in open landfills and informal labor relations with patrons. In these
                         conditions, working hours are longer and no labor rights are ensured.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (GSU04)

                                                                       Page 3 of 19
                         Clarisse Torrens Borges Dall Acqua (GEN04)
                         6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental            Yes           The proposed set of interventions is primarily focused in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                  urban and environmental restoration, aiming to enhance
                                                                the quality of the city➢❨ s urban environment. These
                                                                interventions include under Component 1: the
                                                                optimization of installed sewer infrastructure; the
                                                                reduction and control of pollution sources of water
                                                                resources; and the regeneration of green spaces. The
                                                                project also includes technical assistance for carrying out
                                                                studies required to identify and structure potential Urban
                                                                Operations (OUCs) in the city, under Sub-Component 2.2:
                                                                Implementation of land based financing instruments. A
                                                                management plan for urban parks will be prepared in the
                                                                first year of project implementation, supported by the
                                                                principles of OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats and OP 4.09 -
                                                                Pest Management.
                                                                The application of safeguard policies to the technical
                                                                studies and assistance to be provided by the project for the
                                                                design and structuring of the RDQ OUC will follow the
                                                                guiding principles set at the World Bank➢❨ s Interim
                                                                Guidelines on the Application of Safeguard Policies to
                                                                Technical Assistance (TA) Activities in Bank-Financed
                                                                Projects and Trust Funds Administered by the Bank. In
                                                                accordance with this, a category B is proposed for the
                                                                Project. The Environmental Assessment safeguard is
                                                                mandatory to all projects and sub-projects that may
                                                                potentially have an environmental and social impact.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                In compliance with OP 4.1, the Borrower has prepared an
                                                                Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                                (ESMF). The document contains the three essential
                                                                instruments of environmental assessment: (i) a focused
                                                                analysis of the social and environmental context, the
                                                                potential positive and adverse impacts of the Project, and
                                                                the mitigating measures (part 1 - ESIA); (ii) the project
                                                                socio-environmental management framework (ESMF),
                                                                including the criteria and screening procedures for the
                                                                selection of interventions to be financed, which will be
                                                                applied before the final selection of each investment
                                                                subproject (a first screening process has already been
                                                                applied to some selected projects, and is included as an
                                                                Annex of the ESMF); and (iii) an evaluation of
                                                                Fortaleza➢❨ s institutional capacity for environmental
                                                                compliance.
                                                                Principles of OP 4.01 have been applied, including
                                                                guidance for prior analysis (environmental screening,
                                                                socio-environmental assessment sheets) of the potential



                                                                 Page 4 of 19
                         impacts of project interventions, including direct, indirect
                         and cumulative impacts. In this way, it will be possible to
                         recognize the potential impacts, both positive and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         negative, in order to subsidize the definition of mitigating
                         measures and specific action plans; as well as the
                         activation of other safeguards policies, ensuring the
                         preparation and implementation of the required
                         environmental assessment instruments.
                         The social analysis included in the ESMF addressed
                         issues related with (i) gender gaps and barriers leading to
                         overrepresentation of women➢❨ s headed households
                         with children among the low-income families, and (ii)
                         vulnerable groups (particularly waste scavengers, whose
                         livelihood strategies are expected to be improved by some
                         of the envisaged interventions). In fact, the social
                         assessment concluded that waste scavengers will not be
                         adversely affected. On the contrary, the activities
                         supported by the project are based on a long-lasting work
                         done by the Municipality of Fortaleza with waste
                         scavengers and will contribute to strengthen their
                         representative organizations, improve the safety and
                         health of their labor environments, promote their access to
                         social protection benefits and enhance their living
                         conditions.
                         The social assessment has also ensured people with
                         disabilities and the elderly with all the means to have
                         access to the RDQ facilities as well as access to
                         communication and education activities in compliance
Public Disclosure Copy




                         with the strong Brazilian laws of accessibility and
                         inclusion of people with disabilities. This legislation
                         includes standards of design and construction for
                         accessibility to buildings, public equipment and the urban
                         environment as and sets parameters for people with
                         physical, visual, hearing and other disabilities and are
                         consolidated on the third edition of the Norma Brasileira
                         de Acessibilidade a edificacoes, mobiliario, espacos e
                         equipamentos pÃºblicos (ABNT NBR-9050, in place
                         since October 11, 2015 ➢❨ available at: http://www.
                         pessoacomdeficiencia.gov.br/app/sites/default/files/
                         arquivos/%5Bfield_generico_imagens-filefield-
                         description%5D_164.pdf).
                         Overall, the project is expected to have pro-poor impacts
                         contributing to improve the living conditions of low-
                         income families in some of the most deprived
                         neighborhoods of the city.
                         The potential negative impacts foreseen are mainly: (i)
                         temporary disruptions of various kinds due to the
                         proposed civil work and interventions of the Project, such


                          Page 5 of 19
                                                        as the movement of machinery and equipment, the
                                                        interruption of traffic, the generation of noise and dust,
                                                        always associated with the adoption of mitigation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        measures, adoption of social communication plans and
                                                        special attention to the health and safety of the workers
                                                        involved; and, also with regard to existing vegetation,
                                                        may involve the suppression of vegetation in very specific
                                                        cases, but also always associated with the measures
                                                        already planned for rehabilitation and requalification of
                                                        urban green areas, necessarily involving the densification
                                                        of green areas, revegetation of riparian areas and planting
                                                        of native vegetation; And, (ii) Collection of fines and / or
                                                        costs for works for the domestic interconnection of sewers
                                                        of clandestine users; (iii) Possible need for land
                                                        acquisition, expropriation and / or resettlement of
                                                        families; And (iv) Potential increase in rental values of
                                                        real estate in areas where improvements and urban
                                                        transformations will occur.
                                                        The social analysis has also evaluated the grievance
                                                        redress mechanism in place and considered it diversified,
                                                        accessible and adequate to the most vulnerable
                                                        population.
                                                        The ESMF was reviewed by the Bank, consulted and
                                                        publicly disseminated prior to Appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   Some proposed project interventions may support
                         4.04                           investment for the recovery of green spaces and
                                                        redevelopment of degraded areas. These interventions
                                                        could be proposed in areas considered by the state to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        environmentally sensitive (i.e., small water resources
                                                        streams) or spring and river margins areas, classified as
                                                        Permanent Preservation Areas (APP) and legally
                                                        protected by the Brazilian Legislation (Federal Law
                                                        4771/65).
                                                        However, the interventions proposed for FCS do not reach
                                                        environmentally critical areas. On the contrary, all
                                                        activities are located in areas already quite anthropized
                                                        and in a state of degradation over the years.
                                                        The OP 4.04 is triggered and all planning activities that
                                                        may affect natural habitats must follow World Bank
                                                        policies. In addition, APP use for sanitation systems
                                                        development requires specific permitting, mitigation and
                                                        regeneration measures by the Brazilian legislation.
                                                        Despite the expected positive impacts, the ESMF has
                                                        included clear guidance regarding direct and indirect
                                                        impacts on natural habitats. The natural habitats identified
                                                        are APPs of water resources (such as streams and ponds),
                                                        where activities would involve environmental recovery
                                                        through elimination of sewage effluents, recovery of the


                                                         Page 6 of 19
                                                       vegetation cover and revegetation with native species in
                                                       the riverine areas, and the creation of urban parks.
                                                       In addition, within Rachel de Queiroz Park is located the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       ARIE Matinha do Pici (section 10), whose main guideline
                                                       is environmental recovery without any deployment of
                                                       equipment that will cause environmental impact.
                                                       The principles and guidelines of OP 4.04 will be widely
                                                       considered in the management plans that are being
                                                       prepared for the Rachel de Queiroz, Adahil Barreto,
                                                       Parreao and ARIE da Matinha do Pici parks.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36     No     Given the nature, scope, and location of the investment
                                                       activities under this project, this OP is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes   The project is not expected to finance any pesticides or
                                                       other chemical amendments that would trigger OP 4.09.
                                                       Nevertheless, some amounts of herbicides could probably
                                                       be used in the creation and maintenance of green areas
                                                       and urban parks.
                                                       The project has therefore supported the development of a
                                                       Pest Management Framework (PMF). The PMF has been
                                                       incorporated into the ESMF and will be part of the Project
                                                       Operational Manual.
                                                       The need to use herbicides will be indicated in each sub-
                                                       project. When the use of herbicides is justified, an
                                                       analysis of potential negative impacts resulting from the
                                                       use of these chemical and the risk associated with the
                                                       inappropriate handling or storing of their containers will
                                                       be conducted.
                                                       The projects will also include measures to reduce those
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       risks, in compliance with Law No. 7.802/89. The PMF
                                                       describes the list of measures to be adopted in case
                                                       needed. It makes use of the World Health Organizations
                                                       Recommended Classification of Pesticides by Hazard and
                                                       Guidelines to Classification (GENEVA; WHO 1994-95).
                                                       The PMF also excludes finance under the proposed
                                                       project for formulated products that fall into WHO classes
                                                       IA and IB, or formulation of products in Class II, if: (i)
                                                       the country lacks restrictions on their distribution and use,
                                                       or (ii) they are likely to be used by, or be accessible to, lay
                                                       personnel, farmers, or others without training, equipment,
                                                       and facilities to handle, store, and apply these products
                                                       properly
                                                       Project implementation is not expected to cause any
                                                       negative impact on known physical cultural resources
                                                       (PCR). Proposed sub-projects with expected direct and
                                                       negative impact on known archaeological,
                                                       paleontological, historical or other culturally significant
                                                       sites will not be eligible. However, they may include
                                                       historical sites and/or archaeological findings. As such,


                                                        Page 7 of 19
                                                      impacts and procedures for "chance findings" from
                                                      specific investments under Component 1 (if applicable)
                                                      will be assessed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                      This OP is triggered in a preventative manner as the
                                                      project interventions will not cause direct negative
                                                      impacts to recognized physical cultural resources. For the
                                                      intervention areas of the project, preliminary research was
                                                      carried out at the competent institutions at the federal,
                                                      state and municipal levels, and only the existence of
                                                      Rachel de Queiroz's home was already recognized as
                                                      municipal historic patrimony (Municipal Decree 12,582 /
                                                      2009). The works of revitalization and requalification of
                                                      the Rachel de Queiroz Park aim, among others, at
                                                      promoting the preservation of the existing patrimony.
                                                      Other possible occurrences may arise due to the
                                                      excavation work with chance findings, which measures
                                                      must follow the municipal and federal legislation in force
                                                      with the immediate stoppage of the works and the
                                                      necessary involvement of IPHAN in the rescue and
                                                      recovery activities.
                                                      The Physical Cultural Resources Framework, as part of
                                                      the ESMF, contains relevant provisions to mitigate any
                                                      potentially adverse impact. Such provisions include
                                                      compliance with the guidelines defined by the National
                                                      Institute for Historical and Cultural Heritage (IPHAN)
                                                      regarding historical sites and/or archaeological findings,
                                                      or other competent state or local agency.
                         Physical Cultural      Yes   Project implementation is not expected to cause any
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Resources OP/BP 4.11         negative impact on known physical cultural resources
                                                      (PCR). Proposed sub-projects with expected direct and
                                                      negative impact on known archaeological,
                                                      paleontological, historical or other culturally significant
                                                      sites will not be eligible. However, they may include
                                                      historical sites and/or archaeological findings. As such,
                                                      impacts and procedures for "chance findings" from
                                                      specific investments under Component 1 (if applicable)
                                                      will be assessed.
                                                      This OP is triggered in a preventative manner as the
                                                      project interventions will not cause direct negative
                                                      impacts to recognized physical cultural resources. For the
                                                      intervention areas of the project, preliminary research was
                                                      carried out at the competent institutions at the federal,
                                                      state and municipal levels, and only the existence of
                                                      Rachel de Queiroz's home was already recognized as
                                                      municipal historic patrimony (Municipal Decree 12,582 /
                                                      2009). The works of revitalization and requalification of
                                                      the Rachel de Queiroz Park aim, among others, at
                                                      promoting the preservation of the existing patrimony.


                                                       Page 8 of 19
                                                        Other possible occurrences may arise due to the
                                                        excavation work with chance findings, which measures
                                                        must follow the municipal and federal legislation in force
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        with the immediate stoppage of the works and the
                                                        necessary involvement of IPHAN in the rescue and
                                                        recovery activities.
                                                        The Physical Cultural Resources Framework, as part of
                                                        the ESMF, contains relevant provisions to mitigate any
                                                        potentially adverse impact. Such provisions include
                                                        compliance with the guidelines defined by the National
                                                        Institute for Historical and Cultural Heritage (IPHAN)
                                                        regarding historical sites and/or archaeological findings,
                                                        or other competent state or local agency.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No    The Project will not interfere with Indigenous Peoples
                         BP 4.10                        because all the investments will be undertaken in urban
                                                        areas and there are no indigenous peoples as defined
                                                        under the policy in the Project➢❨ s area of influence.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   This policy is triggered because activities envisaged under
                         OP/BP 4.12                     Subcomponent 1.1- Restoration of the Rachel de Queiroz
                                                        (RDQ) Park, Subcomponent 2.1- Upgrade of planning
                                                        instruments and licensing tools and Subcomponent 2.2 -
                                                        Implementation of land based financing instruments, are
                                                        expected to have direct and/or downstream adverse
                                                        resettlement-related impacts.
                                                        Subcomponent 1.1- Restoration of the Rachel de Queiroz
                                                        (RDQ) Park: Proposed interventions for the restoration of
                                                        the RDQ Park will require land acquisition and have
                                                        direct adverse effects related with involuntary physical
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        and/or economic displacement.
                                                        The location of some activities has already been decided,
                                                        but remains uncertain with regards to others.
                                                        Consequently, the Borrower has prepared, consulted and
                                                        publicly disclosed a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                        (RPF) - setting the principles and guidelines to be applied
                                                        to all activities causing adverse involuntary resettlement
                                                        impacts. Two specific Abbreviated Resettlement Action
                                                        Plans (ARAP) have also be prepared for the activities that
                                                        have its location and scope already defined.
                                                        The RPF calls for: (i) broad and continuous, free and
                                                        informed participation of all people adversely affected by
                                                        involuntary resettlement; (ii) the establishment of a proper
                                                        grievance redress mechanism; and, (iii) in its entitlement
                                                        matrix clearly outlines the resettlement assistance to be
                                                        given to both land owners and informal and non-
                                                        opportunistic occupants.
                                                        The two ARAPs show that the scope and magnitude of
                                                        the direct adverse impacts caused by activities with
                                                        location already defined are limited. The first ARAP deals


                                                         Page 9 of 19
                         with the physical resettlement of 61 families (170 people)
                         living in at-risk areas in section 10 of the RDQ Park. The
                         second RAP addresses the demand for acquisition of 94
Public Disclosure Copy




                         plots of free land, the physical and economic
                         displacement of four commercial buildings, and the
                         temporary impacts of the works over 164 household and
                         commercial facilities in sections 1-7 of the RDQ Park.
                         Socioeconomic census and cadaster of affected people
                         will be updated less than one year before the starting date
                         of implementation of project activities and all people that
                         have entered in the areas until this date will be eligible for
                         compensation according to the rules, principles and
                         guidelines set at the Project➢❨ s RPF.
                         A third location has been considered for inclusion in the
                         RDQ Park (section 8B), but there are two issues that are
                         currently impeding its incorporation. First, the land is
                         owned by the Federal University of Ceara (UFC) and an
                         agreement needs to be signed transferring it to the
                         municipality. Second, the plot of land has been recently
                         invaded by encroachers and there is a pending court case,
                         UFC took measures for their legal eviction prior of the
                         issuance of the municipal decree creating the Park and for
                         reasons not related with it. Regarding this people, it has
                         been agreed that they will be covered by the RPF.
                         However, given the various uncertainties around the
                         situation, no RAP will be prepared for them at this time. If
                         they are evicted prior to the handover of the land to be
                         incorporated into the park, they shall be treated as a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         legacy resettlement linked to the project (i.e., there should
                         be a review/resettlement audit of their displacement
                         process to determine whether any retroactive measures are
                         needed to ensure they receive entitlements as indicated in
                         the RPF). If they are evicted after the land is handed over
                         by UFC to the municipality, they shall be treated like any
                         other group (i.e. an ARAP will be prepared, approved and
                         implemented prior to their displacement). Only if the park
                         ends up being redesigned to exclude the area in question,
                         would they no longer be covered by the project RPF.
                         Sub-component 2.1 - Upgrade of planning instruments
                         and licensing tools (namely: the modernization of the
                         multipurpose cadaster) and Sub-component 2.2 -
                         Implementation of land based financing instruments
                         (namely: the preparation of the RDQ Park OUC):
                         Technical Assistance activities envisaged under these
                         subcomponents may have downstream resettlement-
                         related impacts. Consequently, the application of
                         safeguard policies to the technical studies and assistance
                         provided by the project for the drafting of the municipal


                         Page 10 of 19
                         law of the RDQ OUC and the modernization of the
                         multipurpose cadaster will follow the guiding principles
                         set at the World Bank➢❨ s Interim Guidelines on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Application of Safeguard Policies to Technical Assistance
                         (TA) Activities in Bank-Financed Projects and Trust
                         Funds Administered by the Bank. The Terms of
                         Reference for all these activities will be submitted to the
                         Bank for prior review. The Bank team will assess their
                         consistency with the World Bank➢❨ s safeguard policies
                         and provide guidance as needed to ensure such
                         consistency.
                         For dealing with the downstream potential (but highly
                         unexpected) adverse impacts of the modernization of the
                         multipurpose cadaster, the client will also strengthen its
                         existing channels for registering and responding to
                         grievances as well as ensure that pro bono support will be
                         provided for the poor population in the unexpected
                         occurrence of disputes related with land property
                         demarcation.
                         Potential adverse impacts of the law of the RDQ Park
                         OUC are minimized by the Brazilian OUC➢❨ s
                         regulatory framework includes safeguard measures related
                         with environmental sustainability, social inclusion and
                         citizen participation as well as requires the assessment of
                         impacts on the target neighborhoods and the participatory
                         development of economic and social compensation plans
                         for the directly affected population.
                         The institutional capacity of the municipality of Fortaleza
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to prepare and carry out ARAPs was assessed as adequate
                         because SEUMA will be supported by the Municipal
                         Secretariat of Infrastructure (SEINF) in the preparation of
                         the RAPs and by the Municipal Secretariat of Housing
                         Development (HABITAFOR) in their implementation.
                         These secretariats have gained significant experience with
                         involuntary resettlement issues and the provision of
                         adequate housing for low-income families affected by
                         development projects when working with international
                         organizations in projects that have recently physically
                         relocated about 2,500 families. Furthermore, expert
                         consultancy services will be hired to implement ARAPs.
                         Three consultation rounds have been carried out between
                         August and November 2016 and addressed involuntary
                         resettlement issues (a brief summary of these
                         consultations is presented in section II.A.5, below). The
                         participants ➢❨ including potentially affected people,
                         community leaderships, representatives of community
                         associations and civil society organizations among others
                         ➢❨ showed: (i) their support to activities envisaged by


                         Page 11 of 19
                                                                      the project which improve the environmental quality of
                                                                      the neighborhoods they live in and their compliance with
                                                                      the quality of some public services available in these areas
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      and the need of improving the later; (ii) their awareness
                                                                      about the occupation of at risk areas and permanent
                                                                      protection areas as well as their agreement with the need
                                                                      of resettling people living in these areas; and (iii) their
                                                                      concerns with the compensation alternatives that will be
                                                                      open to potentially affected people. Being informed about
                                                                      the different compensation alternatives the project will
                                                                      make available for their choice and the full participatory
                                                                      approach that will be followed in the implementation of
                                                                      resettlement action plans, the participants expressed their
                                                                      broad support to this approach.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No            Given the nature, scope, and location of the investment
                            4.37                                      activities under this project, this OP is not triggered.
                            Projects on International   No            Given the nature, scope, and location of the investment
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      activities under this project, this OP is not triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed        No            Given the nature, scope, and location of the investment
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                          activities under this project, this OP is not triggered.
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The main direct impacts of the set of proposed interventions under this Project are mainly with
                              positive effects, most of them related to the restore and requalification of green urban areas and
Public Disclosure Copy




                              related to urban environmental management issues. The potential negative impacts foreseen are
                              mainly: (i) temporary disruptions of various kinds due to the proposed civil work and interventions
                              of the Project (ii) collection of fines and /or costs for works for the domestic interconnection of
                              sewers of clandestine users; (iii) pssible need for land acquisition, expropriation and /or
                              resettlement of families; and (iv) potential increase in rental values of real estate in areas where
                              improvements and urban transformations will occur.

                              Negative impacts are not expected to be large scale and will be mostly related to temporary
                              disruptions of various kinds due to the proposed civil work and interventions of the Project. These
                              expected impacts include the movement of machinery and equipment, the eventual interruption of
                              traffic, the generation of noise and dust. Dealing with them, the project will adopt mitigation
                              measures, such as the adoption of social communication plans and special attention to the health
                              and safety of the workers involved; and, also with regard to existing vegetation, may involve the
                              suppression of vegetation in very specific cases, but also always associated with the measures
                              already planned for rehabilitation and requalification of urban green areas (with associated
                              management plan of urban green areas and parks) , necessarily involving the densification of green
                              areas, revegetation of riparian areas and planting of native vegetation.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Urban upgrading and requalification of low income neighborhoods as proposed by the project may


                                                                       Page 12 of 19
                           lead to processes of gentrification due to increases on land, housing, and rental values in targeted
                           areas. However, these will be appropriately minimized or mitigated because the country➢❨ s
                           regulatory framework of urban operations (Law 10527/2001 - Estatuto das Cidades) includes
Public Disclosure Copy




                           safeguard measures related with environmental sustainability and social inclusion and requires a
                           preliminary impact assessment of the neighborhood, an economic and social compensation plan
                           for the directly affected population, and citizen participation and social control mechanisms. Thus,
                           the project will develop and implement a tailored resettlement approach to fight gentrification-
                           related risks in which proper resettlement plans will be implemented setting early community
                           engagement and participation, redeveloped areas will incorporate land-use parameters that
                           promote mixed-use and provide solutions for low-income housing; and, complaints and
                           compliments will be registered by a number of instruments for citizen engagement, social control
                           and civil society participation in decision-making already in place - such as: the Secretariat➢❨ s
                           corporate website, the Secretariat➢❨ s ombudsman office, and the extensive use of social media to
                           communicate and interact with citizens. In addition, citizen and civil society feedback will be
                           regularly analyzed and utilized for adaptive planning and management.

                           The modernization of the multipurpose cadaster - which is mainly related with regularizing
                           existing ownership schema - could potentially lead to downstream adverse impacts related with
                           involuntary resettlement. These adverse impacts will be mitigated and minimized by the
                           strengthening of the robust Grievance Redress Mechanisms that are operated by the Municipality
                           of Fortaleza and the existence of pro bono support for the poor in the unexpected occurrence of
                           disputes related with land property demarcation as consequence of the modernization of the
                           multipurpose cadaster.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The project considered alternative designs of the Rachel de Queiroz Park, minimizing adverse
                           impacts related with involuntary resettlement. Only people living in areas under risk of flooding
                           and areas of permanent protection (where construction is prohibited by the National Law) will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           removed. The scope and magnitude of such adverse impacts are limited. A Resettlement Policy
                           Framework and two Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans have been prepared in compliance
                           with OP/BP 4.12. Affected people and community leaderships have been consulted. The project
                           also considered alternatives in relation to storm-water intercepts/collectors/pumping stations. The
                           selected interventions in sanitation were based on an extensive pollution modelling analysis, which
                           was conducted by a team of technical specialists from CAGECE and SEUMA, in addition to an
                           individual consultant hired by the Bank. The study consisted of: (i) the identification of the main
                           pollution sources of the Vertente Maritima basin and their effects in the water quality throughout
                           the city➢❨ s 31 beaches which are systematically monitored by the Ceara State Environmental
                           agency (SEMACE); (ii) a computational hydrodynamic modeling, leading to the estimation of the
                           pollutant discharges from all the sub basins, from the storm water macro drains and main water
                           streams leading into the beaches; (iii) the selection of the project focus areas - the Western portion
                           of the coast, where 80% of the beaches do not have adequate bathing water quality, regardless of
                           the season. The selected area is also where most of the poor are located; and (iv) the development
                           of scenarios to assess how each type of project intervention (a. communication and environmental
                           education campaigns, b. enforcement, c. individual sewage household connections, d. Capture and
                           diversion of dry-weather flows into the existing underutilized sewage network, and e. pilot on-site
                           water resource treatment technologies) would individually (and/or jointly) contribute to reduce
                           pollution levels in the project focus area.
                           It was found that the capture and diversion of dry weather flows from 4 selected water macro


                                                                     Page 13 of 19
                           drains into the sewage system was the one with the major short-term impact in pollution reduction
                           along the coast. However, a bundled (and incremental) approach of all solutions was chosen, as it
                           was proven that it would also lead to the achievement of sustainable targets on household
Public Disclosure Copy




                           connections to the network. The study is part of the Project files. It also informs the design of
                           sector-specific Project indicators ➢❨ (i) Percentage of sampling points along the western portion
                           of the VM coastline with adequate bathing water quality during the dry season (from a baseline of
                           20% to 80%); (ii) Number of people in urban areas provided with access to Improved Sanitation
                           under the Project (27,200); and (iii) Feasible household connections to sewage network completed
                           in western portion of the VM watershed (80% of the total).
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The borrower prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to deal with direct and potential
                           downstream adverse impacts related with involuntary resettlement. The borrower will also follow
                           a phased implementation timeline, prioritizing works that do not involve land acquisition or
                           involuntary resettlement.

                          The RPF calls for: (i) broad and continuous, free and informed participation of all people
                          adversely affected by involuntary resettlement; (ii) the establishment of a proper grievance redress
                          mechanism; and, (iii) in its entitlement matrix, clearly outlines the resettlement assistance to be
                          given to both landowners and occupants as well as to physical and economic adverse impacts.
                          The borrower has also prepared two specific Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs). The
                          first deals with the involuntary physical displacement and relocation of 61 families living in at risk
                          areas in section 10 of the proposed perimeter of the Rachel de Queiroz Park. The second deals
                          with the demand of land acquisition in sections 3, 4B, 6B and 7 of the Park, which amount to 94
                          plots of vacant land, temporary impacts on 164 households and commercial facilities due to
                          construction works, and physical and economic displacement of four commercial business.

                          Downstream potentially adverse impacts of technical assistance activities related with the drafting
Public Disclosure Copy




                          of the municipal law of the Rachel de Queiroz urban operation will be dealt according to the
                          World Bank➢❨ s Interim Guidelines on the Application of Safeguard Policies to Technical
                          Assistance (TA) Activities in Bank-Financed Projects and Trust Funds Administered by the Bank.
                          As previously mentioned, the drafting of the municipal law of RDQ OUC will also comply with
                          the national legislation on urban operations, which requires OUCs include safeguard measures
                          related with environmental sustainability and social inclusion, among which a preliminary impact
                          assessment of the neighborhood, an economic and social compensation plan for the directly
                          affected population, and citizen participation and social control mechanisms (Law 10257/2001 -
                          Estatuto das Cidades). Downstream potentially adverse impacts of technical assistance activities
                          related with the modernization of the multipurpose cadaster will be mitigated by the strengthening
                          of the already robust Grievance Redress Mechanisms operated by the Municipality of Fortaleza
                          and by the guarantee of pro bono support to poor population that may unexpectedly face a dispute
                          related with land property in consequence of the regularization of existing ownership schema.

                          The institutional capacity of the municipality of Fortaleza to deal with involuntary resettlement
                          issues, prepare and carry out RAPs was assessed as adequate because SEUMA has been supported
                          by the Municipal Secretariat of Infrastructure (SEINF) in the preparation of the ARAPs and by the
                          Municipal Secretariat of Housing Development (HABITAFOR) in their implementation. These
                          secretariats have gained significant experience with involuntary resettlement issues and the
                          provision of adequate housing for low-income families affected by development projects when


                                                                    Page 14 of 19
                          working with international organizations (including IDB) in projects that have recently physically
                          relocated about 2,500 families.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          A further measure that was envisaged to address potential adverse social and environmental
                          impacts is the establishment of a proper grievance redress mechanism, by strengthening the robust
                          Grievance Redress Mechanisms that are operated by the Municipality of Fortaleza, which include
                          the Secretariat➢❨ s official website, the Secretariat➢❨ s ombudsman office, and the extensive use
                          of social media to communicate and interact with citizens.

                          Regarding other social impacts and as previously mentioned (section I.4), the social assessment
                          has paid particular attention to potential impacts on waste scavengers and concluded that they will
                          not adversely affect them. On the contrary, the activities supported by the project are based on
                          ongoing work done by the Municipality of Fortaleza over a significant period of time with waste
                          scavengers and will contribute to strengthen their representative organizations, improve the safety
                          and health of their labor environments, promote their access to social protection benefits and
                          enhance their living conditions. Furthermore, the advertisement and dissemination of the channels
                          of communication with the Prefeitura de Fortaleza ➢❨ including its channels for registration of
                          complaints and grievances ➢❨ and the management unit of the Reciclando Atitudes project will
                          be reinforced atthe headquarters of these organizations.

                          Regarding environmental aspects and issues, the institutional capacity of the municipality of
                          Fortaleza to deal with the set of proposed interventions proposed was also assessed as adequate, as
                          SEUMA has, as main attribution, the design and implementation of environmental policies in
                          urban environment, as well as being the local institution responsible at the municipal level for the
                          licensing of local works and enterprises. Therefore, it counts on a board formed mainly by
                          professionals with vsignificant experience in environmental evaluation of projects and
                          environmental management of urban areas.

                           Sources of municipal funds (namely the municipality➢❨ s Urban Development Fund, FUNDURB)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           have been identified to provide adequate compensation to affected people and to ensure the
                           improvement or, at least, the restoration of their living conditions. The municipality has also in
                           place a number of instruments to receive, register and respond in an effective e and timely manner
                           to complaints, which are accessible to the most vulnerable population.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders include:

                          (i)     The direct beneficiaries of the project, who amount to 305,628 people (of which 53% are
                          female), identified as: (a) the residents of neighborhoods adjacent to the Rachel de Queiroz Park;
                          and (b) residents of the coastal neighborhoods of the Northwestern end of the Vertente Maritima
                          basin;
                          (ii)    Community-based organizations representing the 13 primarily targeted neighborhoods in
                          these two priority areas;
                          (iii)   Civil society organizations working on urban planning and environmental issues;
                          (iv)    Private and the public investors in the RDQ OUC;
                          (v )    Municipal and state environmental agencies and public providers of water, sanitation and
                          health services
                          (vi) Waste pickers who have been working with the Municipality of Fortaleza for a long time and


                                                                    Page 15 of 19
                         have expressed their support and satisfaction with the support provided to the strengthening of
                         their representative organizations and praise the improvement of their labor health and safety
                         conditions, their access to labor rights and social protection programs. They have been informed
Public Disclosure Copy




                         about the support the program will provide to the project Reciclando Atitudes, which objectives
                         will improve their opportunities to collect recycling materials and, consequently, improve their
                         income generation opportunities. The advertisement of the channels of communication with the
                         Prefeitura de Fortaleza ➢❨ including its channels for registration of complaints and grievances
                         ➢❨ and the management unit of the Reciclando Atitudes project will be repeated among this
                         segment of the population and their representative organizations.

                         Citizens and civil society organizations have been involved in the design of the project for the
                         RDQ Park through 5 public consultations carried out for the diagnostic and elaboration of the
                         basic and detailed engineering designs. These consultations convened 138 people, representing
                         five local community associations, six civil society organizations, eight universities, six private
                         enterprises and twelve governmental agencies.

                         In addition, a first public consultation was held in August 30, 2016, and all the above listed key
                         stakeholders were invited to assess the appropriateness of the project➢❨ s social and
                         environmental risk assessment and the proposed mitigation measures. Approximately 125 people
                         attended, among which: academia (UFC and Universidade Estadual do Ceara - UECE);
                         representatives of the private / construction sector (Sindicato da Industria da Construcao Civil -
                         SINDUSCON); representatives of the Municipality➢❨ s key entities directly and/or indirectly
                         involved with the Project (SEUMA, Secretaria Municipal de Financas - SEFIN, Secretaria
                         Municipal de Conservacao e Servicos Publicos - SCSP, Secretaria Municipal de Planejamento,
                         Orcamento e Gestao - SEPOG; Autarquia de Regulacao, Fiscalizacao e Controle dos Servicos
                         Publicos de Saneamento Ambiental - ACFOR); other municipal-related agencies (Defesa Civil);
                         representatives of the State Government➢❨ s agencies and service utilities directly and/or
                         indirectly involved with the Project (Secretaria Estadual de Meio Ambiente - SEMA; Companhia
Public Disclosure Copy




                         de Agua e Esgoto do Ceara - CAGECE, and Companhia Energetica do Ceara - COELCE). The
                         inputs received during this consultation were properly incorporated on the project➢❨ s ESMF and
                         RPF.

                         A second public consultation round was held in September 3, 2016 in the Community Association
                         of Parque Universitario and focused on the RPF and the cadaster of families completed in the area
                         of the section 10 of the RDQ Park. There were 20 participants whose main concerns related with
                         the time of project implementation, the alternatives of compensation, and the criteria of eligibility
                         and whose main manifested preference related with being resettled for nearby areas. All the
                         questions made by the participants where answered and taken into account on the review of the
                         RPF and ARAP.

                         A third public consultation round occurred in November 7, 2016 and took place in the local church
                         of Santa Edwiges. The revised safeguard documents were presented to an audience of 111 people
                         from the neighboring areas of the RDQ Park (mostly from sections 3 to 7), whose main concern
                         was also related with involuntary resettlement issues and the alternatives of compensation. The
                         principles and guidelines of the safeguard documents were explained again, focusing on the
                         information that ARAPs would be implemented with broad and informed participation of all the
                         affected people, include different alternatives of compensation among which every affected family
                         would freely choose the one that most fit their needs.


                                                                    Page 16 of 19
                           Throughout project implementation, a Grievance Redress Mechanism will be operational. For
                           dealing with involuntary resettlement issues, local offices will be opened as needed in nearby the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           areas of intervention. For dealing with issues related with the project as a whole (including the
                           involuntary resettlement ones), the SEUMA➢❨ s Ombudsman Office, the Municipality➢❨ s
                           General Ombudsman office, and the already available channels of citizen engagement through
                           social media will also be used as channels for registering compliances. Procedures were fully
                           described in the two ARAPs already prepared. The available channels for citizen engagement and
                           grievance redress will be advertised ➢❨ using outdoors and other media ➢❨ in the areas of
                           intervention.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          18-Aug-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       25-Aug-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Brazil                                                               19-Aug-2016
                           Comments: The Client prepared and disclosed the Environmental and Social Management
                                         Framework (ESMF). The document contains the three essential instruments of
                                         environmental assessment: (i) a focused analysis of the social and environmental
                                         context, the potential positive and adverse impacts of the Project, and the mitigating
                                         measures (part 1 - ESIA); (ii) the project socio-environmental management
                                         framework (ESMF), including the criteria and screening procedures for the selection
                                         of interventions to be financed, which will be applied before the final selection of
                                         each investment subproject (a first screening process has already been applied to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         some selected projects, and is included as an Annex of the ESMF); and (iii) an
                                         evaluation of Fortaleza➢❨ s institutional capacity for environmental compliance.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                    25-Nov-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                 29-Nov-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Brazil                                                         29-Aug-2016
                           Comments: The Client prepared and disclosed three instruments: the Resettlement Policy
                                         Framework (RPF) and two Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs).
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                    18-Aug-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                 25-Aug-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Brazil                                                         19-Aug-2016
                           Comments: A Pest Management Framework (PMF) was prepared as part of the ESMF.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the


                                                                     Page 17 of 19
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

                          170 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                          10 Provided estimated number of people to be affected


                                                                     Page 18 of 19
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Catalina Marulanda,Emanuela Monteiro
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Noreen Beg (SA)                       Date: 29-Nov-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Ming Zhang (PMGR)                    Date: 29-Nov-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 19 of 19
