Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1403 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/31/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P094255 
Project Name: Sergipe State Integrated Project: Rural Poverty 
Task Team Leader: Luis O. Coirolo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 18, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 23, 2005 
Managing Unit: LCSER 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Participation and civic engagement (P);Rural services and infrastructure 
(P);Municipal governance and institution building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
20.80 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
7.20
7.20 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project would increase social and economic opportunities for the rural poor in Sergipe by 
improving their access to basic socioeconomic infrastructure, thus contributing to the objective 
of increasing the Human Development Index (HDI) from 0.682 to 0.71 by 2007.  Building on the 
CDD approach which has proven successful under the first phase of the Sergipe Rural Poverty, 
the second phase would improve on this experience by:  (i) strengthening the cross-sectoral 
integration of investments in rural areas, (ii) providing greater emphasis on education, health, 
culture, natural resources management and environmental sustainability; and (iii) scaling up 
impact by using the skills, social capital and experience of the Municipal Councils and 
community associations to improve the relevance, efficiency, sustainability, targeting and 
outcomes of non-project activities in rural Sergipe.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Total project cost is estimated at US$28.0 million. A Specific Investment Loan (SIL) of US$20.8 
million would finance:  
 
Page  2
Component 1 ? Community Subprojects to provide matching grants to community associations 
to finance their implementation of about 1,000 small-scale socio-economic infrastructure, 
education, health, culture, productive, environmental and other investments aimed at raising the 
HDI.  Community associations will identify investments, in line with an information campaign 
conducted by the State to raise awareness of the HDI and its constituent components.  Some 71 
municipalities in Sergipe will be covered, with 70% of component resources concentrated in the 
41 poorest project municipalities (i.e., those with HDI<0.623).  
 
Component 2 ? Institutional Development, executed by the State Technical Unit-PRONESE, 
including (a) technical assistance and training to support the mobilization and strengthening of 
community associations in their role of identifying, preparing, operating and maintaining 
subproject investments; (b) capacity-building for project Municipal Councils on responsibilities 
outlined in the Project Operational Manual, including assessment and supervision of community 
associations, participatory planning and the financial management of community subprojects, 
and environmental management for these subprojects, and  (c) workshops and seminars for 
Municipal Councils and community associations to exchange experiences with project 
implementation and facilitate integration with other Federal and State programs for poverty 
reduction.  
 
Component 3 ? Horizontal Integration to provide technical assistance to the State Secretariat of 
Planning to strengthen its emerging results-based management capacity to plan, integrate, 
monitor and evaluate public policies and investments for poverty reduction, and to improve the 
alignment of public expenditures with the State?s development priorities, as outlined in its PPA. 
It will also include training events for municipalities to assist them in integrating federal and 
state programs for poverty reduction.    
 
Component 4 - Project Administration, Supervision, Monitoring and Evaluation to support the 
costs (excluding salaries) of project administration, monitoring and impact evaluation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will cover 71 municipalities in Sergipe, with 70% of component resources 
concentrated in the 41 poorest municipalities (i.e., HDI<0.623).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
PRONESE, the State Technical Unit for the first phase of this two-phase operation, has complied 
fully with Bank safeguard and project environmental rules.  Environmental considerations are 
built in throughout the subproject cycle.  Special activities to further improve environmental 
understanding and/or performance are organized when needed, and the standardized subproject 
designs use the upgraded environmental checklist.  
 
Under the first phase of the Sergipe State Rural Poverty, PRONESE has a technical contingent 
of 23 professionals, among them civil engineers, agronomists, social workers, economists, legal 
council, in addition to other technical and administrative positions. Under the proposed second 
phase, an Environmental Assurance Technical Group (NTGA) will be established, with the 
objective of further ensuring that community subprojects would not have negative impacts on the 
environment.  The NTGA would also undertake the necessary actions in order to obtain 
Environmental Licenses, when needed.  In particular, the NTGA would (i) submit to the State 
Secretariat for the Environmental (ADEMA) and the Brazilian Institute for the Environment 
(IBAMA) requests for environmental licensing; (ii) submit to the Superintendency of  Water 
Page  3
Resources (SRH) requests for Water Use Permits; (iii) evaluate all subproject proposals from an 
environmental perspective, making recommendations for mitigation, as needed; and (v) prepare 
training programs and information campaigns ? for community associations, PRONESE staff, 
municipal councils -- for environmental education, with the aim of raising societal awareness for 
the prevention, detection and resolution of environmental problems.  
 
To achieve these responsibilities, the NGTA will be composed of professional staff in the fields 
of Environment, Biology, Agronomy, Forestry Engineering and Civil Engineering. Additionally, 
an Environmental Conservation Manual will be produced, under which monitoring systems will 
be constructed to detect potential environmental impact from subprojects executed under the 
proposed project.   Furthermore, the NGTA ? and PRONESE in general ? will also work in 
partnership with ADEMA, SRH and IBAMA, as well as NGOs and municipal leaders.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The ongoing first phase of the Sergipe State Rural Poverty (which is classified as Category 
B), applies several environmental "screens" to ensure zero/lowest impact, which are consistent 
with the recommendations of the Bank report ?Thematic Review ? Rural Infrastructure Projects 
in Brazil? (QAT Thematic Review, 2002), in Bahia.  
 
?
Compliance with Bank safeguards policy is monitored throughout the subproject cycle.  
 
?
Standard subproject designs incorporate environmental analysis and mitigation features.  
 
?
A
checklist of environmental elements is used during the subproject design and approval 
phase, and in obtaining (mandatory) subproject environmental licenses.  
 
?
A
new subproject category - the environmental subproject -- has been added to support 
community initiatives which preserve or sustainably exploit natural resources.  
 
The initial analysis of subproject proposals will be handled by project Municipal Councils 
trained to advise the community associations on environmental themes (including Federal and 
State laws and Bank Safeguards).  Environmental checklists, which incorporate Bank 
Safeguards, are fundamental at this stage and used by all involved parties for all subprojects.   
Subprojects approved and prioritized by the participatory Municipal Councils are next analyzed 
by PRONESE, the Project Technical Unit. Depending on subproject type - but especially for 
those involving water resources - and its technical and financial viability, the proposal is 
subjected to an environmental analysis, and where required, enters the licensing phase which 
includes detailed analysis of potential cumulative effects/impact.  No agreement is signed or 
funding transferred until environmental viability is determined. Furthermore, no subprojects that 
(i) harm natural habitats or (ii) include the use of pesticides, will be approved for funding. 
Agreements between PRONESE and beneficiary communities will contain specific clauses 
concerning compliance with environmental guidelines at the implementation and operational 
stages.  
 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be completed during preparation by 
PRONESE, with inputs from the principal State environmental agencies, and reviewed by the 
LCSES Quality Assurance Team prior to appraisal.  The EMP will describe the legal, 
institutional and operational context, requirements and procedures for ensuring that 
environmental issues are addressed throughout project implementation.  These represent a 
continuation of procedures applied systematically and routinely under the first phase of the 
Sergipe State Rural Poverty, with the addition of new developments and activities, as required, 
under more recent environmental legislation in the State of Sergipe, and lessons learned from the 
earlier project. The EMP will also address potential issues as those identified by the Bank report 
?Thematic Review ? Rural Infrastructure Projects in Brazil? (QAT Thematic Review, 2002), in 
Bahia.  
 
Specifically, the EMP will: (a) ensure that the Project is fully compliant with relevant State 
and Federal environmental legislation and Bank Safeguards; (b) further consolidate the 
integration of environmental standards in subprojects financed under the Project; (c) foster a 
convergence between rural poverty reduction and the conservation and adequate valuation of the 
environment; and (d) link environmental conservation and protection activities with investments 
that increase the HDI, consistent with Sergipe?s medium-term investment program (Plano Pluri-
annual, PPA).  
 
The EMP will include sections on:  
 
?
Potential Cumulative Impacts.  The EMP will (i) assess the cumulative environmental 
impacts, if any, from previous Bank-supported rural development projects in Sergipe (such as 
small dams, although the first phase of the Sergipe State Rural Poverty did not finance any of 
this type of subproject); and (ii) recommend a credible approach for addressing any significant 
cumulative impacts from multiple future subprojects under the new loan.  
 
?
Capacity Building.  The EMP will specify how the project (under Component 2) would 
strengthen, as needed, the capacity for environmental management of subprojects (including 
cumulative impacts) within PRONESE, Municipal Councils, Community Associations, other 
beneficiary groups, and any other entities with key roles in project implementation.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
X
According to the 2001 Povos Indigenas do Brasil, Sergipe has one indigenous ethnic 
grouping ? Xok? ? located in the municipality of Porto da Folha and numbering about 250 people 
(as of 1987, the most recent data).  The Xok? in Sergipe no longer speak their original language 
and today communicate in Portuguese.  Under the RPAP (1996-2001), the Associa??o Ind?gena 
Povoado Xok?, a community association representing the Xok?, submitted a subproject proposal 
to finance agricultural mechanization.  The subproject ? benefiting 68 families and valued at 
US$24,820 ? was approved for financing and signed in November 1999.  
 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
The Project Operational Manual already defines the guidelines and specific procedures for 
engaging rural communities in project activities, both indigenous and non-indigenous.  Building 
on techniques developed already under the first phase of the Sergipe State Rural Poverty, the 
Xok? will continue to be brought into the project through culturally appropriate communications 
and outreach campaigns developed in collaboration with indigenous entities/local leaders and 
designed to help the Xok? community understand project objectives and procedures.  This will 
be complemented by a training and capacity-building program developed in collaboration with 
relevant NGOs and institutions in the region.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/08/2005 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  The 
specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and Indigenous Peoples' Development 
Framework will be completed prior to project appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Luis O. Coirolo 
03/16/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
03/22/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mark E. Cackler 
03/22/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
