Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1738 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/15/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P095460 
Project Name: BR - Bahia State Highway Management Project 
Task Team Leader: Aymeric-Albin Meyer 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: July 16, 2007 
Managing Unit: LCSFT 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Trade facilitation and market access (P);Regional integration (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.50 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
100.00
100.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project's ultimate development objective is to increase the effectiveness in the use of the 
state road infrastructure, thus to stimulate higher economic growth and contribute to poverty 
alleviation. The objective is to be achieved through (a) rehabilitation and maintenance of the 
state paved road network, so as to significantly improve the proportion of the network in good or 
fair condition over a period of 6 years, and (b) support to a set of key institutional improvements 
in the road sector to ensure the sustainability of physical achievements, as well as the fostering of 
a
greater integration within the state's regions, and of the state with the rest of Brazil.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will have two components:  
 
Component 1: highway maintenance and rehabilitation (US$185 million)  
 
The rehabilitation needs on the state road network largely exceed the expected availability of 
funds over the medium-term.  As such, the state's road network management strategy focuses on 
improving conditions on the state's five main transport corridors, instead of following a more 
traditional, network-wide strategy.  The transport corridors have been selected so as to support 
the state's strategy to "deconcentrate" economic growth and services' offer, taking into account 
Page  2
the following criteria: (a) improving transport conditions between the main production areas in 
the state and the related markets; (b) strengthening connectivity between the state's main urban 
areas; (c) improving the state's competitive advantage as a preferred point of entry/exit for 
imports/exports within the North-East region of Brazil; and (d) accommodating large increases in 
through traffic, especially along the littoral.  
 
The state of Bahia has closely followed, over the last 3 years or so, the introduction of pilot 
strategies for long-term, result-based road maintenance and rehabilitation on the federal and Rio 
Grande do Sul state road networks, under two Bank operations. Given that early results from the 
introduction of such strategies have been positive, especially in terms of efficiency/flexibility 
gains and cost savings, the state has asked the Bank to help it to adapt and implement a similar 
strategy at the level of the state paved road network.  
 
The component will thus support, at a large scale, the introduction and execution of long-term, 
result-based road maintenance and rehabilitation contracts (the so-called CREMA contracts).  It 
is expected that CREMA contracts will be laid on about 2,000 km of the state paved road 
network.  Works will include rehabilitation, resurfacing, safety and environmental rehabilitation 
works.  
 
Component 2: institutional strengthening (US$15 million)  
 
The component will support: (a) government efforts in optimizing the role of transport services 
to help deconcentrate economic growth and provision of basic services, through determination of 
existing logistics bottlenecks and level/localization of repressed economic growth due to 
inadequate transport costs, integration of transport dimension in planning for education and 
health interventions, identification of public actions required to improve logistics' efficiency in 
the state, and definition of incentives to private sector to invest in logistics, (b) the consolidation 
and gradual implementation of the state's logistics program (PELTBAHIA), especially with 
respect to the strengthening of the state's regulatory framework and capacity to model public-
private partnerships, (c) the strengthening of the state road administration, with respect to the 
consolidation of its planning system (to allow for prioritization of interventions at the network 
level taking into account fiscal constraints, and for systematic road/bridge condition and traffic 
data collection), capacity improvements with respect to environmental/social impacts mitigation 
and works supervision, and modernization of information systems; and (d) the preparation of 
works' engineering designs and supervision, as well as support to the road administration in 
coordinating the project's implementation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The physical component of the Project will finance road maintenance and rehabilitation works 
on about 2,000 km of the state paved road network. All works will take place within existing 
right-of-ways (ROW) and at the sites associated with the works. The ROW consists of the paved 
surface itself, the road's shoulders and drainage, as well as the area reserved for construction, 
operation, and maintenance along the road side. The sites associated with road civil works 
include, among others: deposits, borrow sites, materials treatment areas, quarries, access roads, 
and facilities provided for workers.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  3
Experience, over the last 7 years, with about 140 federal and state road maintenance and 
rehabilitation contracts in Brazil under various Bank-financed operations, underlines that road 
maintenance and rehabilitation activities in Brazil have not generated any significant 
environmental or social impacts during or following execution of works.  This finding points to 
the following: (a) in general, road maintenance and rehabilitation activities do not generate 
significant environmental or social impacts; and (b) the provisions made by the governments and 
the Bank to identify and mitigate such impacts were basically adequate.  
 
When it comes to road rehabilitation and maintenance activities, the state of Bahia and the road 
administration handle environmental and social safeguards following federal legislation and 
norms.  This spring, during the preparation of the Road Transport Project (P092990), the federal 
framework for the handling of environmental safeguards was evaluated as acceptable, while the 
frameworks for handling of social safeguards was evaluated as incomplete.  
 
In addition: (a) experience to date is positive with respect to the road administration's handling 
of safeguard concerns related to the execution of road paving and rehabilitation works under an 
ongoing IADB project, (b) a specific unit in charge of environmental matters within the road 
administration has been created during the last reorganization in 2002, and structured with 
support from the IADB, (c) there is a good level of cooperation between the state's 
environmental agency (Centro de Recursos Ambientais, - CRA) and the road administration, and 
(d) for purposes of road rehabilitation and maintenance activities to be undertaken under the 
proposed project, the state has (i) accepted to handle potential social safeguard concerns 
(resettlement and handling of indigenous people) in accordance with specific frameworks 
satisfactory to the Bank; and (ii) asked Bank support under the project to further improve the 
road administration capacity in handling safeguard policies.  
 
The above indicates that the administration would have adequate capacity to effectively 
mitigate environmental and social concerns related to the execution of road rehabilitation and 
maintenance activities under the proposed project.  
 
Environmental Safeguards  
 
The road administration created in 1995 an Environmental Group (Grupo de Meio Ambiente - 
GRUMA), which was the forerunner of the current environmental department (Gerencia de 
Garantia Ambiental - GERAM), created during the road administration's 2002 reform and 
located within the Department of Planning and Special Programs. The environmental 
department's main activities include (a) provision of relevant advice on road plans and programs; 
(b) preliminary evaluation of engineering designs to allow for an early detection of potential 
impacts; (c) the preparation of terms of reference for, and supervision of  environmental studies; 
(d) inspection of work sites to ensure compliance with environmental norms and supervise 
implementation of environmental rehabilitation activities; and (e) handling of public hearings, 
environmental education and awareness raising.  The environmental department works under (a) 
a
Technical Environmental Commission (Comissao Tecnica de Garantia Ambiental - CTGA), 
regrouping staff from across the road administration, basically responsible for ensuring respect 
of environmental legislation and application of related guidelines and procedures within the 
administration, and (b) the general supervision of the state's environmental agency.  
Page  4
The road administration and the CRA have proven procedures to ensure adequate treatment of 
potential negative environmental impacts as they relate to road rehabilitation and maintenance 
activities.  In addition, the road administration has developed a geo-referenced system to identify 
environmental degradations resulting from the construction or operation of roads (the so-called 
passivo ambiental), and is in the process of treating such degradations (the proposed project will 
provide funding for the treatment of environmental degradations along the road sections to be 
rehabilitated and maintained).  
 
Social Safeguards  
 
Although there is no single comprehensive rule for Indigenous People and Involuntary 
Resettlements equivalent to Bank policies, Brazil has a well-developed set of rules, which pursue 
the same purposes. The protection of indigenous people and Quilombolas' is guaranteed by the 
Brazilian Constitution.  The Federal General Attorney Office (MPF) is responsible to take 
actions to ensure the defense of their right and the compliance with the Constitution and the 
associated laws. In relation to involuntary resettlements, appropriate procedures have their 
foundations in the Constitution and other legal documents that mandate adequate compensation 
for the people affected by government projects.  
 
The road administration's environmental department is in charge of: (a) in the case of 
involuntary resettlements, conducting the process of collecting relevant data, evaluating and 
negotiating compensations; and (b) in the case of interactions with indigenous people, while the 
process is led by the National Foundation for Indigenous People (FUNAI) with the participation 
of the Brazilian Institute for Environment and Renewable Natural Resources (IBAMA), 
constituting a special purpose commission to participate to the definition of the Indigenous 
People Development Plans, and to execute such Plans.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Elena Correa (LCSEO) 
Mr Flavio Chaves (LCC5C) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Borrower will prepare an Environment Assessment (EA) in line with Bank rules. 
Moreover, environmental assessments of civil works of all road sections to be supported by the 
project will be conducted according to Brazilian procedures and are part of the regular 
procedures of the Borrower.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
"Chance findings" of archaeological and paleontological artifacts are very unlikely in 
maintenance and rehabilitation works, because these normally do not involve earthworks. Under 
Brazilian legislation provisions for the protection of cultural property are part of the 
environmental licensing procedures. The local office of the National Institute for Historical and 
Cultural Heritage (Instituto do Patrimonio Historico e Artistico Nacional 
-
IPHA
N) is the 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
institution responsible in the State of Bahia for handling archeological and cultural property 
issues. Whenever "change findings" occur it is mandatory for DERBA to seek IPHAN's support 
to address "chance findings" issues.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
X
The Brazilian Constitution guarantees the protection of the traditions, culture, language, 
property rights, etc. of Indigenous Peoples. The National Indian Foundation (Fundacao Nacional 
do Indio - FUNAI) is the Brazilian institution responsible for handling indigenous peoples' 
issues. Although the project is not likely to trigger issues related to indigenous peoples, DERBA 
will prepare an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework compliant with the requisites of OP/BD 
4.10.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Interventions supported by the project normally do not entail the need for involuntary 
resettlement. Nevertheless, DERBA will prepare a Resettlement Framework to address possible 
issues related to involuntary resettlement.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/12/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The specific safeguard-related studies will be prepared during the period August 22 and 
November 21, 2005.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Aymeric-Albin Meyer 
09/08/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
09/08/2005 
Comments:  I concur with the decision to prepare the project following Category B requirements 
