INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 12/13/2005                       Report No.: AC1883
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Brazil                       Project ID: P095460
Project Name: Bahia Integrated State Highway Management Project
Task Team Leader: Aymeric-Albin Meyer
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 14,  Estimated Board Date: April 4, 2006
2005
Managing Unit: LCSFT                  Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
Loan
Sector: Roads and highways (100%)
Theme: Trade facilitation and market access (P);Regional integration (S)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):     100.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):        0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):        (.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):        (.00
Other financing amounts by source:
BORROWER                                             86.00
86.00
Environmental Category: B - Pari:ial Assessment
Simplified Processing                 Simple []        Repeater []
Is this project processed under 01 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)  Yes []  No []
2. Project Objectives
The Project's ultimate development objective is to increase effective use of the state road
infrastructure, with an aim at stim,ulating higher economic growth. The objective is to be
achieved through (a) rehabilitation and maintenance of key sections of the state paved
road network, so as to contribute t:o the decrease of road transport costs on selected
corridors, and to the increase in th,e use of the state road transport infrastructure, and (b)
support to a set of key institutional improvements in the road sector to ensure the
sustainability of physical achievernents, as well as the fostering of a greater integration
within the state's regions, and of the state with the rest of Brazil.
3. Project Description
The proposed project will have two components.
Component 1: rehabilitation of state paved road sections (US$166 million)
The rehabilitation needs on the state road network largely exceed the expected
availability of funds over the medium-term. As such, the state's road network
management strategy focuses on improving transport conditions on the state's main
transport corridors and on their feeders, instead of following a more traditional, network-
wide strategy. Overall, the state transport corridors and feeders have been identified so as



to support the state's strategy to "deconcentrate" economic growth and services' offer,
taking into account the following criteria: (a) improving transport conditions between the
main production areas in the state and the related markets; (b) strengthening connectivity
between the state's main urban areas; and (c) improving the state's competitive advantage
as a preferred point of entry/exit for imports/exports within the North-East region of
Brazil. The selection has been undertaken over the 2001-2004 period by the State as part
of the preparation of the Transport Logistics State Program (PELTBAHIA) and the state
long-term development strategy Bahia 2020. The economic evaluation undertaken as
part of project preparation has validated the plan's findings.
The state of Bahia has closely followed, over the last 3 years or so, the introduction of
pilot strategies for long-term, result-based road maintenance and rehabilitation on the
federal and Rio Grande do Sul state road networks, under two Bank operations. 1 Given
that early results from the introduction of such strategies have been positive especially in
terms of efficiency/flexibility gaiins and cost savings, the state has asked the Bank to
assist it in adapting and implementing a similar strategy at the level of the state paved
road network.
The component will thus support the introduction and execution of long-term, output-
based road maintenance and rehabilitation contracts, on about 2,000 km of the state
paved road network (or 15% of the network length). Works will include rehabilitation,
resurfacing, safety and environmental rehabilitation works.
Component 2: institutional strengthening (US$20 million)
The component will support: (a) government efforts in optimizing the role of transport
services to help deconcentrate economic growth and provision of basic services, through
determination of existing logistics bottlenecks and level/localization of repressed
economic growth due to inadequate transport costs, integration of transport dimension in
planning for education and health interventions, identification of public actions required
to improve logistics' efficiency in the state, and definition of incentives to private sector
to invest in logistics, (b) the consolidation and gradual implementation of the state's
logistics program (PELTBAHIA), especially with respect to the monitoring of the
program's impact in logistics' peiformance, strengthening of the state's regulatory
framework, and capacity to model public-private partnerships, (c) the strengthening of
the state road administration, with respect to the consolidation of its planning system (to
allow for prioritization of interventions at the network level taking into account fiscal
constraints, and for systematic road/bridge condition and traffic data collection), capacity
improvements with respect to environmental/social impacts mitigation and works
supervision, and modernization ol information systems; (d) improvements in the road
administration's technical capacity, to support municipalities in maintaining their road
networks and in improving transport services to the poor, and (e) the preparation of
works' engineering designs and supervision, as well as support to the road administration
in coordinating the project's implementation.
' The Federal Decentralization and Rehabilitation Project (Bank loan amount: US$250 million) and the Rio
Grande do Sul State Highway Management Project (Bank loan amount: US$70 million), scheduled to close
by the end of 2005.



4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
As already mentioned, the physical component of the proposed project will finance road
maintenance and rehabilitation works on about 2,000 km of the state paved road
network. The first phase of road works will mainly be along the following three
corridors: 1. Javi - Santa Maria da Vit6ria - Brumado - Ilh6us; Ibis.  Brumado  -
Salvador; 2. Xique-Xique - Baixa Grande - Salvador; and 3.  Irece - Palmeiras -
Oliveira dos Brejinhos - Brumado.
All works will take place within existing right-of-ways (ROW) and at the sites associated
with the works. The ROW consists of the paved surface itself, the road's shoulders and
drainage, as well as the area reserved for construction, operation, and maintenance along
the road side. The sites associated with road civil works include, among others: deposits,
borrow sites, materials treatment areas, quarries, access roads, and facilities provided for
workers.
None of the already identified road work sites will interfere with indigenous peoples'
territories or will require involuntary resettlements.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Ms Elena Correa (LCSEO)
Mr Flavio Chaves (LCC5C)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                    Yes       No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)               X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                          X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                     X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                        X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)               X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                   X
Projects on International Waterways (OP1BP 7.50)              X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)         __       I    X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible
impacts:
Given the physical limitation of the works to existing ROW and the sites associated with
road projects outlined in the previous section, no large scale, significant and/or
irreversible social or environmental issues are expected to arise from the implementation



of the proposed project. Indeed, the major potential negative impacts already took place
at the time the roads where built in the 60s and 70s.
Nevertheless, as with all road works, rehabilitation and maintenance can temporarily
cause soil erosion, disturbance to water flows, an increased accident risk, noise and
vibrations, etc. These impacts are normally mostly site-specific, and do not significantly
affect human populations or alter environmentally sensitive areas. It should be
emphasized that few, if any of the likely negative impacts are irreversible, with
mitigation measures well known and of ready design and implementation. In addition,
"chance findings" of archaeological and paleontological artifacts are very unlikely in
maintenance and rehabilitation works, because these normally do not involve earthworks
in previously non-disbursed areas.
This evaluation is confirmed by the experience, over the last seven years, with about 140
federal and state road maintenance and rehabilitation contracts in Brazil under various
Bank-financed operations, that shows that (a) road maintenance and rehabilitation
activities have not generated any significant environmental or social impact during or
following execution of works; and (b) the provisions made by the governments and the
Bank to identify and mitigate such impacts were basically adequate.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated
future activities in the project area:
For the same reason as mentioned before, the proposed project is not expected to have
any indirect and cumulative impacts, such as induced land cover land use changes in the
influence area of the respective roads.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or
minimize adverse impacts.
Not relevant.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues.
Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures
described.
The preparation in Spring 2005 of the federal-level Road Transport Project (P092990):
(a) confirmed the adequacy of the Brazilian federal legislative and normative body (to
which subnational governments must conform) to handle the Bank's safeguard policies on
environmental assessment and cultural property; and (b) reiterated the fact that such body
is not sufficiently developed to ensure that the Bank's safeguard policies on indigenous
people and involuntary resettlement can be adequately handled. Consequently, the
Borrower prepared an Environmental Assessment (EA) in accordance with Bank policies,
which confirmed that the project is likely to have only minor, site-specific and temporary
impacts on the environment and that no involuntary resettlements or interferences with
indigenous peoples' territories are expected. Nevertheless, the Borrower accepted to use
specific frameworks acceptable to the Bank to handle indigenous people development
and resettlement issues in the unlikely event these should arise on a specific road section
during project implementation. In such case the Bank will have to be satisfied that



appropriate mitigation plans (designed in accordance with the approved frameworks) will
be drafted, and adequate provisions made for their implementation, before bidding for
works on the related road section can take place.
Brazil has a good track record in handling safeguard issues in the context of road
maintenance and rehabilitation works financed externally, and the state of Bahia is no
exception as demonstrated over the last ten years through (a) the gradual strengthening of
the environmental management capacity of its road administration (strengthening which
will be pursued under the proposed project, see below); and (b) the satisfactory execution
of two IADB-financed road projects, by the state road administration (DERBA).
DERBA has a well functioning environmental department (Gerencia de Garantia
Ambiental - GERAM), which works under a Technical Environmental Commission
(Comissao Tecnica de Garantia Ambiental - CTGA), regrouping staff from across the
road administration, and basically being responsible for the environmental performance
of DERBA.
DERBA has environmental and social standards, procedures and guidelines for road
works that are included in its bidding documents, thus are integral part of civil work
contracts. Compliance monitoring is carried out by GERAM, at frequencies that vary
with the size and environmental sensitivity of works.
Relations between DERBA and the state environmental agency (Centro de Recursos
Ambeintais - CRA) are good. Cooperation is particularly strong in the area of
environmental licensing, with the delegation (accompanied by the necessary training) by
CRA of the preparation of the technical documentation for the instruction of the licensing
process (Inspection Reports and lPreliminary Technical Opinions) to DERBA's CTGA.
The proposed project will support GERAM in the implementation of a pluri-annual
institutional strengthening plan thiat includes financing of technical assistance to
strengthening GERAM's capacity to supervise road works and assure the compliance
with social and environmental norms and standards. It also envisages the consolidation
and full implementation of GERAM's procedural manuals and information systems. This
will imply technical assistance, dissemination activities and the provision of the
necessary training. Training will also be provided to DERBA's staff in handling the
environmental and social aspects related to the execution of civil works contracts, as they
concern local communities, contractors' and DERBA staff. Finally, training will be
provided to staff in the local offices of DERBA (Residencias) to (a) familiarize
themselves with preventive procedures and inspection tools for environmental services,
and (b) implement an on-the-job training to build the necessary local capacity to deal
with social and environmental issues related to project design and the execution of works.
Finally, designs for civil works to be financed under the project will include
environmental rehabilitation works, including remedying erosions, soil stabilization (to
prevent erosions) and ensuring adequate drainage.



Bank supervision will closely follow the progress in streamlining environmental and
social concerns into the project design phase and in monitoring the respect of safeguard
clauses and execution of environmental works during the implementation of civil works
contracts.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Possible stakeholders in safeguard policy issues include IBAMA (environment federal
level), CRA and CEPRAM (enviironment state level) FUNAI (indigenous peoples), and
the local office of IPHAN (cultural property). CRA and CEPRAM have been directly
involved in the preparation of the proposed project.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
Date of receipt by the Bank                         11/11/2005
Date of "in-country" disclosure                     12/13/2005
Date of submission to InfoShop                      12/13/2005
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
Date of receipt by the Bank                         11/11/2005
Date of "in-country" disclosure                     12/13/2005
Date of submission to InfoShop                      12/13/2005
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
Date of receipt by the Bank                         11/11/2005
Date of "in-country" disclosure                     12/13/2005
Date of submission to InfoShop                      12/13/2005
* If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to befilled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and  The EA was reviewed by
approve the EA report?                             the team's environmental
specialist
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP   Yes



incorporated in the credit/loan?
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been  An IPPF has been prepared
prepared in consultation with the Indigenous People?  in accordance with the
revised OP4. 10
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit  The framework was
review the plan?                                    reviewed by the social
scientist on the team
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  n.a.
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process  A resettlement policy
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?           framework has been
prepared
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit  The framework was
review and approve the plan / policy framework / policy  reviewed by the social
process?                                           scientist on the team
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a  Yes
public place in a form and language that are understandable
and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been  Yes
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?



D. Approvals
Signed and submitted by:                        Name                        Date
Task Team Leader.               Aymeric-Albin Meyer                         ilw    It  Fr
Environmental Specialist:       Flavio Chaves
Social Development Specialist   Elena Coea          c-                 (     - I/  VSu-
Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator.  n.a.
Comments:                                                        4      2  2
Sector Manager:                 Jose Luis Iigoy
Comments:



