Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/01/2005 
Report No.:  AC1923
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P089929 
Project Name:  Rio Grande do Norte Integrated Water Resources Management 
Task Team Leader:  Alvaro J. Soler 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 1, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: July 11, 2006 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (70%);General water, sanitation and flood protection 
sector (30%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (P);Other environment and natural resources 
management (S);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
35.90 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
23.90
23.90 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to promote economic, social and environmentally 
sustainable development through the implementation of an integrated water resources 
management system.  
 
Additionally, the project will support the preparation of a water sector strategy and long-
term investment program that will pursue an adequate supply and an efficient use of 
water resources, key elements to support the State's overall sustainable development and 
reduce the vulnerability of the rural poor to cyclical droughts. Regarding essential 
infrastructure, the project will focus mostly on water supply in poor rural areas, including 
rehabilitation and expansion of both drinking water supply networks and pilot 
interventions to improve irrigation schemes.  
 
The results of the project's interventions will be measured by the achievements made in 
the contributions made to three key areas: (i) the development of an improved legal 
framework and strengthened institutional setup for efficient WRM by the state; (ii) the 
development and satisfactory implementation of planning, information and operation 
Page  2
instruments for WRM; and (iii) the promotion of an optimized water resources supply 
through the rational use of natural resources and the expansion and improvement of the 
coverage of the water supply systems.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project will have the following components:  
 
Component 1: Institutional Development and Water Resources Management 
Instruments (US$15.9M, 26.6% of project cost).   The objective of this component is to 
improve the State's WRM capabilities and develop adequate WRM instruments. Project 
activities will be directed mainly at consolidating the design and operation of an 
integrated water resources management system, with effective stakeholder participation 
and using the watershed as the basic territorial management unit, to ensure equitable and 
efficient development that is socially, economically and environmentally sustainable. 
Subcomponents: (1.1) Improvement of the Legal and Institutional Framework, (1.2) 
Water Sector Planning Instruments, (1.3) Information Instruments, (1.4) Operational 
Instruments and (1.5) Studies and Special Projects.  
 
Target groups include: public water agencies, including SERHID, IGARN and CAERN; 
other water users and their associations; SEPLAN and the state government.  
 
Main outcomes include: improved institutional and legal framework for the water 
sector, water rights system and water charges system implemented, consolidation of 
water users' associations, water resources management plan, public water resources 
emergency plan, water resources monitoring network, studies related to water availability 
and use, and system to monitor and evaluate implementation of the government's public 
investment programs.  
 
Component 2: Natural Resources Conservation and Protection (US$7.6M, 12.7% of 
project cost). This component will support the preservation of water quality; improve the 
efficiency in water use through reducing water losses in state-owned public water supply 
infrastructure, improving water conservation in agricultural and industrial activities, and 
generating water-saving technologies, including using treated wastewater; and promote 
the adoption of sustainable agricultural practices on irrigated lands. Subcomponents: (2.1) 
Microcatchment pilot projects, (2.2) Prevention of Losses in Public Water Distribution 
Pipeline Networks, (2. 3) Uses of Treated Wastewater and (2.4) Sediment Control.  
 
Target groups include: water users in the pilot microcatchments and in the state as a 
whole, and public water agencies.  
 
Main outcomes include: implementation of natural resources management plans (pilot 
projects) in two microcatchments; improved maintenance, operation and billing and 
collection system of water distribution pipeline networks to prevent water losses; 
improved and expanded water treatment plants with design of incentive schemes to 
promote use of treated wastewater; construction of about 580 small soil retention 
Page  3
schemes in streams or brooks located in areas of heavy erosion, to control sedimentation 
and improve water quality.  
 
Component 3: Water Infrastructure (US$34.1M, 57.0% of project cost). The objectives 
of this component are to enhance the state's water management capabilities and to 
improve general water availability through the provision of technical and financial 
assistance to improve water availability through the rehabilitation of existing 
infrastructure, the construction of new water infrastructure works, and improved water 
supply for very poor dispersed rural populations, including improved irrigation 
efficiency. Subcomponents: (3.1) Rehabilitation and Maintenance of Existing Water 
Infrastructure, (3.2) New Water Infrastructure, (3.3) Water Supply Systems for Small 
Rural Communities, and (3.4) Pilot Sub-projects for the Rehabilitation and 
Modernization of Small Farmer Irrigation Schemes.  
 
Target groups include: the state's poor rural population, including small farmers in the 
pilot microcatchments; water users throughout the state and their associations; water 
management and supply entities throughout the state  
 
Main outcomes include: rehabilitation, maintenance and improved operation of 40 
existing dams and reservoirs for multiple use; improve water intake and expand coverage 
to another 7 poor municipalities of the Monsenhor Expedito Water Distribution System 
thereby improving the reliability of water supply to the population of about 170,000 
people currently served by the system; construction of small water supply systems to 
supply drinking water to about 120,000 people that currently live without  adequate water 
supply in rural areas; and rehabilitate and modernize small farmer production systems in 
the Serido and improve the water resources management system in the area through 
participatory pilot sub-projects.  
 
Component 4: Project Management (US$2.2M, 3.7% of project cost). This component 
will be responsible for overall project execution and the Monitoring and Evaluation 
System, as well as the preparation of the Phase II Bank Loan.  There are four 
subcomponents: (4. 1) Project Management, (4.2) Monitoring and Evaluation, (4.3) 
Support to Preparation of the Second Phase and (4.4) Project Communication and 
Dissemination.  
 
Target groups include: SERHID; water users and public water agencies throughout the 
state.  
 
Main outcomes include: PMU established and effectively implementing project actions; 
project M&E system in operation; project Information and Communication Program 
functioning; and Phase II agreed and prepared.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented over the whole State of Rio Grande do Norte.   
 
Page  4
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (LCSEN) 
Ms Judith M. Lisansky (LCSEO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
In order to meet the triggered safeguards, the following reports were prepared:  
 
OP 4.01 - Environmental Assessment.  An Environmental Assessment Report (EAR) 
was prepared per the Bank's environmental policies applicable to Category "B" projects. 
The Report evaluates the interventions related to production increase and expansion and 
to the treated water supply networks; establishment of desalinization units in small 
communities and improvement of the existing ones; establishment of water supply 
simplified systems; and other investments such as the recovery of multiple use reservoirs 
in the region.  
 
Mitigating actions to address the adverse impacts were included in an EMP - 
Environmental Management Plan, containing associated costs, responsibilities for its 
implementation and time schedules. These actions are detailed in the EAR and will 
become an integral part of the Program's implementation.  
 
OP 4.04 - Natural Habitats. Actions related to improvements in existing dams and 
irrigation schemes could potentially affect conditions of preservation areas (e.g. the 
reservoir buffer zones). In addition, interventions aimed at the expansion of the 
Monsenhor Expedito Pipeline will take place in the Bonfim/Guaraira Environmental 
Protection Area (EPA). The project will include compensatory measures to support the 
Program in the regulation and effective establishment of the EPA. The EPA is a 
sustainable use conservation unit that ensures the proposed activity.  
 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management, The Bank's OP requirements will be fully complied with in 
the following interventions: (i) dam rehabilitation and conservation - regarding the 
eventual need to control pests in areas with vegetation cover surrounding the reservoirs; 
Page  5
and (ii) recovery and modernization of the irrigation systems at the time of definition of 
the support mechanisms for the development of agricultural activities. Integrated Pest 
Management Plans will be prepared for irrigated areas involved in the project.  
 
OP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement. Although involuntary resettlement of families was 
not identified, a Resettlement Framework has been included as part of the EAR.  The 
framework is the one developed for PROAGUA with the support and approval of the 
Bank, and already endorsed and in use in the State.  It contains guidelines to be observed 
in the remote case that removal of families is needed at a later stage for the undertaking 
of the Program's interventions.  
 
OP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples, no interventions were identified for the 1st year of works 
with existing quilombolas, traditional populations of the State, and no occurrence is 
expected for the 2nd through to the 5th years.  
 
OP 11.03 - Cultural Property. No relevant interventions were identified in the activities 
and works for the first year of the Program. However, the works of the 2nd through the 
5th years will be undertaken in municipalities hosting archeological sites. For this 
purpose, the assessment of these works will be undertaken during the design of the 
projects in compliance with current Brazilian legislation, and will include a consultation 
with the IPHAN - National Institute for the Artistic and Archaeological Heritage. The 
Environmental Manual for Construction includes guidelines to follow should an object of 
cultural heritage be accidentally discovered during project implementation.  
 
OP 4.37 - Safety of Dams. This policy is applicable to Component 3 - Water 
Infrastructure, sub-component 3.1 - Conservation and Rehabilitation Program for the 
State Water Infrastructure. The proposed program aims to rehabilitate 40 strategic dams 
in operation throughout the State. Twenty-two of these are large size dams and eighteen 
are of medium or small size.  
 
Eight dams were selected for the safety assessment, three of which were 15 meters or 
higher - thus considered of large size; and five were considered of medium and small 
sizes and had 15 meters or less - these will undergo project interventions during the first 
year of the Program.  
 
A
panel of experts on dam safety was created for the large size dams. Safety reports 
were assessed and approved by the World Bank on the Rodeador, Passagem das Trairas 
and Itans dams. For the smaller dams, the inspection was undertaken by SERHID experts, 
who used a methodology recommended by the Ministry of Integration (MI) and 
completed the Formal Inspection Sheet for earth dams.  
 
Recommendations from these inspections have been included in project designs.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are no long term impacts besides those already included on the EA.   
Page  6
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternative analyses for the increased water pumping of the Monsenhor Expedito 
Pipeline System are being carried out in order to maximize the project environmental 
gains.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower carried out an EA following the Bank's safeguards policies. The State 
Government contracted a consulting firm for executing these tasks. The State 
Government assumed all the tasks costs.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During the preparation stage of the Project, consultations, contacts and meetings 
("scoping" process) were held with representatives of State government entities and 
NGOs. A final public consultation was held on November 3, 2005. All consultations had 
the appropriate support documentation thus contributing to a significant decision making 
process.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/17/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/17/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/28/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/17/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/03/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/01/2005 
 
Safety of Dams: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/17/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/03/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/01/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  7
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by the regional safeguards 
team?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alvaro J. Soler 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Juan D. Quintero 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Judith M. Lisansky 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:  This is a category B project and the clearance of safeguard issues is issued by the Sector 
Manager. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Abel Mejia 
 
Comments:   
