Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC709 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: March 13, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bulgaria 
Project ID: P083436 
Project Name: Rural Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Rita E. Cestti 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 20, 
2004 
Estimated Board Date: December 21, 2004 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways 
(30%);General water, sanitation and flood 
protection sector (30%);Sub-national 
government administration (15%);Micro- 
and SME finance (15%);Irrigation and 
drainage (10%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure 
(P);Rural non-farm income generation (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 50 
Other financing amounts by source:  
Borrower 
($m) 
25 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN] 
 
The proposed RDP would improve living standards and income of the rural poor in Bulgaria, by  
strengthening central and local governments and their ability to access and absorb SAPARD 
funds (and later EU structural funds) targeting rural infrastructure, including water resource 
management; piloting the development of  private financial intermediation for small farmers and 
rural enterprises, removing a key obstacle to rural growth, while potentially facilitating 
beneficiary access to SAPARD funds. The key performance indicators that would enable 
measurement of the project impact would be:  (i) number of families benefiting from rural 
infrastructure investments; (ii) incremental employment created as a result of sub-project 
investments; (iii) number of rural families with improved living conditions and income; (iv) 
number of poor rural households, small rural SMEs and enterprises accessing SAPARD funds; 
(v) number of municipalities and villages participating in the project; and (vi) increased 
absorption of SAPARD funds. 
 
 
Page  2
 
 
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN] 
 
The Project loan is currently estimated at €50 million, and includes three components: (i) Rural 
Infrastructure Investment; (ii) Institutional Development; and (iii) Project Coordination, 
Supervision, Monitoring and Evaluation.  The proposed RDP will be financed under a Specific 
Investment Loan (SIL) designed to support physical investments in rural infrastructure 
(rehabilitation, upgrading and new infrastructure), capitalize a small rural credit line, and finance 
training and consultant services.  It is proposed that funds to be allocated under the Rural 
Infrastructure Investment Component be pooled with those from the national budget under the 
SAPARD program, while the other components be implemented using World Bank standard 
fiduciary arrangements.  Preparation activities will assess the feasibility of pooling Project funds 
with national resources.  
  
Component A. Rural Infrastructure Investment. 
This Component will be prepared within the 
framework of 2000-06 SAPARD program.  National budget funds allocated for Measure 1.6, 2.3 
and 2.4 will be pooled with the resources provided under the proposed Project.  Adopting a 
SWAP approach for this component will put more reliance on the SAPARD Agency, aiming to 
improve the effectiveness of NARDP, and will improve the fiduciary and safeguards processes in 
the country.  Institutional capacity building at the local level will facilitate absorption of future 
EU structural funds. 
 
Sub-component A.1:  Development of Village and Rural Infrastructure(WB loan:  €35 million).
  
Financial support will be provided for the following types of rural physical infrastructure sub-
projects supported under Measures 2.3 and 2.4: improving or expanding agriculture and 
household waste stocking sites, village water supply network, village street infrastructure, village 
disposal systems, renovation of historical buildings; construction or renovation of multipurpose 
cultural centers; improving existing municipal and agricultural roads; and improving or 
expanding existing drinking water supply infrastructure between municipal settlements.  
Beneficiaries will be rural municipalities from the so called “less-developed rural areas.” The 
boundaries of these area are defined on an annual basis by the Council of Ministers based on 
specific criteria, including unemployment and income levels.  
 
Sub-component A.2: Pilot Irrigation and Drainage Infrastructure (WB loan:  €3 million).
  The 
financial support will be provided for pilot sub-projects to rehabilitate irrigation and/or drainage 
schemes along the line of Measure 1.6 under SAPARD.  Beneficiaries will be Water Users 
Associations (WUAs) willing and committed to assume full responsibility for operation and 
maintenance of transferred rehabilitated infrastructure. 
 
Component B. Institutional Development. 
This component will focus on institutional 
development and will include the following sub-components: 
 
Sub-component B.1: Local Government Capacity Building (IBRD:  €3.5 million).  
This 
component will finance training and/or technical assistance to increase the capacity of rural 
communities in the use of community-based approaches for decision making during the design 
and implementation of rural infrastructure sub-project.  This will involve development of local 
development priorities and investment options, imparting the skills necessary for project 
Page  3
 
 
identification, investment decision making, and contracting/supervision of outside service 
providers, such as construction design firms, and capacity to operate and maintain infrastructure 
services.  Depending on capacity assessments, it may also include capacity-building measures to 
meet financial and environmental safeguards satisfactory to the Bank.  There will be a significant 
emphasis on consultation with citizens and beneficiaries in priority setting and decision making. 
  
Sub-component B.2: Strengthening Rural Financial Institutions (IBRD:  €6 million).  
This will 
involve technical assistance for selected participating financial intermediaries, with a particular 
focus on micro-finance services; and technical assistance to special applicants (e.g. smaller 
poorer farmers who have viable investment ideas; rural entrepreneurs) to help them prepare 
proposals for economically sound projects.  This component will also finance a credit line to 
participating financial institutions for on-lending to medium and small-scale farmers, rural SMEs 
which have difficulties in accessing SAPARD funds.
 
 
Sub-component B.3: Institutional Improvements in Irrigation and Drainage (IBRD:  €1 million)
.  
This sub-component will support the implementation of the strategy of the irrigation and 
drainage sub-sectors and will assist in addressing any legal and/or institutional constraints that 
are holding the accreditation of SAPARD’s measure 1.6.  This component will also support 
institutional reform for sustainability of the sector
.  
Since sustainability does depend on the 
adequate capacity of WUAs, the project will provide support in the form of technical 
assistance/equipment to strengthen technical and financial skills of WUAs for operating and 
maintaining irrigation and drainage facilities. 
 
Component C: Project Coordination, Supervision, Monitoring and Evaluation (IBRD:  
€1.5 million).
  A small Project Unit has been established under the Department of Rural 
Development of the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry to assist in project preparation.  The 
Unit consists of a full-time Project Coordinator, a part-time Financial Specialist and a full-time 
Procurement Specialist, hired as a consultant and paid with a PHRD preparatory grant fund.  The 
core team will work closely together with the relevant MAF staff to build capacity for the 
implementation phase. During implementation, it is proposed that the Department of Rural 
Development function as the Technical Unit responsible for overall Project coordination, with 
the support of the SAPARD agency and its regional branches.  The Project will finance costs of 
coordination, supervision, monitoring and impact evaluation, excluding salaries of MAF staff. 
 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
Physical investments supported under the Project will respect the geographical restrictions under 
the specific SAPARD’s measure. Rural investments under sub-component A.1 will be located on 
the 34 so-called “Less-Developed Rural Areas” of Bulgaria. These areas encompasses 77 
municipalities, about 24% of the national territory and 12% of the national population. Location 
of the irrigation and drainage rehabilitation works will be determined during project proparatio. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
The Bulgaria Safeguard policies legal framework comprises: the Environmental Protection Act 
and Ordinance on obligatory environmental impact assessment; the Nature Protection Act; the 
Page  4
 
 
Water Act; the Protected Areas Act; and the Culture Monuments and Museums Act. During 
Project preparation, a review and assessment of the current country capacity for and application 
of environmental and social safeguards in the context of rural investments eligible for support 
under the project will be carried out. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
The project would finance a range of  rural infrastructure investments, which are 
likely to include: upgrade of water networks, rehabilitation of rural roads; 
renovation and upgrade of buildings; upgrade and expansion of waste sites; 
irrigation and drainage system rehabilitation, etc. 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management
 (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[TBD] 
Involuntary Resettlement
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
Given the likelihood that the project may invest in new infrastructure, which would involve land 
acquisition, the project will require a Policy Framework to be prepared, disclosed in country, and 
in the Infoshop as a separate document and cleared prior to appraisal. 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples
 (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[X] 
Cultural Property
 (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
The project might finance restoration works in cultural or historical monuments and/or 
construction activities in protected cultural sites
. 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[TBD ] 
Projects on International Waterways
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
Potential sub-projects in wastewater treatment plants and irrigation/drainage systems may 
trigger this OP.  The team will seek opinion of LEGEN if there are any requirements for 
notification to the riparian countries.
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [ ] B   [ ] C   [X] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
The environmental assessment category FI is assigned to the project since specific rural 
infrastructure investments will be processed on a rolling basis. The range of eligible investments, 
however, will be established in advance. 
 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
 
 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage 
ISDS would be prepared. 
 
Early September, 2004. 
 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-
stage ISDS 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed.   
 
An environmental section of the operations manual and policy framework will be prepared, 
sent to ECSSD for review, and disclosed in the country (in local language) and at the Bank's 
Infoshop (in English) prior to Appraisal. Since the project is likely to include subprojects in 
environmental category A, ECSSD determined that the project will not be delegated to the 
TTL's sector manager for safeguards clearance at Appraisal and Negotiations
.
 
 
Draft Environmental Management and Social Process Framework:
 August 31, 2004 
Final EMSPF:
 October 30, 2004 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Rita E. Cestti 
03/13/2004 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ronald N. Hoffer 
03/25/2004 
Comments 
Acting Sector Manager: 
Ed Cook 
03/25/2004 
Comments 
 
 
