                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                   CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: 105715


Date ISDS PreparedJUpdated: May 12,2016

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Burkina Faso                             Project ID: P159754
                                                  Additional Project ID (if any):
  Project Name: Burkina Faso access to irrigation for cotton farming
  Task Team Leader: Rajesh Advani, Richard Colback
  Estimated Appraisal Date: 1 0-Oct-20 16         Estimated Board Date: N/A
  Managing Unit: GWA07                            Lending Instrument: Grant from the
                                                  Global Partnership on Output Based Aid, a
                                                  Bank multi-donor trust fund
  Sector: Agricultural extension and research (20%), Irrigation and drainage (80%)
  Theme: Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (5%), Nutrition and food security (10%),
  Climate change (20%), Water resource management (65%)
  IBRD Amount (US$m.):              0.00
  IDA Amount (US$m.):               0.00
  GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
  PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
- Other financing amounts by source:
  Global Partnership on Output Based Aid (US$m.):           4.40
  Borrower (US$m.):                                         0.80
  Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
  Simplified Processing                  Simple [X]                    Repeater [ ]
  Is this a transferred project           Yes [X]                      No []


B. Project Objectives:

The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve access to basic irrigation services for cotton
farmers in Burkina Faso.

C. Project Description:

Description

The project will have two components, the first to support the training of farmers to adopt new technology
and the second to support the acquisition of irrigation equipment. The project will be implemented by
SOFITEX, a government owned parastatal that is the largest cotton buyer and processor in Burkina Faso.

                                                    1
The project will be implemented in regions selected from the company's current area under production
including Houet, Kenedougou, Mouhoun, Kossi, Sourou and Comoe Bougouriba. Other organizations
playing a key role in implementation are Ecobank, which will provide financing for irrigation equipment,
and the national cotton farmers association (UNPC-B), which has extensive experience in delivering
training to farmers.

Component 1 (US$900,000): Output based training for farmers. Under this component, the project will
provide technical capacity strengthening for 5,000 farmers on good agricultural practices for soil and
water, such as mulching or land forming for rainfall harvesting. Such practices are low-cost ways to
manage soil water to increase yields, and allow effective use of the irrigation technologies. The project
will also provide further training to 3,000 farmers who will benefit from irrigation equipment subsidies on
the operations and maintenance of equipment supported by the project. Training materials will be tailored
to the needs of farmers, who are often illiterate.

The delivery mechanism for the training, contracting of trainers and selection of beneficiaries will be
determined during preparation, and is expected to involve SOFITEX, the national cotton farmers
association (UNPC-B), which has extensive experience delivering training to farmers, and other local
actors who can playa long-term role in building farmer capacity for water management. In order to
ensure sustainability, the project will support the training of trainers.

All training will be output-based. A practical certification method will be defined during preparation in
consultation with project stakeholders. The training provider will be reimbursed for training costs after
independent verification by the independent verification agent (IVA) that training was carried out in
accordance with the rules of the project.

Component 2 (US$3,100,000) OBA subsidies to support acquisition of irrigation technology by cotton
farmers in the SOFITEX supply chain. Under this component, the project will support 2,500 farmers and
24 communities to acquire irrigation technology for supplementary irrigation. These farmers are expected
to be drawn from the set of 5,000 farmers trained under Component 1. The irrigation is not meant to
replace rain fed cotton farming but to help farmers supply water to the cotton crop during critical dry
periods when there is a high risk of crop failure, which will help build resilience to climate change
impacts. Technologies to be supported are likely to include:

a) Improved local wells, to enhance availability of water from subsurface sources. Typical wells have a
limited diameter and recharge capacity; lining and enlarging the wells will significantly improve
performance (200-300% increased flow rates, estimated cost $ 250 - $ 400 per well)

b) Motorized pumps to increase access to water. The need to manually access and carry water is a major
constraint to the adoption of supplementary irrigation. The introduction of locally available and
maintained diesel and gasoline pumps (capital cost $430 per ha plus $31 annual O&M) will create greater
access to irrigation water at an affordable cost. Solar powered pumps will also be assessed as a way to
introduce high-capitallow-O&M options (Capital cost $ 16,000/ 12 ha, or $660 per half-hectare plot).

c) Community-based solar irrigation systems. The system will allow a group of farmers within a
cooperative to share larger capital costs and output. Solar power reduces reliance on fossil fuels and has
the advantage of eliminating most of the O&M costs that have historically created problems for the long-
term sustainability of community-based irrigation systems.

d) Improved water distribution and storage via piping and water storage structures, to improve efficient
utilization of water. This leverages the costly infrastructure already promoted and supplied by government


                                                        2
and donors, and will allow for organized and coordinated access to water where such structures exist
(costs tbc on-site).

Component 3 (US$400,000) Partial Risk Fund to support access to loan finance. The project is proposing
a partial risk fund to be accessed by the lender in the event that farmers default on their loan repayment
obligations to Ecobank. This would encourage the lender to make loans in what is clearly a high-risk
operating environment. Key risks include: fragile state with limited legal options to settle disputes;
absence of liquid collateral that can be provided by borrowers; and, pilot investment in irrigation
technology for low-income farmers not familiar with the concept. The partial risk sharing structure,
including limits of coverage and cover for principal payments or interest and principal will be negotiated
during preparation. The initial estimate has been set at approximately 50% of the farmer contributions for
equipment purchases under the project. Any funds not called on from the partial risk fund shall be
reallocated to Component 2.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the analysis of
environmental and social risks and impacts (if known):

The project involves land and water management and installation of small water storage basins.
These will be the primary sources of water for the project, which will be utilized for supplementary
irrigation.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Effective SEMS:

The borrower has a loan from the IFC, and has met the requirements of the IFC's Performance Standards.
A further assessment of mitigation measures to be taken and the Borrower's institutional capacity to
comply with the Performance Standards will be conducted during project preparation.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Environment: Leandre Yameogo (GEN07); Olufunke Asaolu (CRK14)
Social: Abdoul Wahabi Seini (GSUOl)

II. PERFORMANCE STANDARDSTHAT MIGHT APPLY

Performance Standards (please explain why)                              Yes           No          TBD
PS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental                         X
and Social Risks and Impacts

PS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                       X

PS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention                       X

PS 4: Community Health, Safety, and Security                             X

PS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement                                   X




                                                    3
Performance Standards (please explain why)                         Yes       No          TBD
PS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable                     X
Management of Living Natural Resources

PS 7: Indigenous Peoples                                                      X

PS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                       X



III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Any required documentation with respect to ensuring compliance with the Performance
   Standards will be cleared by the World Bank Group and disclosed prior to project appraisal,
   currently planned for October 2016.

IV. APPROVALS

 Si ned and submitted b :
 Task Team Leaders:                 Name: Rajesh Advani, Richard Colback             Date
                                                                                  May 10,2016
                                    Name: Hanneke Van T"                             Date a;/.   ;6.
   Comments:
 Sector Mana er:
   Comments:




                                               4
