                                                                               98221

                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

 I. Basic Information
 Date prepared/updated: 07/15/2015
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country: Burkina Faso                    Project ID: P149434
 Project Name: Local Forest Communities Support Project
 Task Team Leader: Lucienne Mbaipor
 Estimated Appraisal Date: April 16, 2015 Estimated Board Date: September 16 ,2015
 Managing Unit: GENDR AFR1                Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
 Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (80%);Public administration-
 Agriculture, fishing and forestry (20)
 Theme: Decentralization (P);Participation and civic engagement (P);Other rural
 development (S)
 IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
 IDA Amount (US$m.):              4.5
 GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
 PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
 Other financing amounts by source:
          BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              0.00
                                                                          0.00
 Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment and transferred
 Simplified Processing                          Simple [x]         Repeater []
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                     Yes [ ]      No [X]
 or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

 2. Project Objectives

 The proposed Project Development Objective is: to strengthen the capacity of targeted
 Local Communities (LCs) in five regions of Burkina Faso to participate in the REDD+
 programs at local, national and global levels.

I.   PROJECT DESCRIPTION

     A. Project Components

 1.     The Dedicated Grant Mechanism (DGM) project for Burkina Faso is being
 developed in line with the overall DGM process globally. Community representatives
 will participate in cross-regional learning events and global forums, then share the
 knowledge received with their constituents.

 2.      Component 1: Development of managerial, technical capacities and skills of
 local communities (US$1.0 million). This component will support training in leadership
 development, conflict resolution and negotiation skills to ensure active participation in
initiatives related to natural resource-based mitigation and adaptation to climate change,
training and capacity development for securing and strengthening customary land tenure
and resource rights and traditional forest management systems of local communities, and
for reducing cultural, social, economic and policy barriers to such rights and to the
continuance and enhancement of traditional forest management systems.

3.      Component 2: Support the development of economic and sustainable natural
resource management activities (US$2.7 million). This component will (i) support the
implementation of activities that contribute to improving the income of targeted local
communities, and (ii) promote the implementation of measures likely to ensure
sustainable management of natural resources and living conditions in the target villages.
The component will be divided into two sub-components:

4.       Component 3: Coordination, management, monitoring and evaluation
(US$0.8 million). This component will ensure effective operational planning, monitoring
and implementation of the Grant. It will finance the cost of the NEA. The NEA will be
the secretariat for the NSC and will develop country-specific review and risk assessment
criteria, and provide operational and financial reporting to the World Bank and NSC.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis

The project will have interventions at the national as well as sub-national levels. National
level interventions will occur predominantly in Ouagadougou while investments at the
local level will occur in 5 Regions and 32 communes (26 rural and 6 urban) that border
classified forest and woodland areas (East, le Nazinon, le Chapelet du Mouhoun, Far-
South and Bontioli). The exact locations for specific investments are not yet known.


5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   M. Joseph Ellong                  (GSURR)
   Mr. Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (GENDR AFR1)

  6. Safeguard Policies                       Triggered?           Explanation (Optional)
  Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01             Yes       The project activity under sub
                                                            component 2 will support sustainable
                                                            management and development of natural
                                                            forests as well as restoration and natural
                                                            regeneration of previously degraded or
                                                            converted forests, economic activities
                                                            and rural livelihoods practices such as
                                                            putting in place infrastructures and
                                                            equipments for production,
                                                            transformation and conservation of
                                    product. These activities may have
                                    environmental impacts even at very
                                    small and limited scale. A programmatic
                                    Environmental and Social Management
                                    Framework (ESMF) has been prepared
                                    at the global level for the DGM as a
                                    whole and has been shared and reviewed
                                    by IPLC leaders during the first NSC
                                    session (Oct. 31 – Nov. 3, 2014). An
                                    ESMF for the FIP project has been
                                    prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed
                                    in the country and at the InfoShop. The
                                    DGM project updated the ESMF
                                    prepared under FIP Project as the two
                                    projects have the same sites, consulted
                                    upon and disclosed in the country and at
                                    the InfoShop.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No    Project activities will not be undertaken
                                    near or inside critical ecosystems. As
                                    the project will enhance the quality of
                                    the management of forest and
                                    woodlands, particular attention will be
                                    paid to these ecosystems. The conception
                                    of the subprojects will avoid any threat
                                    to critical ecosystem. The ESMF
                                    elaborated in accordance with OP4.01
                                    for the FIP project is updated for the
                                    DGM project and provided guidance on
                                    avoiding or mitigating impacts on
                                    natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   No activity of the project is expected to
                                    promote timber exploitation or to finance
                                    activities which will contribute to
                                    destroy the forest. OP4.36 is triggered to
                                    underscore the attention that must be
                                    paid to aspects related to the protection
                                    of the forest resources during project
                                    preparation and implementation.
                                    Improving Forestry management policies
                                    is a primary focus of this project. While
                                    the project will explore integrated forest
                                    management as part of a strategy of
                                    increasing carbon sequestration potential
                                    the main expected result is improved
                                    forest management. The ESMF of the
                                    FIP project is updated by the DGM
                                                           project includes guidance on managing
                                                           forestry issues.
  Pest Management OP 4.09                        No        N/A
  Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11         Yes       This policy is triggered because the
                                                           project will support under Component 2,
                                                           construction of infrastructures and
                                                           forages that may need earth excavations.
                                                           In addition, Burkina Faso has a rich
                                                           cultural heritage that needs to be
                                                           preserved. The ESMF of the FIP project
                                                           is updated to cover this aspect. Chance
                                                           find procedures will be incorporated into
                                                           civil works contracts and buffer zones
                                                           will be created to avoid any damage to
                                                           cultural resources such as sacred forests
                                                           and graveyards. The project
                                                           implementation team will be extra
                                                           vigilant to ensure that project activities
                                                           do not affect such sites.
  Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                  No        There are no indigenous people in the
                                                           project area.
  Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12            Yes       No involuntary resettlement is
                                                           anticipated; however, because of the
                                                           possibility of limitation of access
                                                           (essentially related to the possible impact
                                                           on traditional transhumance corridors
                                                           and grazing lands) a process framework
                                                           for the FIP project has also been updated
                                                           according to the DGM context, approved
                                                           and disclosed in the targeted areas and at
                                                           the InfoShop.
  Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      No        The project will not finance dam or dam-
                                                           related investments.
  Projects on International Waterways OP/BP      No        The project will not depend on
  7.50                                                     international waterways and will not
                                                           finance water resources use activities.
  Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No        This project is not being implemented in
                                                           any disputed areas.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

No significant environmental impacts are expected from this project as its objective is to
promote sound natural resources management and improve animal and vegetal
biodiversity. However, it is necessary for the sake of the environmental integrity of the
project to follow a structured assessment process to ensure that no activities will have
unintended consequences on the environment. The ESMF had identified the following
risks or impacts that will need special attention even if they are very limited and in small
scale: vegetation destruction, deforestation, poaching and illegal logging increase;
increased demand of fuel wood and construction wood in rural areas; wildlife habitat
destruction; loss of biodiversity; soil erosion; pasture encroachment on crop fields;
decrease of groundwater level; soil and groundwater pollution if pesticides, herbicides,
and fertilizers are misused; reduction of households means of subsistence due to
conservation efforts; productivity decrease for mono specific planting which can be more
vulnerable to diseases, insects, fire, etc.; overexploitation of forest products NTFPs.

 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Land issues are very sensitive in the current context of Burkina Faso and the Bank has
reviewed extensively the implication of land-based intervention in the context of the FIP
and the DGM activities. In some instances, in Component 2, funding modern livestock
(breeding) or forage crop could raise tensions between farmers and herders over access of
cattle to water holes or grazing fields. The project will use the existing process (charte
foncière) in order to reach a consensus. In case of irreconcilable disagreement, the project
will not finance the corresponding activity.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
1) The project opted not to develop activities with negative impacts. For that purpose, an
ineligible activities list for DGM funding is included in the PAD and will be reflected in
the project implementation manual.

2) The project positively excluded sensible areas.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

A programmatic Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been
prepared at the global level for the DGM as a whole and has been shared and reviewed by
IPLC leaders during the first NSC session (Oct. 31 – Nov. 3, 2014). In addition,
considering the similarity of objectives and implementation arrangements, the safeguards
instruments to be used are based to a great extent on those of the FIP project that was
approved in October 2013. Accordingly, an Environmental and Social Management
Framework has been prepared; On the social side, because of potential limitation to
accessing some lands particularly used traditionally as cattle trails or grazing fields, a
Process Framework has also been prepared that describes the principles and procedures to
follow in such instances.

Based on Burkina Faso's past experiences with World Bank projects and safeguard
measures including on decentralization, the capacity of the borrower, while limited, is
adequate to carry out the proposed safeguard policy measures.
Since the exact nature and location of the activities cannot be identified prior to appraisal,
the project will update the ESMF and the Process Framework prepared for the FIP project
in Burkina to ensure that potential negative environmental and social impacts of future
sub-projects are identified and appropriately mitigated. The two documents were
approved and disclosed in Burkina and at the Bank’s InfoShop.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

The ESMF and the Process Framework of the FIP project mentioned above have been
consulted upon and disclosed on October 28, 2013. They were updated consulted and
disclosed in the Country and in InfoShop.

While the project will feed into a national climate change and REDD+ strategy, the key
stakeholders will be community members, local and international NGOs in the project
site at the national level. Consultation was done with the Communities in the project’s
sites to share the documents recommendations. The environmental and social documents
for the project will be available in the regional project offices and at the national level.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                        No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                       03/30/2015
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                   06/02/2015
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                    05/31/2015
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                       N.A.
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                       No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05/31/2015
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  06/02/2015
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07/14/2015
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                       N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A/
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          N/A
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          N/A
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                     Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                    No
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or   No
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  No
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        No
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   No
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         No
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           No
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        N/A
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
InfoShop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project includes the          Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name                       Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms. Mbaipor Lucienne
Environmental Specialist:           Mr. Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna
Social Development Specialist       Mr. Joseph Ellong
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Johanna Van Tilburg
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Benoit Bosquet
  Comments:
