                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                 APPRAISAL STAGE


Date prepared/updated: July 29, 2015

I. Basic Information

1. Basic Project Data                                                         Report No: 89172
Country: Kingdome of Cambodia                 Project ID: P146085
                                              Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Early Childhood Care and Development for Floating Villages Project
Task Team Leader: Tsuyoshi Fukao
Appraisal Date: June 30, 2014                 Estimated Board Date: N/A
Managing Unit: GEDDR                          Lending Instrument: Investment Project Financing
Sector: Pre-primary (100%)
Theme: Education for All (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source: US$3.14 M
        Japan Social Development Fund                                      US$3.14 M


Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Is this a transferred project                    Yes [x ]               No []
Simplified Processing                            Simple [x]             Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises       Yes [ ]     No [x]
and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives:

The Project Development Objective is to improve access to quality Early Childhood Care and
Development (ECCD) services through community and home-based programs for 0 to 5-year-
olds, particularly for those from disadvantaged backgrounds, in the targeted areas. The higher
level objectives of the Project are inclusive growth and the reduction of inequality. This will
contribute to the Government’s efforts to achieve the MDGs for basic education, health, and
poverty reduction goals by making ECCD services available to the disadvantaged.

3. Project Description:

This project aims to complement activities related to the implementation of the ECCD program
in particularly challenging social and geographical conditions. It also aims at extending it to
provinces not covered by Second Education Sector Support Project (SESSP) (which will contain
substantial provisions to support ECCD), or programs funded by other development partners.

                                               1
The floating ECCD model utilizes innovative strategies, is the first of its kind and will be
implemented by the international NGO Save the Children International (SC). SC will be the
grant recipient, and implement the project in close collaboration with the relevant local and
national stakeholders.

The target groups are living in 137 villages along the Tonle Sap River and Tonle Sap Lake in
Kampong Chhnang and Pursat provinces, where there are high incidences of poor quality of
education services, high malnutrition rates, low access to and poor quality of health services,
water and sanitation. Furthermore, the target areas in these two provinces are among those with
the lowest net enrolment rates, and the highest drop-out and repetition rates in the first year of
primary school. Parents’ literacy levels as well as nutrition knowledge levels are very low.
Prevalence of stunted and wasted children under six years of age is high and only limited
interventions exist for these children, which are the most vulnerable age groups.

The project consists of the following components: (i) Component 1 “Promoting access to ECCD
services” focuses on providing low-cost community and home-based (HB) ECCD programs for
children and parents living in the target villages, including construction of 20 ECCD centers
equipped with low cost environmental friendly sanitation technology, establishment of HB
ECCD programs and creation of a network for village ECCD facilitators and core mothers; (ii)
Component 2 “Providing quality child-friendly ECCD programs” focuses on creating an
enabling, child friendly environment ECCD services, including introducing a quality CB ECCD
program, initiating an inclusive HB ECCD program, and improving maternal literacy to ensure
quality CB/HB ECCD related activities; (iii) Component 3 “Strengthening capacity of
government and community structures” contributes to effective implementation of ECCD
policies by means of strengthening local structures and capacity of government, communities
and NGOs to support ECCD program implementation, and strengthening ECCD networking and
coordination among all stakeholders; and (iv) Component 4 “Project management and M&E”
facilitates project management including advocacy-related activities and undertakes results-based
monitoring and evaluation of the programs.

The results indicators will include both service delivery and outcome indicators and are being
proposed to be in line with the revision to the Education Sector Plan that is currently being
finalized. The proposed PDO-level indicators are:

          Number of children enrolled in Community-based ECCD program financed by the
           project; and

          Number of children enrolled in Home-based ECCD program financed by the project.

The proposed project is rated as category B mainly because it finances construction of twenty
(20) floating community ECCD centers. The project will carry out community-based activities
conducted in a participatory and sensitive manner. The project will closely work with local
institutes including Provincial and District Offices for Education (POE, DOE), Provincial Health
Department (PHD), Commune Council for Women and Children (CCWC) and NGOs that are
familiar with local people in implementing its activities.



                                                2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

Project locations include floating villages on the Tonle Sap Lake in Kampong Chhnang Province
(81 villages targeted) and Pursat province (56 villages targeted). Tonle Sap Lake lies in the
central floodplain of Cambodia territory, surrounded by six provinces. The water regime is
characterized by high water fluctuation between dry and wet season, which varies from 1 to 9
meters. Similarly, the lake surface also changes from 2,500 km2 to about 13,000 km2.

The lake is the main source of water for households, who boil and filter water for drinking. Some
schools and households collect rain water during the rainy season. Some communities make a
point of going far away from their villages into the lake to collect water where it is cleaner. All
community members defecate, urinate, and dispose of waste directly into the lake, either from
inside a private latrine cubicle with two simple horizontal planks existent in a few of the
households and most schools, or by going directly into the bush. Toilets with just two floor
boards to balance over are very dangerous for small children who can fall through. Some also
had a hole in the floor or went from the edge of the house boat. Waste water treatment systems
are practically non-existent in the floating community. The project will promote simple cost-
effective wastewater treatment system for floating communities using the microbial activity on
aquatic plant roots within floating “Pods” (patented by Wetland Works!, Ltd in Cambodia)
installed under the toilet of the future ECCD; consequently, the project will seek to improve
ambient water quality (in terms of reducing microorganisms of fecal origin) and demonstrate
improved gastro-intestinal health among the child population of the targeted villages.

Recognizing the ecological, economical, and socio-cultural value of the Lake, the Government of
Cambodia decided to designate the whole Tonle Sap Lake as Biosphere Reserve under Biosphere
Program of UNESCO in 1997. The Lake is divided into three zones, namely three core areas, a
buffer zone, and a transition zone. The proposed ECCD centers in this project are located in
communities that have been established many decades ago especially in the existing primary
school compounds within transition and buffer zones. The core areas that are demarcated for
long term protection are located very far from the project sites. Hence, these proposed sites will
pose insignificant impacts to this unique ecosystem conservation.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
    Mr. Satoshi Ishihara (Sr. Social Safeguards Specialist)
    Mr. Makathy Tep (Environmental Specialist, Consultant)




                                                3
6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
 Safeguard Policies            Triggered   Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/BP Yes        The project will finance civil works,
 4.01                                      specifically the construction of twenty
                                           ECCD centers, ten of which will be on the
                                           lake (in the buffer zone) and the remaining
                                           on the shore, within existing community
                                           areas. Each center will be newly
                                           constructed and equipped with two
                                           classrooms and a specifically designed
                                           wastewater treatment based on low cost
                                           environmental friendly technology using
                                           microbial activity and plants to reduce
                                           pollution from toilet use. There are
                                           envisaged temporary typical minor
                                           environmental impacts relevant to small
                                           scale      construction     (e.g.,   noise,
                                           construction waste, water pollution, etc.)
                                           that might occur. However, these potential
                                           impacts are deemed to be minor, site-
                                           specific, and reversible in nature, and for
                                           which mitigation measures can be readily
                                           designed and implemented.

                                           Given the nature of the proposed civil
                                           works under the project, the project’s
                                           environmental category is “B”. In line
                                           with the applicable national laws and
                                           given the small scale of constructions, a
                                           full environmental assessment report is
                                           not required. The Environmental and
                                           Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                                           and Environmental Codes of Practice
                                           (ECoP) that were developed and applied
                                           for the Second Education Sector Support
                                           Program (SESSP) remain valid for this
                                           project; hence, these documents have been
                                           updated and their revised content included
                                           in the EMP separately prepared for this
                                           project. During operation of facilities,
                                           possible impacts could result from the use
                                           of flushing toilets in the ECCD centers.
                                           To mitigate the potential negative effects
                                           from waste water from flushing toilets, an
                                           innovative portable technology that treat

                                      4
                                       human waste by using aquatic plants will
                                       be integrated in project design. The
                                       updated safeguards tools (EMP developed
                                       based on SESSP’s ESMF and ECoP) will
                                       be included in the requisite bidding
                                       documents. The EMP will be revised
                                       further with site specific elements once
                                       the ECCD design is available.

                                       SESSP has been effective since May
                                       2014. The Technical Advisor (TA) for
                                       safeguard related issues will be recruited
                                       to provide technical supports on
                                       implementation of the safeguard tools.
                                       The TA will also support the further
                                       revision of this project’s EMP.

                                       Many of the project beneficiaries are
                                       vulnerable social groups who may feel
                                       reluctant to or discriminated against
                                       participating in the project. Beneficiary
                                       assessment was conducted to identify
                                       vulnerable groups and develop measures
                                       in a participatory manner to facilitate their
                                       participation in and benefiting from the
                                       project. The result of the beneficiary
                                       assessment is disclosed as part of the
                                       Safeguard Assessment Report and the
                                       measures developed to facilitate their
                                       project participation will be implemented
                                       under the project.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No       After surveying the proposed construction
                                       sites, the task team has confirmed that
                                       there will be no impact on natural habitats
                                       as a result of project activities. All
                                       construction sites are located outside core
                                       zones, but within transition and buffer
                                       zones.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No       The project will not degrade critical forest
                                       areas as defined under the safeguard
                                       policy.
Pest Management OP 4.09       No       The project will not involve any
                                       procurement of pesticides nor cause any
                                       increased use of pesticides.


                                   5
 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP No                 The project will not adversely affect sites
 4.11                                                 with archeological, paleontological,
                                                      historical, religious, or unique natural
                                                      values.
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         No             Ethnic screening conducted in the project
                                                      area did not identify Indigenous Peoples
                                                      who meet the eligibility criteria under OP
                                                      4.10.
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP        No             The project will finance the new
 4.12                                                 construction for twenty ECCD centers.
                                                      Ten centers will be constructed on the
                                                      lake, and another ten centers will be
                                                      constructed on the shore (during rainy
                                                      season, these “on-shore centers” become
                                                      floating centers). For all proposed
                                                      construction, there will be no land
                                                      acquisition, as all construction will take
                                                      place on state-owned land or lakes, and
                                                      there are no legacy issues. After surveying
                                                      the sample of sites, the task team has
                                                      confirmed that no physical relocation will
                                                      be necessary for this project.
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37             No             The project does not involve any dams.
 Projects on International             No             The project does not involve international
 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 waterways.
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP      No             The project will not be located in any
 7.60                                                 known disputed areas as defined in the
                                                      policy.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

   A. Summary of Key Safeguards Issues

  1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the project. Identify and
  describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
  The proposed project is rated as category B because it includes construction of twenty
  floating community ECCD centers. Temporary small-scale impacts are expected during
  construction of the centers and relevant sanitation system such as dust, noise, water pollution
  and construction waste.
  2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
  activities in the project area:
  There are few potential small-scale long-term adverse impacts triggered by this project, such
  as possible malfunction of the Pod due to natural disaster or over-use. In such cases, the
  Pod’s plants can be replaced by locally available plants. NGO tests that the water quality

                                               6
within the aerobic Pod is already at a high level of secondary treatment.
Mitigation against any negative impacts that might occur in the project can be managed at
the implementation stage.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.

Three options have been identified for the treatment of the wastewater for the centers: (i)
Pod treatment system; (ii) Live and Learn’s floating EcoSan toilet system; and (iii) a
floating bio-digester design system. This project would utilize the first (Pod treatment)
option as it has the following comparative advantages: (i) simpler fabrication; (ii) easier
installation; (iii) less operational maintenance; (iv) better for environment (no chemicals
required); and (v) the least associated costs beyond locally available materials. In addition,
SC implements the system for existing floating primary schools. The latter two options have
been identified as alternatives.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues.
Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures
described.
Environment:
In line with the national law and given the small scale of constructions, a full environmental
assessment report was not required. The Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) and Environmental Codes of Practice (ECoP) that were developed and applied for
the Second Education Sector Support Program (SESSP) remain valid for this project; hence,
these documents have been updated and their revised content included in the EMP
separately prepared for this project. During operation of facilities, possible impacts could
result from the use of flushing toilets in the ECCD centers. To mitigate the potential
negative effects from waste water from flushing toilets, an innovative portable technology
that treat human waste by using aquatic plants will be integrated into the project design. The
updated safeguards tool will be included in the requisite bidding documents. The EMP have
been publicly disclosed on the in Khmer language on MoEYS public board in Phnom Penh,
Kampong Chhnang and Pursat on June 9, 2014, as well as in the InfoShop in Washington,
D.C on June 16, 2014.

Social:
A Beneficiary Assessment (BA) screened the ethnic groups in the potential project sites and
to evaluate the project’s positive and adverse effects on potential subproject sites. The
assessment was conducted with multiple methods including: (i) desk review of statistical
data; (ii) key informant interviews with various stakeholders; (iii) focus group discussions;
and (iv) informal conversations with community members. The assessment identified
vulnerable groups and developed measures in a participatory manner to facilitate their
participation in and benefiting from the project. The measures developed to facilitate their
project participation will be implemented under the project.

Institutional Capacity:
To date, SC has implemented two JSDF-funded projects in the field of education in rural
areas in Cambodia and both project’s were rated “highly satisfactory” in terms of

                                             7
achievement of main objectives. The first project was conducted over 24 months in Siem
Reap, supporting Basic Education in reconciliation areas (Cambodia Basic Education,
TF26779-KH, US$1.58 million), while the second project was implemented over a 27-
month period in Preah Vihear province, supporting public education for disadvantaged
children (Cambodia Public Education, TF052059-KH, US$1.83 million). The latter project
was cited as “best practice” in the 10-year JSDF retrospective. Save the Chidlren has good
team of Environment and Social safeguards specialists to support their program
implementation. Many of team members are familiar with bank policies and requirements
through projects’ implementation including safeguards.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The principal stakeholders are the government, civil society organizations, parents, and
teachers. Government ownership and commitment for the ECCD activities under the
Education Sector Support Scale Up Actin Program (ESSSUAP) were strong, and the ECCD
expansion is high priority for MoEYS. Stakeholder consultations on project scope and
design have been held regularly with targeted communities by the recipient since 2011.
Number of suggestions such as strong request of both CB and HB ECCD programs, and
high demands of parenting education including literacy program and health activities, are
incorporated into the current project design.


 B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
Was the document disclosed prior to                 Yes
appraisal?
Date of receipt by the Bank                         May 30, 2014
Date of “in-country” disclosure                     June 9, 2014
Date of submission to Info Shop                     June 16, 2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the
Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors
Resettlement Action Plan /Framework/Policy Process:
Was the document disclosed prior to                 N/A
appraisal?
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of “in-country” disclosure

Date of submission to Info Shop
*If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources
policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the

                                             8
  Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
  If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain
  why:




  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
  ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

   OP/BP/GP 4.01 – Environment Assessment
   Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                    Yes
   If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) review
   and approve the EA report?                                                           Yes
   Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the
   credit/loan? Yes.                                                                    Yes
   OP/BP 4.10 – Indigenous Peoples
   Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)           No
   been prepared in consultation with affected ethnic minority people?
   If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager      n/a
   review the plan?
   If the whole project is designed to benefit ethnic minority people, has the design   n/a
   been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or
   Sector Manager?


III. APPROVALS
 Task Team Leader:            Name: Tsuyoshi Fukao
 Approved By:
 Practice Manager:            Name: Harry Anthony Patrinos               Date: July 30, 2015




                                               9
