                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                INITIATION/CONCEPT STAGE
.
                                                                Report No.: 101108
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: April 20, 2015


I. BASIC INFORMATION
    A. Basic Project Data
    Country:                    Cambodia          Project ID:                 P151424
    Project Name:               CAMBODIA ENHANCEMENT OF POVERTY ANALYSIS
                                CAPACITY
    Task Team Leader:           Carolina Mejia-Mantilla
    Estimated Date of           April 30, 2015
    Approval:
    Managing Unit:              GPVDR (09078) Lending Instrument:             IPF
    Sector(s):                  General public administration sectors (50%)
                                Other social services (50%)
    Theme(s):                   Poverty strategy, analysis and monitoring (60%)
                                Social Protection and Labor Policy & Systems (40%)
    Fragile and/or Capacity Constraints [   ]
    Financing (in USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:     349,300.00             Total Bank Financing:
    Total Co-financing:     0                      Financing Gap:
        Financing Source                                                                  Amount
        Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building                                    349,300.00
       BORROWER/RECIPIENT: Royal Government of Cambodia
    (MoP/NIS)
        Total                                                                           349,300.00
    Environmental               C
    Category
    Is this a Repeater          No
    project?
    Is this a Transferred       No
    project?
.
B. Project Objectives
The development objective of this grant is to help strengthen Cambodia’s statistical system and
to help improve the government’s capacity to monitor the welfare of its population through
poverty and inequality indicators.

More specifically, three key results are expected from the project:
1. Enable the National Institute of Statistics (NIS) to revise the Cambodian Statistical Master
Plan (SMP) of 2007.
2. Enhance the analytical capacity of the National Working Group on Poverty Measurement to
undertake independent poverty measurement and analysis in Cambodia.
3. Enhance the NIS’s knowledge of appropriate methodologies to estimate the spatial price
index at the provincial level, used to account for price differences across Cambodia.


C. Project Description
The grant financed project will have three main activities (plus an implementation support
component) over a period of two years.

The different components are the following:

1. Statistical Management and Coordination: the objective of this component is the revision of
the Cambodian Statistical Master Plan (SMP) of 2007. This entails a thorough revision of the
weaknesses and strengths of the statistical system (what information is needed, what are the
current instruments/sources to obtain it, and who is the responsible institution), as well as an
action plan for the next five years. The component also includes a revision of the amended
Statistics Law to determine its effect on the statistical system, as well as an active advocate for
the full integration of statistical activities within the national agenda (and the national budget)
and for the importance of the statistical system for public policy making.

The outputs of this component will be:
   - A revised Cambodian Statistical Master Plan, including a brief assessment of the
       amended Statistics Law.
   - Workshop for the dissemination of the SMP.
   - Workshop on the importance of good quality statistics for policy making.
   - Organization of high level meetings with other institutions/government staff, to better
       incorporate statistics in the public agenda.

2. Building the government’s capacity to produce, analyze and use poverty numbers: The
objective of this component is to enhance the capacity of the Cambodian government to
independently produce, analyze and interpret poverty statistics. The component will provide
training on poverty measurement and analysis methods to the core members (10) of the
Working Group for Poverty Measurement in Cambodia, around the preparation of the mid-term
review of the NSDP from a poverty reduction perspective. The idea is to have a long-term, side
by side, modular training on poverty estimation and poverty analysis, which includes a
combination of theory and practice, and proposes specific deliverables (in the forms of short
notes) from the participants at the end of each module. All the required software and hardware
    will be provided to the core members of the group.

    3. Strengthening the spatial price index indicator: The objective of this third component is to
    improve the current spatial price index at the provincial level, which is being estimated by the
    National Institute of Statistics but it is not publicly available. This encompasses the following
    activities: identify the drawbacks of the methodology currently being used to estimate the
    spatial price index (provincial level), recognize the appropriate solutions, and train the relevant
    staff on how to implement them. Particular attention will be devoted to the collection and
    processing protocols being used in the provincial statistical offices (outside Phnom Penh). It
    must be mentioned that the spatial price index provides allows to compare monetary welfare
    estimates across provinces (as required in the poverty estimation numbers).

    The outputs of this component are:
       - The production of a revised spatial index and a short document explaining the
           methodological adjustments introduced.
       - Workshop to disseminate the spatial index to the general public and promote its use
           among academics and researchers.


    D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
    (if known)

    The project location is Phnom Penh, Cambodia. Since the project is designed to mainly provide
    technical assistance for the Ministry of Planning (MoP) of the Royal Government of Cambodia
    through the National Institute of Statistics located in Phnom Penh, there are no salient physical
    characteristics relevant to the safeguards analysis. The project will not finance any type of civil
    work, which could result in potential environmental and social impacts or development of any
    law and regulations that may require broader community engagement and consultation with
    wider groups of citizen including indigenous people. The project will enable NIS to revise and
    implement the Cambodian Statistical Master Plan (SMP) of 2007 and enhance the analytical
    capacity of the National Working Group on Poverty Measurement to undertake independent
    poverty measurement and analysis in Cambodia.
.
    E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Management
    Not required.
.
    F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
    – Satoshi Ishihara (sishihara@worldbank.org)
    – Helene Carlsson Rex (hcarlsson@worldbank.org)
    – Sybounheung Phandanouvong (sphandanouvong@worldbank.org)

.
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
    Safeguard Policies                 Triggered ? Explanation (Optional)
    Environmental Assessment OP/BP No                 The Environmental Assessment OP/BP
    4.01                                              4.01 would not be triggered because no
                                                      civil work is planned for the project that
                                                      could bring about environmental and social
                                                      impacts. The project would mainly provide
                                                      technical assistance for the client.
    Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No             Same as above.
    Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No             Same as above.
    Pest Management OP 4.09            No             Same as above.
    Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP No              Same as above.
    4.11
    Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No             Same as above. Furthermore, adverse
                                                      impact on IP is not anticipated from the
                                                      project and it will not support development
                                                      of any law and regulations that may require
                                                      broader community engagement and
                                                      consultation with wider groups of citizen
                                                      including IP.
    Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No             Same as above.
    4.12
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No             Same as above.
    Projects on International          No             Same as above.
    Waterways OP/BP 7.50
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP   No             Same as above.
    7.60
.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

      A. Will an Appraisal stage ISDS be required? [No]
        i.   Explanation: Given that none of the safeguard policies is triggered under the
             proposed project is classified Category C, an Appraisal Stage ISDS is not required.
       ii.   If Yes, tentative target for preparing the appraisal stage ISDS




       B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
       needed. N/A
        C. The specific studies, their timing and disclosure should be documented in the
        appraisal-stage ISDS. N/A


.
IV. APPROVALS
    Task Team Leader:             Name: Carolina Mejia-Mantilla
    Approved By:
    Regional Safeguards           Name: OPSOR ESSAT                             Date: May 7, 2015
    Advisor:                      (imarina@worldbank.org)
    Practice Manager:             Name: Salman Zaidi                            Date: May 7, 2015
                                  (szaidi5@worldbank.org)
.
    1
      Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be
    disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations
    and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
