Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/25/2005 
Report No.:  32208
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Cambodia 
Project ID:  P070668 
Project Name:  KH-Cambodia Education Sector Support 
Task Team Leader:  Luis Benveniste 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 29, 
2004 
Estimated Board Date: May 12, 2005 
Managing Unit:  EASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Secondary education (70%);Primary education (30%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
28.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.50
2.50 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the project is to assist the Borrower to implement the ESSP 
goals to expand access to educational services by addressing supply, demand, quality and 
efficiency constraints, with special focus on the poor and underserved communes.   
 
The two main project indicators are:  
 
.
Improved access to education for poor and disadvantaged children as measured by an 
increase in net primary and lower secondary enrollment rates.  
 
.
Enhanced education quality service delivery as indicated by overall improvements in 
student achievement scores in mathematics and Khmer for students in grades 3, 6 and 9.   
 
3. Project Description 
CESSP will strive to reach the proposed development objectives through a two-pronged 
strategy.  First, the project will seek to enable equitable access to education through both 
supply- and demand-side interventions.  Second, it will promote decentralized 
mechanisms to nurture educational quality enhancements.  The former strategy will 
involve: (a) school construction in areas with incomplete primary or no lower secondary 
schools as well as (b) reduction of access barriers through targeted scholarships to 
Page  2
encourage disadvantaged children to attend school.  The latter will entail: (a) the 
strengthening of decentralized quality education service delivery and (b) the development 
of a national assessment monitoring system.  Measures will be undertaken to ensure 
maximum coordination between the supply and demand-side interventions.  The project 
will also finance emerging needs and activities in ESSP and within the boundaries of the 
stated project development objectives development objectives, to be agreed with IDA 
during the course of implementation.  
 
The theory of change underpinning the program is the following.  First, both supply- 
and demand-side barriers to schooling access need to be lifted.  Children must have 
schools available in their vicinity, and their participation must be supported through 
schemes that can bring them closer to schools and reduce the direct or opportunity costs 
of attendance.  Coming to school, however, is no guarantee that learning will occur.  The 
relevance and quality of schooling must be promoted by fostering a reflective process 
within schools to identify their challenges and develop improvement action plans.  This 
process can be catalyzed through an institutional participatory framework that includes 
community members, parents, school staff, district supervisors and provincial officers.  
School improvement planning will be complemented with professional development 
efforts to enhance principal and teacher technical capacity to deliver the academic 
program more effectively.  An independent national assessment system will monitor 
progress and provide specific feedback to educators and policymakers to guide the 
education system towards improved student participation and academic achievement 
outcomes, the ultimate objective of the project.  
 
Project implementation will strive to reach the most disadvantaged children (targeting 
girls, ethnic minority areas and communes with high poverty incidence preferentially).  
Over the long term, the project will benefit primary and lower secondary school children 
nationwide by strengthening the institutional and technical capacity for education quality 
improvement planning and administration.  Sustainable and quality enhancing 
management, supervisory and pedagogical practices will be promoted so as to foster 
greater efficiency and effectiveness in educational service delivery.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented nationwide, but targeting communes with high poverty 
incidence, including areas where ethnic minorities reside.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
D.1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.  
 
Contractor specifications to address environmental issues, including construction dust 
and noise control, waste management, site management, provision of clean water and 
sanitation facilities, unexploded ordinance removal, asbestos-containing material 
demolition management and preservation of cultural and historic resources have also 
been adequately addressed and integrated to bidding documents.  
 
No land acquisition plans or resettlement framework are required, since civil works will 
largely take place within existing school campuses or, in a small number of cases, on 
vacant and idle land owned by the Government that is free from all encumbrances, 
habitation, dispute, claim or controversy. The use of the land will neither require a 
resettlement plan nor a resettlement framework.  
 
A
national "scholarship program" in Component 1.2, designed to reduce barriers for 
disadvantaged children, is the primary instrument directly addressing the issue of 
Indigenous Peoples' inclusion.  Scholarships are recognized as a means to lower the 
direct and opportunity costs to education.  The expansion of targeted incentive schemes 
for the poorest and groups at risk is an actionable measure under the NPRS and the 
General Policy for Highland Peoples Development (produced by the Inter-Ministerial 
Committee for Highland Peoples Development).  
 
Some project activities will be focused on poor areas where ethnic minorities reside.  
CESSP is expected to enhance the livelihoods of indigenous peoples in the following 
ways.  First, the proposed school facilities expansion plan will play a positive influence in 
enabling ethnic minority children to complete primary and continue on to secondary 
schooling by reducing the distance away from school.  Second, scholarship support will 
be provided to reduce the direct and opportunity costs to education.  Third, the project 
Page  4
will foster professional capacity building and development of indigenous peoples as 
teachers.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not applicable   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As mentioned above, specific environmental protection clauses will be included in all 
civil works contracts.  The project will promote good governance by encouraging 
community voice and parental participation, accountability for results, transparency in the 
management of resources and stakeholder feedback mechanisms.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Project preparation was informed by over 400 informants-including community 
members, teachers and primary and lower secondary students-from urban, rural and 
remote areas.  Focus group discussions were held in three provinces.  Civil society 
participation was also incorporated during the project design stage through the 
representation of the NGO Education Partnership in the project Steering Committee.  
 
The project will promote local participation and involvement through a variety of 
avenues, such as community-contracting schemes for school facilities development, 
participation in local management committees for the scholarship program, involvement 
in school planning and encouragement of local accountability through public 
dissemination of information on school performance and resource allocation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
Page  5
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Luis Benveniste 
03/29/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
03/25/2004 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christopher J. Thomas 
10/28/2004 
Comments:   
