Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC713 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: April 14, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Cameroon 
Project ID: P084160 
Project Name: Public Sector TA 
Task Team Leader: Armand E. Atomate 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 15, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2004 
Managing Unit: AFTPR 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: General public administration 
sector (100%) 
Theme: Other public sector governance (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: 
to be identified, whenever appropriate 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 10 
Other financing amounts by source: Borrower/Recipient 
- ($ .2m) 
 
B.  Project Objective  
 
How are resources actually used and accounted for ? That is the leading question at the core of the 
proposed TACB project. Therefore, the project development objective would be to “enhance transparency 
and accountability in the use of public resources”, which is a cross-cutting theme of the PRSP and the 
CAS in the five broad public sector governance areas outlined above. This would be achieved through 
implementation of some “quick-win” activities to ensure the credibility of reforms envisaged, using a 
comprehensive approach to address interrelated specific issues of: (i) dysfunctional personnel and payroll 
management; (ii) regulatory framework not conducive to business-friendly environment for investment 
and private-sector-led growth; (iii) distorted competition in procurement processes and operations; (iv) 
inefficient budget allocations and implementation processes; and (v) monitoring and evaluation 
mechanisms overly centered on the supply of inputs rather than on output measures and end-results of 
policy and programs implementation. A comprehensive approach would also adequately respond to the 
cross-cutting need/call for transparency and accountability, the complexity of interdependent nature of 
changes envisaged, and the interlocked network of intergovernmental relationships between Ministries, 
Departments and Agencies (MDAs) involved.  
 
The proposed project would be implemented over a period of three years, using a traditional investment 
loan. By project year-3, it is expected that minimum conditions would be in place for enhanced 
transparency and accountability in the use of public resources to make a case for the PRSC. Increased 
resource predictability in the public sector management for improved frontline service delivery in aid of 
poverty reduction is anticipated to be the principal project outcome that would  enable the GOC move 
from the statu quo to a more programmatic approach under the PRSC. Consistent with the PDO and the 
intended outcome, concerned MDAs would be the project primary target groups. However, key recipients 
of project outcomes would be all the users of the Cameroonian public service who would benefit from 
Page  2
 
 
greater transparency and accountability of government functions and operations; and hence improved 
frontline service delivery and poverty reduction over the medium term
. 
 
C.  Project Description  
 
The PDO would be achieved through the following project components, for an estimated IDA financing 
of US$10M.  
 
Component 1 - 
(US$2.5M) - would support the ongoing deconcentration of State personnel and payroll 
management reform. The component objective would be to contribute to improving transparency and 
accountability in human resources and staff salaries management, for reduced wage bill and improved 
frontline service delivery, while helping combat corruption, shady deals, and rent seeking. Activities 
agreed upon with, for implementation by, the Ministry of Public Service and Administrative Reforms 
(MINFOPRA), consist of: 
  
(i) 
Consolidating in pilot sites, and extending to the remaining ministerial departments, the 
following instruments 
\01fi
SIGIPES, as a computerized State personnel management system;  
\01fi
SIGIPES-AQUARIUM, as an electronic interface between Administration and users 
to improve transparency, accountability and celerity in the management and 
treatment of personnel files; 
\01fi
SIGIPES-Plus, as a computerized system for management of personnel career 
development , 
plus
 salaries.   
(ii) Training: 
\01fi
computer experts who will ensure full application of instruments listed above;  
\01fi
auditors who will regularly ensure that procedures are enforced;  
\01fi
users and technical agents who will process personnel files; and  
\01fi
managers of human resources departments who will oversee the use of the new 
management tools.  
 
(iii) 
Publishing and disseminating a Handbook on human resources management procedures, as a 
user-friendly tool to guide reform implementation, improve results-based working 
relationships, and allow a results-based monitoring and evaluation of staff performance. 
 
(iv) 
Designing and testing an affordable staff  performance appraisal scheme, based on output 
measures and not just the supply of inputs. 
 
Component 2
 - (US$1M) - would support the ongoing improvement of business environment. The 
component objective would be to contribute to promoting transparent competitiveness and the rule of law 
for improved business-friendly environment for investment and private-sector-led growth. Activities – 
including some relevant recommendations of the December 30, 2003 priority action plan on legal and 
judicial reforms in Cameroon - agreed upon with, for implementation by, the Ministry of Justice 
(MINJUST), consist of:  
 
(i) 
modernizing office technology infrastructure of repressive jurisdictions and disciplinary 
bodies within the MINJUST to ensure efficient enforcement of new business laws, which 
came into effect between 1998 and 2000, and replaced existing national legislation; 
 
(ii) 
designing and implementing in-country training programs for magistrates, lawyers, judges, 
and other legal practitioners involved in drafting and treatment of commercial and financial 
Page  3
 
 
contracts, to ensure their proper and rapid execution, as well as their compliance with new 
business laws;  
 
(iii) 
achieving Intranet and Internet connections between the Chancellery and administrative 
jurisdictions for timely sharing of, and access to, information on court decisions, sanctions, 
deadlines and people accountable for their implementation; and  
 
(iv) 
publishing and disseminating handbooks on the new business laws, on administrative 
procedures and tariffs, and on the related legal profession bodies, including a directory of 
business lawyers and attorneys. 
 
Component 3
 - (US$1M) - would support the ongoing procurement reform. The component objective 
would be to  contribute to enhancing transparency and accountability in procurement processes for 
improved competition in procurement operations. Activities – including some relevant recommendations 
from the December 2000 Country Procurement Assessment Review (CPAR) - agreed upon with, for 
implementation by, the Procurement Regulatory Agency (ARMP), consist of:  
 
(i) 
preparing standard national biddings documents;  
(ii) 
implementing a computerized system for archiving procurement documents;  
(iii) 
publishing and disseminating: (a) the new Procurement Code; (b) brochures containing laws 
prohibiting corruption in procurement operations, detailing sanctions against violators and 
steps for filing complaints; (c) a Guide on fiscal expenditures related to procurement; (d) a 
unified Guide for the bidder and the purchaser; and (e) a procedures handbook for public 
buyers; and  
(iv) 
training staff in procurement processes and directives. 
 
Component 4 - 
(US$2.5M) - would support – in coordination with the broader long-term reform of 
Cameroon’s public finances supported by the IMF, the EU and the French Cooperation - the ongoing 
budgetary reform. The component objective would be to contribute to improving transparency and 
accountability in budget allocation, execution, and monitoring processes for enhanced efficiency and 
effectiveness of public expenditure. Activities - including some relevant recommendations from the June 
2002 Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) -  agreed upon with, for implementation by, 
the Ministry of Finance and Budget (MINFI), consist of: 
  
(i) 
modernizing ANTILOPE (the computerized  system of management of State personnel’s 
salaries and pensions), which will be progressively relieved of its function of liquidation of 
administrative acts, following progressive extension of SIGIPES-Plus;  
 
(ii) 
reactivating the SIGIPES-Plus/ANTILOPE interface to enable transparent alignment of 
budget allocations with effective number of staff within ministerial departments;  
 
(iii) 
upgrading office technology infrastructure of: (a) the “Audit Bench” to strengthen its ability 
to control and rule on public accounts, as well as those of public and semi-public enterprises 
(Art. 41 of the 1996 Constitution); (b) the “Lower audit courts”, indispensable for efficiency 
and effectiveness in the control of public service accounting officers spread nation-wide; and 
(c) structures of internal and external controls, internal audit, monitoring and surveillance 
bodies to reduce 
ex ante
 and enhance 
ex post
 controls;  
 
(iv) 
conducting an operational audit of the DEPMI expenditure management and information 
system for corrective measures in tracking budgetary operations nation-wide, while providing 
Page  4
 
 
enhanced internal controls and reducing opportunities for resources misuse, corruption, and 
mismanagement; and  
 
(v) 
streamlining budget execution procedures and controls, including: (a) automation of price 
control through a computerized market price list at all levels of financial control, (b) reducing 
the number of steps in files processing, and (c) preparing procedure manuals for users and 
financial managers to improve their understanding of the DEPMI. 
 
Component 5 
- 
(US$1.5M) - would support the design and implementation of a results-based monitoring 
and evaluation (M&E) system, as a key factor to aligning the use of public resources to PRSP priorities 
and targets. The component objective would be to contribute to strengthening main statistical data sources 
for informed policies and budget allocations, while performance is measured based on result-indicators, 
not just the supply of inputs. Activities agreed upon with, for implementation by, the National Institute of 
Statistics (NIS), consist of: 
  
(i) 
implementing the following priority operations, essentially focused on statistical data 
production, to enable the calculation of (process, input, output, result, impact) indicators 
against which progress towards achievement of PRSP and sector strategies targets would be 
measured: (a) general census of population and habitat (RGPH), population and health survey 
(EDS), employment and informal sector survey (ESI), multiple indicators survey (MICS), 
agriculture survey, recurrent budget/public expenditure tracking surveys (PETS), beneficiary 
assessment survey, Cameroonian households survey (ECAM), and generation of statistical 
data based on administrative sources.  
 
(ii) 
Modernizing office technology infrastructure of the NIS and its ministerial units to improve 
the quality of statistical data;  
 
(iii) 
Implementing a computerized data-based information management system to ensure 
coordination of statistical activities among Government agencies;  
 
(iv) 
Harmonizing and standardizing methodologies and computation formulas used to calculate 
the levels of indicators for monitoring the implementation of PRSP and sector strategies; 
 
(v) 
Training relevant staff of the NIS and its ministerial units in survey design and execution, 
impact assessment, and use of indicators to inform policy formulation; and 
 
(vi) 
extending active partnerships with the civil society (including NGOs, faith-based institutions, 
the media, and trade unions) as a development stakeholder, with the overall objective to assist 
the civil society play an active and independent role in the implementation of the PRSP, thus 
contributing to improved management of resources. This would further the capacity building 
program for the 50 largest NGOs in the country, launched by the World Bank office in 
Cameroon, in collaboration with UNDP, which is the first step in making NGOs more 
effective in the implementation of PRSP objectives and more credible with the Government 
and the donor community.  
 
The day-to-day support to the implementation of project activities would be provided by a 
Project 
Management Unit
 (US$1M). As project implementation evolves, new priorities might emerge which, if 
deemed relevant, would be funded under 
Contingencies
 or 
Unallocated
 (US$0.5M). There are no 
investments in physical infrastructure. 
 
 
Page  5
 
 
Regarding alternatives considered by the proposed project, one possibility would be to address, 
exclusively, public finance which constitutes the key element of the public sector governance reform 
agenda. However, such a narrow focus would not adequately reflect key public sector reform priorities 
identified in the Government’s PRSP and echoed in the World Bank’s CAS (FY04-06). Rather, a 
comprehensive approach focused on results-based “quick-wins” would adequately respond to the cross-
cutting need/call for transparency and accountability, the complexity of interdependent nature of changes 
envisaged, and the interlocked network of intergovernmental relationships between MDAs involved. As 
to the choice of lending instrument, while an APL would have been desirable in this context, it would 
contribute no additional value since the key weaknesses and deficiencies of the country’s public sector are 
well established. Furthermore, the current weak framework for public financial management does not 
allow an increased budgetary assistance at the present stage. Therefore, a traditional investment loan (TA) 
is a most suitable lending instrument to prepare Cameroon for budget support under the PRSC, scheduled 
for FY06
.
 
 
D.  Project location 
 
The focal coordination point for project preparation and implementation would be in the Ministry of 
Economic Affairs, Programming and Regional Development (MINEPAT). It would include 
representatives of non governmental, civil society, and private sector organizations to ensure necessary 
checks and balances. The responsibility for project execution would be vested in existing Government 
agencies to create conditions for sustained impact. Qualified non governmental, civil society, and private 
sector organizations would be sub-contracted, as needed. The day-to-day support to the implementation of 
project activities would be provided by a Project Management Unit (PMU), accountable to a 
Steering/Management Committee, and supported by specialized technical and thematic groups.  
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 
 
 
Not applicable 
 
Page  6
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[N/A ] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[ N/A] 
Natural Habitats
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ N/A] 
Pest Management
 (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[ N/A]  
Involuntary Resettlement
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[ N/A] 
Indigenous Peoples
 (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ N/A] 
Forests
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ N/A] 
Safety of Dams
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ N/A] 
Cultural Property
 (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ N/A] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ N/A] 
Projects on International Waterways
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [ ] B   [X] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD  
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN: N/A 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Armand E. Atomate 
04/14/2004 
Project Safeguards Specialist 1: 
Serigne Omar Fye 
04/15/2004 
Project Safeguards Specialist 2: 
John A. Boyle 
04/15/2004 
Project Safeguards Specialist 3: 
Kristine Schwebach 
 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Thomas Walton 
04/15/2004 
Comments  
 
Sector Manager: 
Guenter Heidenhof 
04/14/2004 
 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  7
 
 
 
