                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                     RESTRUCTURING STAGE
         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring

                                                               Report No.: 104974

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:           20-Apr-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                       Cameroon               Project ID:                  P128534
 Project Name:                  Cameroon Social Safety Nets (P128534)
 Task Team Leader(s):           Carlo Del Ninno
 Estimated Board Date:          21-Mar-2013
 Managing Unit:                 GSP07
 Sector(s):                     Other social services (78%), Public administration- Other social services
                                (16%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (6 %)
 Theme(s):                      Social Safety Nets/Social Assistance & Social Care Services (78%),
                                Social Protection and Labor Policy & Systems (16%), Gender (6%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                      No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:        50.00                       Total Bank Financing:         50.00
 Financing Gap:             0.00
     Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                    0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                                          50.00
     Total                                                                                                50.00
 Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred          No
 project?

 2. Current Project Development Objectives
 The project development objective (PDO) is to support the establishment of a basic national safety net
 system including piloting targeted cash transfers and public works programs for the poorest and most
 vulnerable people in participating areas within the Recipient's territory.
 Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
3. Project Description
The operation supports the creation of a national safety net system including piloting two instruments: a
larger productive cash transfer program and a smaller public works program.

The operation supports the creation of a national safety net system including piloting two instruments: a
larger productive cash transfer program and a smaller public works program.

By developing and testing these two instruments as pilots, the project will provide the foundations of a
system aimed at reducing poverty and making economic growth more equitable. While the project
mainly focuses on piloting effective safety net programs in poor rural areas of the five selected regions
of Cameroon, two large urban areas (Yaounde and Douala) are also be covered. The two instruments of
the new safety nets system, selected on the basis of the recommendations of Cameroon's Safety Nets
Review have different but complementary objectives. The cash transfer program provides small, regular
transfers over a 24-month period to very poor households. These transfers, in combination with
accompanying measures and soft conditionalities, help households stabilize their consumption, make
the necessary investments in the human capital of their families, especially children, and provide
opportunities to engage in income-generating activities. The public works program complements the
cash transfer program by providing additional income to households in communities affected by
unpredictable events such as droughts in order to make them more resilient to external shocks. The
additional income – given in return for the labor of a household member on various public works
activities is expected to enable program beneficiaries to smooth their consumption and protect their
assets. An additional benefit of these public works activities is the creation and/or maintenance of useful
public goods. The coverage and implementation of the two instruments are coordinated and further
described in the section below and in Annex 2 of the PAD.

Given limited experience in Cameroon with targeted transfer programs, the proposed operation
implement the cash transfer and public works programs as pilots and places a significant focus on
learning and building capacity. The government is already undertaking and financing a small cash
transfer pilot for 2,000 beneficiaries in rural north and in the North-West with the technical support of
the Bank. Extensive fieldwork was carried out in mid-2012, the targeting and registration of
beneficiaries was done in November 2012, and the Government's pilot made the first of its 24 monthly
payments in January 2013. The design of the pilot was based on the findings of the feasibility study
mentioned above. Building on the experience of the Government's small-scale pilot, the project is
supporting a larger scale pilot of the cash transfer program in the five poorest regions of Cameroon and
the urban areas of Yaounde and Douala. Such an approach grants significant flexibility and focuses
attention on experimentation and learning as the system is constructed. As such, a high level of
flexibility to adjust to lessons learned and experiences throughout implementation has been built into the
project's design and structure. The project also supports a smaller pilot of the public works program. A
full timeline of how the program's design, piloting, and implementation is sequenced and supported has
been developed. To facilitate the development of implementation procedures, the main Project
implementation manual (PIM) was complemented with technical annexes and modules that specify
implementation procedures as they are developed and implemented.

The project will achieve the PDO by: (i) helping the Borrower to establish a national safety nets system
for coordinating safety nets programs and improving its poverty targeting; and ii) designing, piloting
and implementing the main building blocks of a national safety nets system, such as cash transfer and
public works programs. To this end, the project has three components: Component 1: Laying the
Foundations of a Safety Nets System and Supporting Project Management; Component 2: Pilot Cash
Transfer Program with Accompanying Measures to Boost Household Productivity; and Component 3:
Public Works Program Pilot.

Component 1: Laying the Foundations of a Safety Net System and Supporting Project Management
(US$7.8 million).
This component is supporting the Borrower in developing systems to coordinate and manage safety nets
programs for the poor and vulnerable. The component also supports the management of the overall
project. As improving existing systems and testing and building new ones takes time, this component is
being implemented over the whole project period. First, this component includes activities to strengthen
the institutions needed for coordinating, implementing, and monitoring government social safety nets
(SSN) programs. Secondly, the component supports the development, testing, and improvement of the
tools and instruments necessary for implementing and running a national SSN system. The component
also finances technical assistance, capacity building, and inputs for expanding and improving the
systems and tools designed and tested during the government’s cash transfer pilot. This component
covers the instruments and administrative systems required for identification, targeting, registration, and
payment of beneficiaries, as well as monitoring and evaluation (M&E), coordination, and governance
and accountability instruments. An inter-ministerial steering committee on safety nets provides overall
policy guidance, while the project implementation unit (PIU) is responsible for actual implementation.
An important aspect of the new national safety nets system will be the capacity to expand the safety nets
in response to shocks by: (i) increasing the value of the transfer given to current beneficiaries; (ii)
expanding the cash transfer program to additional beneficiaries, albeit for a shorter period of time than
for existing beneficiaries; and (iii) providing additional employment opportunities through public works
activities.

Second, this component finances the costs of the management, coordination, and M&E activities under
this and the other two project components.


Component 2: Pilot Cash Transfer Program with Accompanying Measures to Boost Household
Productivity (US$36.3 million).
This component supports the development and piloting of a cash transfer program with accompanying
measures to provide support and boost productivity of chronically poor households and serves as a
cornerstone of Cameroon’s social safety nets system. The cash transfer program provides a small regular
payment, which is proven to assist households in stabilizing their basic consumption without having to
resort to negative coping mechanisms when shocks occur. The component is piloting the provision of
cash transfers to eligible households based on existing international experience, the recommendations of
the feasibility study, lessons learned from the small-scale government pilot exercise, and the feedback
from the implementation process. The cash transfers will help poor and vulnerable groups by increasing
household income for a period of 24 months. Transfers will be limited to 24 months because the process
of recertifying the eligibility of beneficiaries (commonly used in cash transfer programs in Latin
America) can be difficult and costly in low-capacity settings. Another reason for having a time limit on
the transfers is to reduce any concerns about creating dependency among beneficiaries, which is
politically important in Cameroon. Moreover, since transfers are only provided for 24 months, the
program has the potential to cover a larger number of beneficiaries in the long run and to expand into
new geographical areas.

The targeted groups include chronically poor households (in particularly those at risk of malnutrition) in
the rural areas of Cameroon's five poorest regions and in the urban areas of Yaoundé and Douala.
Beneficiaries are selected using a combination of targeting techniques including geographic targeting,
community selection, and proxy means testing (PMT) methodologies. Transfers will be paid to women
representatives of the recipient households, a move which is expected to increase investment in
children’s human capital. The feasibility study conducted in 2011 recommended providing a monthly
benefit level of FCFA 15,000 per household. However, to encourage households to save and invest a
share of the transfers, payments are made every two months. Also, two of the 12 payments are larger
than the others and linked to training and information on savings and investment. The bi-monthly
payment is also logistically simpler than a monthly payment and reduces transaction costs. The size and
structure of the benefit will be reviewed periodically, following beneficiary feedback and evaluation
results to ensure that the most appropriate payment structure is used to achieve the desired reduction in
poverty. The payment system has a centrally managed database and payments are made by fixed or
mobile branches of the payment agencies selected by the project (see Annex 2 of the PAD for details).

Accompanying measures have been developed to maximize the impact of the cash transfers on the
welfare and productivity of beneficiary households. These measures are designed to help households
make the necessary investments in the human capital of their families, especially children, in productive
household assets, and possibly to engage in income-generating activities. These accompanying
measures include information on the project's objectives and on beneficiaries’ responsibilities, the
requirement for beneficiaries to enter into simple moral contracts in which they agree to invest in the
schooling, health care, and nutrition of their household members. Community campaigns on the
adoption of proper health and nutrition practices and the reduction of any risky kinds of behavior are
also undertaken. In addition, households are encouraged to participate in training designed to teach basic
financial skills and the skills necessary for various income-generating activities. The aim of these
accompanying measures is to increase households’ probability of getting out of poverty and become
more resilient to future shocks.

To achieve the objectives of the accompanying activities and ensure the successful improvement
household productivity, the following activities are being undertaken, starting at the time of household
registration and lasting throughout the 24-month payment period.
a)       Information campaigns at registration. At registration, small groups of the women being
registered are given information on the project's objectives and on what is expected from beneficiaries.
In the context of Cameroon, part of the focus of these information sessions is on encouraging women to
acquire national ID cards for their families, to register the births of their children, and to use whatever
network of social services is available to them.
b)       Moral contracts. Also at the time of registration, beneficiary households are required to agree to
a moral contract (a soft conditionality) including a number of positive actions, although households that
are not able to comply are not dropped from the program. On behalf of their households, the women
commit to sending their school-aged children to class, taking all young children in the household for
regular health check-ups, and ensuring that the regular cash transfers provided through the program are
used to ensure proper nutrition for the children in the household, especially those under 2 years old.
c)       Community-level information campaigns. These activities promote the adoption of proper
health and nutrition practices and the reduction of any risky kinds of behavior that have been identified
in the communities following lessons learned from the small government pilot and the implementation
of the first cycle of the cash transfer pilot program.
d)       Individual training activities. Also during the 24 months of the transfer cycle, the program
provides beneficiaries with training in a range of skills including financial literacy and
income-generating activities. This training is provided by NGOs or microfinance institutions.

Empirical evidence confirms that cash transfers and accompanying measures can achieve significant
development impact. Even though the receipt of transfers is not conditional on any specific household
action, positive outcomes of the project are still expected. Cash transfers by themselves have been
proven to lead to increased spending on health, education and food security, as well as to economic
investment (e.g., in South Africa unconditional cash transfers to the elderly poor resulted in better
schooling outcomes for their orphan grand- children, for example). In addition, encouraging positive
behaviors, such as improved nutrition practices, contribute to increased overall child welfare and, in the
long-run, greater human capital. Finally, evidence suggests that training activities centered on savings
and income-generation can promote economic activity among beneficiary households (the IGVGD
program in Bangladesh has successfully contributed to poverty-reduction through training in
income-generating activities).

Component 3: Public Works Program Pilot (US$5. 9 million).
This component has developed and is piloting a labor-intensive public works program aimed at helping
vulnerable households deal with exogenous shocks (such as droughts or floods). The program
complements the cash transfer program during particularly hard times and helps vulnerable households
to cope with shocks. The component finances small community-level projects that provide
approximately 60 days of work to selected beneficiaries. Their labor creates valuable public goods (e.g.
soil conservation activities for the protection of the environment, small irrigation systems, rehabilitation
of small infrastructures such as small roads and sanitation projects, and other activities that meet local
needs as expressed by communities) during the slow agricultural season between January and May.
Communities where the project operates is selected every year based on poverty data and the occurrence
of shocks. Unskilled local people are selected to work on these projects at wage rates equal to or less
than the average current wage rates for unskilled labor. According to the feasibility study, this rate was
approximately FCFA 1,000 per day in the poorest five regions of the country. However, a recent field
survey demonstrated an increase in the average rates for unskilled labor to approximately FCFA 1,500.
The salaries earned by these workers will help to smooth the income of their households during
especially difficult times. The program uses the wage level as a way to target poor households as only
the poor are likely to self-select into the program. Self-selection will be complemented by other simple
targeting methods if the number of interested beneficiaries exceeds the number of expected participants.
The component finances the wages as well as the inputs, technical assistance, and administrative costs of
the pilot public works program. To maximize the amount of funds that can be transferred to the
beneficiaries, it is required that the wage component of each public works subproject be equal or exceed
70 percent of the total cost of the subproject, including materials. On average it is expected that the
materials for the public works subprojects will not exceed 20 percent of total costs. Each individual
project is selected from among those proposed by the community and, when feasible, that are included
in the commune development plan (PCD) prepared with the support of the World Bank Community
Development Program (Programme National de Développement Participatif, PNDP). Further details of
how the particular subprojects are selected are laid out in the PIM.

The public works activities are coordinated, to the extent possible, with the cash transfer program so as
to facilitate its implementation and reinforce its effectiveness. The development and piloting of the
public works component was supposed to be phased in after the cash transfer pilot program was
operating in all the selected regions, in order to facilitate coordination between the two programs.
However, following a request from the Government to start the public works pilot program sooner, both
the cash transfer and public works programs are being implemented at the same time. The exact scope of
the public works pilot is set out in the PIM. The link between the public works and cash transfer
programs at the geographical and implementation level is being further developed. Public works
subprojects may operate in the same five rural regions as the cash transfer program. As the objective of
the public works component is to help households to cope with shocks, any village located within these
five regions is eligible for the public works program even if it is not located within the same département
as where the cash transfer program is operating (provided sufficient available capacity). Therefore,
some public works sites may be located in or near villages where the cash transfer program is already
operating and may be open to both beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries of the cash transfer program. As
a result, given that there may be some village-level overlap between the programs, the public works
program would reinforce the positive effects of the cash transfer program by providing the most
vulnerable households with supplemental income after a shock.

Changes in the operating context (insecurity, poverty levels, etc.) of the public works program
necessitate an amendment of the Financing agreement, in order to allow for more flexibility in setting
the daily wage rate of beneficiaries. This amendment requires a simple restructuring, but does not in any
manner affect the nature or scope of safeguards.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The project is expected to have a positive social impact by providing livelihood and employment
opportunities for targeted communities in participating areas. On the basis of pre-determined criteria,
the project will target the poorest and most vulnerable communities, specifically by providing
labor-intensive public works opportunities and unconditional cash transfers as well as by creating
community assets through public works subprojects that will result in long-term social benefits to people
in the area. Provisions have also been made to facilitate the inclusion of women in the public works
program.

The Social Safety Nets Project is a Category B project, suggesting that the environmental and social
impact of the project will be limited, site-specific, and manageable to an acceptable level. Six safeguards
policies are triggered as indicated in the table below. Safeguard policies that are not triggered include:
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37), Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) and
International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50).

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna ( GEN07 )
Kristyna Bishop ( GSU01 )
Paivi Koskinen-Lewis ( GSU01 )

6. Safeguard Policies                          Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01            Yes              This policy was triggered because of
                                                                direct potential environmental impacts
                                                                associated with component 3 (Public
                                                                works) activities that may include soil
                                                                conservation, reforestation activities,
                                                                small irrigation systems, small
                                                                infrastructure rehabilitation, and rural
                                                                road maintenance. These activities will
                                                                have direct impacts on soils, vegetation,
                                                                and the human population in the project
                                                                areas. These impacts will not be
                                                                significant and will be mitigated by
                                                                accompanying measures to minimize
                                                                adverse impacts and pursue global
                                                                environmental benefits. The Borrower
                                                                has prepared an ESMF for activities that
                                                                guide the screening, analysis, and
                                    safeguards approval of future activities,
                                    whose sites are not yet defined. The
                                    ESMF also presents sample terms of
                                    reference for activities that require an
                                    Environmental Assessment as well as
                                    environmental guidelines for contractors
                                    (rural roads maintenance,
                                    afforestation/reforestation, small
                                    irrigation system facilities). Water
                                    management infrastructures will be small
                                    in scale and will not trigger Safety of
                                    Dams but the ESMF will describe the
                                    technical specifications of such
                                    infrastructures. Based on the screening
                                    process, specific Environmental Social
                                    Impact Assessments (ESIAs) including
                                    Environmental and Social Management
                                    Plans (ESMPs) will be prepared. The
                                    irrigation system will not be dependent
                                    on dams.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No    The project activities will not support any
                                    activities in protected areas.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   This policy was triggered as the project
                                    may finance small-scale reforestation
                                    activities. The project will ensure that
                                    adequate species are used for that
                                    purpose. Furthermore, a simple forest
                                    management plan should be prepared if
                                    necessary to ensure sustainable
                                    management of planted forests. The
                                    ESMF provides guidelines on the
                                    planting process. The project will not
                                    introduce land pressure that will push
                                    communities to encroach new lands.
                                    Moreover, the project will not finance
                                    any micro-project that threatens forests or
                                    natural habitats as clearly specified in the
                                    ESMF.
Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes   This policy was triggered because of the
                                    potential expansion, even at the
                                    individual small scale, of agroforestry
                                    activities and the possibility to create
                                    irrigation networks that could increase
                                    water storage. As the Government has
                                    prepared several Pest Management Plans
                                    (PMP) for other World Bank projects in
                                    the agriculture sector, the project is using
                                    the existing PMPs prepared under the
                                    Agricultural Competitiveness Project
                                                         (P112635). It provides guidance on
                                                         managing pests in the irrigation
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11    Yes            This policy was triggered because some
                                                         project activities may be undertaken
                                                         around Indigenous Peoples (IP) sites. It is
                                                         important that all IP cultural sites,
                                                         particularly sacred sites, be protected.
                                                         The ESMF provides guidance on chance
                                                         find procedures for physical cultural
                                                         resources (OP 4.11) and for managing
                                                         any known assets, including the best way
                                                         to identify these sites prior to execution of
                                                         activities in these areas. The Project team
                                                         will consult with the IPs to ensure the
                                                         protection of these sites if identified.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10             Yes            This policy was triggered as there are
                                                         Indigenous Peoples in the East Region.
                                                         An Indigenous Peoples Planning
                                                         Framework was prepared and disclosed
                                                         during initial project preparation and a
                                                         social specialist has been hired by the PIU
                                                         to put in place specific measures for these
                                                         communities.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12       Yes            Large-scale land acquisition is highly
                                                         unlikely as this project is only financing
                                                         small, community-based social
                                                         infrastructure. However, there is a chance
                                                         that some land acquisition might be
                                                         necessary under Component 3 and an
                                                         RPF was prepared to provide guidance
                                                         regarding screening, and to establish the
                                                         principles for compensation and the
                                                         preparation of a RAP(s) if necessary. In
                                                         the target areas, activities to be financed
                                                         under the project will be mainly
                                                         implemented in lands that are already
                                                         being cultivated and in pastoral lands.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                 No             N/A
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No             N/A
7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60     No             N/A

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Activities proposed in component 3 of the project may have potential limited adverse (even minimal and
site-specific) environmental risks and impacts in the project’s area of influence. An ESMF, RPF and
IPPF were prepared for the project to provide guidance for the mitigation of risks and impacts. The
project does not anticipate any large scale, irreversible risks. Due to the project’s large implementation
area, the ESMF considers cumulative impacts that at this stage will be limited. Activities proposed in
component 3 have been narrowed down and specified in the operational guidelines, and it is not
anticipated that they will cause significant negative impacts. A work-plan for the social and
environmental specialist hired by the PIU has been approved by the Bank and is now in implementation.
The work plan includes several measures to ensure that indigenous communities will benefit from the
project where possible.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
The project activities are not likely to cause long-term impacts in the project area.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The project will limit its support to small community activities with limited environmental and social
adverse impacts. The project will not finance activities that could have significant adverse impacts in
protected areas such as national parks or primary forests. For the most part, these are demand-driven
activities that require the support of the beneficiary community.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The PIU, according to the ESMF guidelines, has hired a Social and Environmental Specialist in charge
of leading the implementation of the safeguards instruments. The Government has assigned a focal point
for environmental and social safeguards to ensure that the safeguards instruments are implemented. The
WB safeguards team has reviewed the action plan and will also support the focal point to ensure that the
project is in compliance with safeguards requirements. The Ministry of Environment has committed to
mobilizing adequate human resources for safeguards implementation monitoring at the local level.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
During the project preparation process, the stakeholders (affected people, CSOs and public
administration partners) were consulted during the preparation of the main safeguards instruments. A
workshop was organized in Yaoundé to present the main safeguards instruments (ESMF, RPF, IPPF and
PMP) and specifically, for the IPs, the consultation was organized in the Kadey Division with the main
IPs.
In the terms of reference of the social environmental specialist hired by the PIU, it is clear that he will
consult, sensitize and train the relevant direct stakeholders.

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of submission to InfoShop
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Cameroon                                                                      26-Dec-2012
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of submission to InfoShop
"In country" Disclosure
Cameroon                                                                      26-Dec-2012
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of submission to InfoShop
"In country" Disclosure
Cameroon                                                                      26-Dec-2012
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of submission to InfoShop
"In country" Disclosure
Cameroon                                                                      26-Dec-2012
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [ X ]       No [   ]   NA [   ]

If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager Yes [ X ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
(PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?            Yes [ X ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]

Is a separate PMP required?                                           Yes [ X ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]

If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards        Yes [ X ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included in project
design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management
Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? Yes [ X ]     No [   ]    NA [   ]

Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the           Yes [ X ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as       Yes [ X ]     No [   ]    NA [   ]
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or      Yes [ X ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been Yes [     ]   No [   ]    NA [ X ]
reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or
Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [ X ]       No [   ]    NA [   ]
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or      Yes [ X ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and   Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [ X ]
constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome     Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [ X ]
these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it    Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [ X ]
include provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [       ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place Yes [     ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to
project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader(s):           Name: Carlo Del Ninno
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:            Name: Hanneke Van Tilburg                 Date: 02-Mar-2016
Practice Manager/Manager:      Name: Stefano Paternostro                 Date: 15-Mar-2016
