Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1460 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/14/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Cameroon 
Project ID: P089289 
Project Name: CM-SUSTAINABLE AGRO-PASTORAL AND LAND 
MANAGEMENT PROMOTION UNDER THE PNDP
 
Task Team Leader: Ousmane Seck 
GEF Focal Area: L-Land degradation 
Global Supplemental ID: P089289 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 03, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: February 22, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTS3 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Agricultural Extension (45%), Irrigation & Drainage (20%), Other 
social services (35%)
 
Theme: Land Administration and Management (P); Environmental Policies and 
Institutions (S); Other Environment and Natural Resources Managements (S); Water 
Resource Management (S). 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.30 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.07 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.63
0.70 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project's development objective is to contribute to reversing land degradation and improving 
land productivity in critical areas. This will be achieved through the adoption of SLM best 
practices, and the development of adequate capacity, tools, and mechanisms by communities; 
thereby strengthening the overall impact of the PNDP. By strengthening the awareness and 
capacity of local producers, the project will contribute to reconciling the short-term objective of 
increased agricultural productivity with the long-term global environment objective.  
 
The project’s global environmental objective is to contribute to (i) maintaining and restoring 
fragile agro-pastoral ecosystems, and (ii) enhancing agro-biodiversity. This will be done through 
the promotion of sustainable land management policies, practices, and investments. Among other 
Page  2
things, the project will take into account for reducing soil erosion, stabilizing sediment storage 
and release in critical water bodies, and increasing vegetative cover and carbon sequestration.  
 
The following major outcomes will be achieved by project completion: (i) sustainable land 
management practices have been adopted and implemented by communities through micro-
projects; (ii) a comprehensive policy and institutional framework to support sustainable agro-
ecological activities has been developed; thereby leading to the review, adoption, and 
implementation of legal text(s) on land use and land use plans at the provincial and community 
levels; (iii) land use planning and sustainable land management are implemented in a 
participatory manner, and GIS databases and maps are utilized by the project to track socio-
economic trends and patterns; (iv) the capacity of, and coordination among, key ministries have 
been strengthened to promote sound SLM policies, program and guidelines (at the national 
level); (v) the capacity of local communities has been strengthened with regards to the effects of 
land degradation on their welfare as well as means of integrating good practices into local and 
communal project planning; (vi) the capacity of NGOs to provide support on micro-projects (at 
the local level) has been strengthened; and (vii) project impacts and results have been monitored 
and disseminated.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1 - Support for local development: the objective is to support micro-projects based 
on needs expressed by the communities and focused on the adoption of sustainable land 
management practices, inter alia: mitigation measures for reducing soil erosion and water runoff, 
contour planting, renewal of degraded hillsides and pastures, ecologically sound water 
management, application of conservation tillage systems, crop cover, windbreaks, grassed 
waterways, etc.  
 
Component 2 - Support the decentralization process: the objective is to contribute to the 
development and reinforcement of policies, regulations, and institutional frameworks at 
decentralized levels to address land degradation and to integrate SLM issues into appropriate 
rural development policy frameworks. Building upon ongoing efforts by the Government, the 
project will support the review and adoption of legal text(s) on land use, with objective the 
preparation and implementation of a land use plan at the provincial and community levels.  
 
Component 3 - Enhancing capacity building: the objective is: (i) to reinforce capacity and 
coordination among key ministries to promote sound SLM policies, programs and guidelines; 
and (ii) to support capacity building and training of local communities to raise services-
providers’ awareness of the effects of land degradation on their welfare, as well as to integrate 
good practices into local and communal project planning. This will include: (i) preparing 
integrated land management plans, linked to training in simple land-use planning tools; (ii) 
sharing and disseminating knowledge on improved farming methods; and (iii) implementing 
practices entailing more efficient use of natural resources. Overall the project will facilitate the 
preparation and development of awareness-raising programs through local press, workshops and 
training seminars, for the benefit of targeted Communes, communities, NGOs and concerned 
line-ministries.  
 
Page  3
Component 4 - Supporting project management and coordination, monitoring and evaluation and 
communication: GEF activities will integrate monitoring and evaluation systems for land 
degradation, associated with predetermined indicators (see results expected and tentative 
indicators below). Screening criteria will be developed for micro-projects. It will be 
complemented by usage of the GIS-based land-use zoning map and associated MIS, which will 
facilitate optimal replication of activities to areas most vulnerable to land degradation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will intervene in four (4) Provinces -Adamaoua, North, Center, and West- in which 
approximately eight (8) sites will be selected based on the added-value of financing with GEF 
incremental funds versus IDA funds under the PNDP and additional criteria to be agreed upon 
with the borrower.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower is currently implementing the Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for the IDA Community Development 
Support Program (PNDP) as well as frameworks for other projects, and is acquiring capacity for 
their implementation.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No  TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This OP is triggered as a result of IDA-funded micro-projects which will be complemented 
by GEF micro-projects for sustainable land management. As necessary, the GEF project will 
implement the ESMF prepared in June 2003 for the IDA project to address any potential 
negative environmental impacts that might occur during its implementation.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
X
The project area includes indigenous peoples (Pygmies) and vulnerable groups (Bororo). The 
project will incorporate recommendations of the Indigenous People Development Plan (IPDP) 
that was prepared for the IDA Community Development Program Support Project as well as take 
into account the needs of the Bororo regarding animal husbandry.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
 
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
Page  4
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/12/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The ESMF for the IDA project (PNDP) already exists, and is relevant to the GEF project. 
Accordingly, it will be redisclosed in September 2005, before the appraisal mission. 
Similarly, the IPP already exists and will be redisclosed in September 2005, prior to 
appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ousmane Seck 
06/14/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
06/14/2005 
Comments:  It has been recommended to delegate the clearance responsibility to AFTS3; a memorandum to 
this effect will be sent by the Regional Safeguard Coordinator shortly. 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Joseph Baah-Dwomoh 
06/14/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
