The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Chad Value Chain Support Project (P133021)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


       Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Aug-2017| Report No: ISDSR23085




                       Regional Vice President:    Makhtar Diop
                              Country Director:    Soukeyna Kane
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Ceyla Ceyla Pazarbasioglu
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Consolate K. Rusagara
                            Task Team Leader:      Inoussa Ouedraogo, Mahaman Sani
            The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Chad Value Chain Support Project (P133021)




.

    I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

    Project ID                                                   Project Name
    P133021                                                      Chad Value Chain Support Project
    Task Team Leader(s)                                          Country
    Inoussa Ouedraogo                                            Chad
    Approval Date                                                Environmental Category
    22-May-2014                                                   Partial Assessment (B)
    Managing Unit                                                 Is this a Repeater project?
    GTC07

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

    Total Project Cost                                           Total Financing
    10,200,000.00                                                10,200,000.00
    Financing Gap
    0.00
    OLD_FIN_DTL
    Financing Source                                                                                         Amount
    International Development Association (IDA)                                                        10,200,000.00
    Total                                                                                              10,200,000.00



    2. PROJECT INFORMATION

    Current Project Development Objective
    The proposed project development objective is to improve: (i) targeted aspects of the business environment; and (ii) the
    performance of agro-pastoral value chains in the Republic of Chad.



.
           The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Chad Value Chain Support Project (P133021)




    3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION




.

    4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
       KNOWN)
    The project interventions will concentrate on areas with the most potential for MSME development in the
    meat value chain, e.g. Ndjamena and its peri-urban areas, where butchers and their associations, women
    meat processors and women dairy products producers are located.



    5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


    Alexandra C. Bezeredi, Social Safeguards Specialist
    Cheikh A. T. Sagna, Social Safeguards Specialist
    Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
    SAFEGUARD_TABLE
    6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED
     Safeguard Policies                      Triggered            Explanation
                                                                  This policy is triggered due to potential negative
                                                                  impacts that might occur under activities to be
                                                                  financed in component 2. These impacts are likely
                                                                  to be moderate and site-specific, consistent with EA
                                                                  category B. Potential environmental adverse
                                                                  impacts may occur during the rehabilitation of
                                                                  Diguel slaughter area and the construction of
                                                                  women milk processing units. The borrower has
     Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes                  prepared        an Environmental and Social
                                                                  Management Framework (ESMF) which was
                                                                  reviewed, consulted upon, and disclosed in country
                                                                  on March 17, 2014 and at the World Bank InfoShop
                                                                  on March 18, 2014 . The subprojects that were
                                                                  identified were subject to environmental and social
                                                                  screening. The Environmental and Social Impacts
                                                                  Notices were prepared for Farcha slaughterhouse
                                                                  that will receive only equipment while another
           The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Chad Value Chain Support Project (P133021)



                                                                       Environmental and social Impacts notice for Diguel
                                                                       Slaughter area is under preparation. It will be
                                                                       reviewed and disclosed prior any civil work started.
                                                                       The environmental and social prescription will be
                                                                       integrated in the rehabilitation bidding documents.
                                                                       The project activities are not expected to have
 Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)                No
                                                                       negative impacts on critical natural habitats.
 Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                         No                     The activities will not threaten any forest area
                                                                       The project activities will not involve the use of
 Pest Management (OP 4.09)                      No
                                                                       chemical pesticides.
                                                                       It not anticipate to have negative impact on
                                                                       physical cultural resources as the activities will be
 Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No                         limited in the specific area. nevertheless, the ESMF
                                                                       has provided procedures for handling with “chance
                                                                       finds? during implementation project activities.
                                                                       The project areas are not hosting the Indigenous
 Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)              No
                                                                       Peoples.
                                                                       The Involuntary Resettlement is not triggered as
                                                                       the activities are not anticipating land acquisition or
 Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)        No                     involuntary resettlement. Nevertheless, specific
                                                                       measures will be taken to ensure that gender issues
                                                                       are well addressed including GBV.
 Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                  No                     The project is not anticipating financing any dam.
 Projects on International Waterways (OP)                              The project is not anticipating to finance any
                                                No
 (BP 7.50)                                                             activity that could impact international waterways.
                                                                       The project does not anticipate any disputes in the
 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)      No
                                                                       targeted area.
KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A.     SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
      potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
      The project is classified as Category B and triggers OP 4.01 as potential environmental adverse impacts may occur
      during the implementation of the project activities. These potential adverse impacts are moderate and site-specific
      and would mainly result from the rehabilitation of no more than two slaughter areas. The ESMF that has been
      prepared identified the following safeguards issues: risks of pollution and nuisance due to civil works; insalubrity,
      odors, pollution and nuisances caused by solid and liquid waste, risks of accidents, risk of water ground pollution by
      liquid waste, risk of conflict by users during the exploitation phase. The initial evaluation remains relevant at the
      restructuring time of the project.
      The ESMF did not anticipate any potential large scale, significant adverse impacts.
       The World Bank                                                                                    RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Chad Value Chain Support Project (P133021)




2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  The assessment of the potential environmental and social adverse impacts identified the risk of pollution of ground
  water if the liquid wastes are not adequately managed.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  Due to limit resources, it was agreed to rehabilitate the national slaughterhouse of Farcha but to limit support only
  on equipment.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  As the exact locations of project activities were not known at the appraisal stage, an ESMF has been prepared which
  identifies potential environmental and social impacts of project activities and proposes adequate mitigation measures
  as well as a screening mechanism for sub-projects, guidance for the preparation of ESIAs and ESMPs when relevant,
  and institutional arrangements for the implementation of safeguards instruments.

  The ESMF was consulted upon, reviewed and subsequently disclosed on March 17, 2014 in country and on March 18,
  2014 at the world bank website.

  The Borrower prepared also An Environmental Impact Notice was prepared with associated ESMPs for Farcha
  slaughter house activities that will mainly be focused on purchasing slaughter house equipment.

  Due to the limited financial resources, the scope of the project was reduced and the rehabilitation will now be only
  focused on one slaughter area named Diguel and the construction of milk processing units in the areas that are already
  identified .
  The client will proceed to the environmental and social screening for each subprojects (Diguel slaughter area and mill
  processing units and at least a ESMPs will be prepared and environmental and social prescriptions incorporated in
  the bidding documents.

  It was also agreed that pilots activities related to local transformation of solid waste for biogas production will be
  developed.

  The project doesn’t trigger OP 4.12 as activities will take place on existing sites and the technical eligibility criteria of
  the matching grants under component 2 explicitly include the “presence of a production site, with material resources,
  and human capacity to realize the subproject?; consequently, the project will not fund any activity leading to new
  land acquisition or loss of assets or livelihoods. Nevertheless, particular attention will be given in gender issues and
  all risks related to GBV. Specific measures will be taken during the rehabilitation of the Diguel slaughter area to avoid
  economic loss for the women that are commercialized close of Diguel area. As the commercialization of meat
  activities are developed from 4 am to 7 am each day, it was agreed to ensure that the rehabilitation activities will be
  organized during the day when all women activities are completed.

  The Chadian National legislation specifies the circumstances and conditions under which it is mandatory to prepare
  the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and specifies that the “regulations determine the content, methodology
  and procedure for impact studies and the conditions under which these studies are made public and the ways in
            The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
            Chad Value Chain Support Project (P133021)



       which the Minister for Environment shall notify or be notified for any environmental impact assessment?. National
       Legislation on Environment and OP 4.01 converge, including on the classification of projects by category (A, B and C).

       Within the General Directorate of Environment, the Environmental Assessment, and Pollution and Nuisance Control
       Department (DEELCPN) is in charge to review the environmental and social instruments. The capacity of this
       department is weak due mainly to the limit number of staff, limit logistic means. The archive system of EA remain
       manual making difficult to find document.The Department prepares each year a report that is not publicly disclosed.

       The Project implementation Coordination Unit signed a MoU with the DEELPN who assigned a focal point. It was
       agreed that an environmental and social consultant will be hired for the remaining time of the project. This consultant
       will continue to work with the DEELCPN focal point and will ensure all environmental and social concerns are dully
       addressed and will also follow the firm that will ensure rehabilitation of slaughter areas and milk processing units.

       A consultation plan will be prepared to ensure all stakeholders are really informed timely.



     5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
       an emphasis on potentially affected people.
       The key stakeholders are the butchers’ federation with all their members, the women associations that are be
       involved in the milk processing units, the ministry of Environment, the Ministry of public health, ministry in charge of
       livestock, veterinians,   Traditional rulers in Diguel and the areas where milk processing units will be located,
       communal authorities. All these stakeholders were involved during the preparation of the relevant safeguards
       documents.

       The project will implement the consultation plan that was proposed in the ESMF which will be updated due reduction
       of the project scope.


DISCLOSURE_TABLE
B.    DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                       Date of submission for disclosure
13-Mar-2014                                                       18-Mar-2014
 For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


 “In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                             Date of Disclosure
 Chad                                                                17-Mar-2014
         The World Bank                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Chad Value Chain Support Project (P133021)



 Comments
 The ESMF disclosure remain relevant as no changes were made in the document.



COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                    Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                      Yes
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?   Yes



 PDI_TABLE
 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                      Yes
 disclosure?

 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
 and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups       Yes
 and local NGOs?



 ALL_TABLE
 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                      Yes
 prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                      Yes
 cost?

 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring
                                                                                      Yes
 of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower
                                                                                      Yes
 and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




III. APPROVALS
           The World Bank                                    RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Chad Value Chain Support Project (P133021)



                                         Inoussa Ouedraogo
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                         Mahaman Sani

    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor

    Practice Manager/Manager

.
