`
                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                          APPRAISAL STAGE
    .




                                                                           Report No.: 99763
    .




    Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:         August 11, 2015
    I. BASIC INFORMATION
        1. Basic Project Data


Country:                        Chile              Project ID:             P152820
Project Name:                   Technical Assistance for Geothermal Development
Task Team Leader:               Migara Jayawardena, Mariano González Serrano
Estimated Date of               October 29, 2015
Approval:
Managing Unit:                                     Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                                                       Financing
Sector(s):                      Other Renewable Energy (100%)
Theme(s):                       Climate Change (50%)
                                Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%)
Fragile and/or Capacity Constraints [        ]
Financing (in USD Million)
                                                    Total Bank             3.5
Total Project Cost:         4.05
                                                    Financing:
Total Complementary
                    (50)                            Financing Gap:
financing (IDB):
Financing Source                                                            Amount
ESMAP                                                                       0.5
Clean Technology Fund                                                       3
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.55
Complementary financing (IDB)                                               (50)
BORROWER/RECIPIENT Agencia de Cooperación Internacional – Ministerio de Relaciones
Exteriores (AGCI)
         Total                                                             4.05
Environmental                   B
Category
Is this a Repeater              No
project?
Is this a Transferred          No
project?

.


.




    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The development objective of the Technical Assistance for Sustainable Geothermal Development
    project is to assist the Government of Chile (GoC) in resolving specific barriers to improve the
    geothermal energy market conditions. By addressing key legal, social and market barriers, this
    technical assistance will contribute to the development of commercializeable geothermal resources.
.




    3. Project Description
    The activities in the proposed project will be carried out under the two components with the intention
    of comprehensively addressing several key barriers to geothermal development in Chile:

    Component 1: Improve policy framework and strengthen management capabilities to help
    mobilize investments in geothermal. This component will assist the GoC in addressing potential legal,
    regulatory and administrative burdens that are undermining market confidence and hampering the
    development of the geothermal sector. The component’s goal will be to dismantle some key constraints
    that have prevented investments from being mobilized for the substantial number of geothermal
    concessions in place.

    (a)     Review and reform geothermal concession management framework. A significant number of
    geothermal concessions remain in place with limited or no investments being made in exploration. To
    address this bottleneck, the geothermal concession process—including its eligibility criteria, terms and
    obligations, compliance and oversight, monitoring and evaluation procedures, and transparency and
    information dissemination aspects—will be reviewed and necessary reforms identified. Subsequent
    support will be provided to the GoC to implement key revisions to the concession management
    framework.

    (b)     Enhance legal and regulatory framework. A comprehensive review of the present Law on
    Geothermal Energy Concessions (No. 19.657), its implementing regulations, and other related policies
    and regulations that impact geothermal development will be undertaken. This review will aim to identify
    key shortcomings that contribute to the slow pace of investments in geothermal development. Revisions
    to the appropriate legal and regulatory instruments will be made in order to create incentives and to
    provide greater certainty for sector investments. Modifications also will be sought in related policy
    frameworks that are identified as being critical to the sector’s successful development.

    (c)      Capacity building and institutional strengthening. Given the nascent state of geothermal
    development in Chile, there is limited capacity within the Ministry of Energy (MoE) to support
    development and oversight of the sector. The project will mobilize specialists with global expertise in
    geothermal development, including a full-time Technical Advisor who will work with MoE to enhance
    its institutional capacity. In order to meet evolving sector needs, global geothermal specialists
    associated with the World Bank will support the MoE on an as-needed basis. This pool of experts will
    cover a broad spectrum of expertise, including legal, technical (exploration, drilling, and power),
    economic, financial, social and environmental areas. There also will be a provision for ad-hoc, just-in-
    time support to address unanticipated issues, providing sufficient flexibility in mobilizing international
    expertise to help develop and and support the implementation of the proposed reforms. Since the World
    Bank is administering the overall CTF Grant, an administrative fee (Multilateral Development Bank -
    MDB fee) of 5% of the grant amount (US$ 140,000), will also be applied to cover the administrative
costs such as project supervision, procurement oversight, and compliance with safeguards.

(d)       Stakeholder engagement to address social and environmental considerations of geothermal
development. A stakeholder engagement strategy, informed by a social assessment, will be developed
to improve engagement with affected communities and to increase knowledge and awareness of
scientific, social and environmental aspects of geothermal development among stakeholders, including
indigenous peoples. Activities will include, among other things, developing communication materials
and guidance notes, facilitating knowledge exchange, and strengthening consultation processes by
facilitating stakeholders’ access to independent expertise.


Component 2: Enhance market conditions for promoting sustainable development of the sector.
The sustainable, long-term development of geothermal would depend on successfully facilitating the
multi-stage development process, from exploration to power plant operation. In order to scale-up and
sustain development, it will be important to mobilize risk capital beyond the support of CTF, to expand
the overall market size of the sector to achieve economies of scale, and to better integrate geothermal
into the overall power sector in Chile. Component 2 undertakes several key reform activities focused on
longer-term, sustained sector development. These activities include:

(e)     Geothermal resource risk mitigation framework to help mobilize investments in exploration and
production drilling. Through the project, the Bank will support the design and preparation of a
geothermal risk mitigation framework based on successful international experience and customized for
the specific circumstances of the Chilean geothermal and energy markets. It will identify the most
suitable ways in which risk capital can be mobilized toward early stage drilling, and help design an
incentive framework to catalyze developer action in line with the overall GoC development goals and
with the goals for the expansion of the Chilean geothermal sector. With the GoC, the IDB has developed
MiRiG, which will initiate support to at least two specific geothermal projects in addressing their
technical, financial and commercial viability. The proposed CTF and Bank technical assistance will
complement MiRiG support by addressing some of the key shortcomings developers face. In turn, the
experience of MiRiG will create a feedback loop and inform the design of the risk mitigation framework.

(f)      Integration of geothermal power in the broader power market in Chile. There is a need to
rationalize the scale and timeframe for geothermal expansion in Chile and to ensure that the country’s
power markets can adequately integrate geothermal into their respective systems. This is essential in
order to provide sufficient incentives for geothermal developers to invest in the multiple stages of
upstream and downstream development. This activity will carry out a comprehensive analysis of the two
large power markets in Chile, the markets’ bidding and PPA conditions, potential non-rewarded
externalities of geothermal and the social justification for deploying an incentive framework. The
analysis will lead to design and development of market incentives for expanding geothermal utilization
commensurate with the development goals of the country. The proposed project will help the GoC
implement the selected reforms and incentives within the broader power market in order to promote
geothermal development.

(g)      Design of a strategy to enhance geothermal competitiveness in the long term by exploring
synergies with alternate uses and related domestic sectors. Based on the few fields where there has been
drilling, there is evidence that initial investments in geothermal can be costly on a financial basis. This
is especially the case with drilling, particularly due to the rugged terrain, limited duration of drilling due
to weather conditions that restrict drilling time, and the remote location of many sites. There may be
existing industries in Chile that can suitably provide services at lower costs, if they are sufficiently
developed to support geothermal development. Combining other purposes, such as direct use of low
and medium enthalpy geothermal, the overall viability of geothermal projects may be enhanced by
    taking advantage of co-benefits of the technology. An industrial analysis and a study on the uses of low
    and medium enthalpy geothermal will be carried out to identifying approaches and incentives that may
    be required to promote these uses in order to expand geothermal markets and to capture the benefits of
    cost reductions and greater economies of scale. Such efforts will contribute to transforming the current
    nascent geothermal sector into a robust one over time.

    4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
    (if known)
      The project will address the geothermal policy framework for the country of Chile. Chile has
      geothermal resources throughout much of the Andes that extend north-south throughout the country.
      There is a concentration of geothermal resources identified in the far north and central-south regions,
      but it is possible that projects (including low enthalpy direct uses) may be developed in multiple
      regions in Chile. Geothermal resources have been identified in environmentally, economically,
      and/or culturally sensitive areas and in areas where indigenous peoples are present, and concessions
      for exploration have been awarded without prior consultation. Current regulations in Chile stipulate
      developers are only legally obliged to consult with local communities after exploration occurs.
      Communities near projects are generally uninformed about the potential impact of exploration
      activities, and often mistrusting. In several areas, consultation processes are currently being
      undertaken between developers, the relevant government departments and the indigenous
      communities.

      The project will entail direct technical advisory support to the Ministry of Energy, analytical and
      diagnostic studies, capacity building and institutional strengthening as well as information,
      engagement and consultation activities with key stakeholders. The project support will not include
      any physical investment or the implementation of any geothermal program on the ground. While the
      project is conceived as mostly technical assistance and direct advisory support at this stage, key policy
      and regulatory reforms and changes in the geothermal sector will be recommended for
      implementation in the future that will have downstream impact. The analytical and diagnostic
      studies as well as the engagement and consultations with key stakeholders that will be supported
      through this project will be used to manage any potential risks associated with future procedures/
      frameworks being proposed for the geothermal sector in Chile.
.




    5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
    Noreen Beg ( GENDR )
    Peter LaFere ( GSURR )
.




    6. Safeguard Policies                          Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
    Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01            Yes             The policy is triggered as this is an
                                                                   upstream TA project that will provide
                                                                   direct technical support to the Ministry
                                                                   of Energy on developing provisions and
                                                                   guidelines on issues in the geothermal
                                                                   sector which will indirectly have bearing
                                                                   on environmental and social
                                                                   management issues relating to the
                                                                   geothermal exploration and generation.
                                                                   Existing country guidelines (including
but not limited to the Guía para la
Evaluación de Impacto Ambiental de
Centrales Geotérmicas de Generación
de Energía Eléctrica, prepared in 2012,
which serves as a guideline for
Environmental Impact Assessment for
geothermal energy generation and is
generally consistent with the World
Bank Group EHS Guidelines on
Geothermal Power) and legislation
referenced below, will be used as a basis.

Environmental assessment evaluation of
the majority of infrastructure projects
(process described below) is managed by
the Servicio de Evaluación Ambiental,
an agency that is based within the MMA,
(Ministerio de Medio Ambiente). The
procedure followed in determining the
requirement for a full Environmental
Impact Assessment is largely in line with
OP 4.01, with the one exception that
project alternatives are not explicitly
considered within the scope of the
EIA. Given that the development of
geothermal energy is entirely linked to
the existence of the resource in a specific
location, project alternatives would
generally be limited to the specific
infrastructure works, generation
technologies, and wastes-emissions
management issues among others as well
as not to proceed with the project.

The Project Environment and Social
Specialists will review Terms of
Reference (ToRs) for all studies
prepared as part of the Project, to ensure
that all environmental and social
concerns related to geothermal
exploration in Chile are adequately
addressed. This work will include a
review of any stakeholder mapping
exercises already conducted, whether
there are any special provisions under
existing law for geothermal development
in protected areas, etc.

It is understood that the draft law
governing geothermal energy
development will not directly address
environmental management, as this is
regulated under the following laws:

 Ley No 19.300, (Sobre Bases Generales
del Medio Ambiente); DS No 40, (del
Ministerio del Medio Ambiente,
Reglamento del Sistema de Evaluación
de Impacto Ambiental; and Ley No
19.880, (Establece Bases de los
Procedimientos Administrativos que
Rigen los Actos de los Órganos de la
Administración del Estado)

With regard to the ToR for the analytical
review of the existing concessions
already granted, social and/or
environmental concerns impeding the
development of geothermal in Chile,
such as land acquisition/land
use/protected habitats, will be examined,
and proposals will be made as to how
such concerns might be remedied in
future concessions (and existing
concessions in the event that
amendments to existing contracts are
permitted). Any advice related to
remedial issues will be consistent with
World Bank Policy.

A Social Assessment will be conducted
in order to scope and identify key issues
with stakeholders and inform strategic
planning in the geothermal sector. This
social assessment will provide the basis
to commence an interactive process with
stakeholders on areas of environmental
or social importance such as the impacts
of water abstraction during exploration
and drilling; impacts of hydrogen sulfide
emissions on sensitive receptors;
sensitivity around areas of cultural,
archaeological, and historical
importance, land acquisition and private
property rights; indigenous rights and
consultations; and effects on natural
flora and fauna.

All TA activities, recommendations, and
advice, will be consistent with the
                                               objectives and requirements of World
                                               Bank OP 4.01 and the Bank Group
                                               General and industry specific EHS
                                               Guidelines.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              Yes   This is an upstream TA project that will
                                               provide direct technical support to the
                                               Ministry of Energy on developing
                                               provisions and guidelines on issues in
                                               the geothermal sector. The project
                                               support will not include any physical
                                               investment or the implementation of any
                                               geothermal program on the ground.

                                               All TA activities, recommendations, and
                                               advice, will be consistent with the
                                               objectives and requirements of the
                                               World Bank’s OP 4.04.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       Yes   This is an upstream TA project that will
                                               provide direct technical support to the
                                               Ministry of Energy on developing
                                               provisions and guidelines on issues in
                                               the geothermal sector. The project
                                               support will not include any physical
                                               investment or the implementation of any
                                               geothermal program on the ground

                                               The SEA works closely with CONAF
                                               (Corporación Nacional Forestal) which
                                               is responsible for protection of
                                               indigenous forests (including trees that
                                               are designated as Natural Monuments)
                                               and xerophytic formations. They also
                                               administer protected forests.

                                               All TA activities, recommendations, and
                                               advice, will be consistent with the
                                               objectives and requirements of the
                                               World Bank’s OP 4.36
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No    The Project activities will not include
                                               purchase of pesticides or provide TA that
                                               could lead to increased use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes   This is an upstream TA project that will
                                               provide direct technical support to the
                                               Ministry of Energy on developing
                                               provisions and guidelines on issues in
                                               the geothermal sector. The project
                                               support will not include any physical
                                               investment or the implementation of any
                                               geothermal program on the ground.
                                      Nevertheless, given the likelihood that
                                      geothermal development will take places
                                      in areas populated and/or owned by
                                      indigenous peoples, for whom certain
                                      physical features hold cultural and
                                      religious significance, the Social
                                      Assessment will include this topic, and
                                      will propose a consultation and feedback
                                      mechanism to enable stakeholders to
                                      voice any grievances or concerns.

                                      It should be noted that any project,
                                      regardless of scope, requires a full EIA if
                                      indigenous peoples are affected, given
                                      their status as a protected people under
                                      the Ley Indígena.

                                      All TA activities, recommendations, and
                                      advice, will be consistent with the
                                      objectives and requirements of the
                                      World Bank’s OP 4.11.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10   Yes   The policy is triggered as the TA project
                                      will provide direct technical support to
                                      the Ministry of Energy on developing
                                      provisions and guidelines for a policy
                                      framework on sustainable development
                                      of the geothermal sector across the
                                      country, including in areas where
                                      indigenous people are present. The TA
                                      will, however, not identify or
                                      specifically endorse any energy projects,
                                      and will not finance any feasibility
                                      studies, technical engineering studies, or
                                      bidding documents.

                                      The project will provide technical advice
                                      to the Ministry of Energy on the
                                      development of a new concession law
                                      for geothermal development which will
                                      include social and environmental aspects
                                      and links with existing legislation such
                                      as the Ley Indigena no. 19,253 and the
                                      Decreto Supremo no. 66. The project
                                      will also strengthen the capacity of both
                                      the Ministry of Energy and indigenous
                                      groups to enhance potential downstream
                                      consultation processes.

                                      The Social Assessment (SA) will include
                                      an evaluation of all potential impacts
                                            (positive and adverse) on Indigenous
                                            Peoples that may originate from the
                                            current and proposed draft concession
                                            law. The SA will inform the provision
                                            of technical advice on how a stakeholder
                                            engagement strategy should be
                                            undertaken.

                                            The stakeholder engagement strategy is
                                            aimed at increasing knowledge and
                                            awareness of geo-scientific, social and
                                            environmental aspects of geothermal
                                            development among stakeholders,
                                            including indigenous communities, and
                                            to improve engagement and
                                            consultations with indigenous and non-
                                            indigenous communities. To this effect,
                                            the project will also finance the
                                            implementation of select activities of the
                                            stakeholder engagement strategy,
                                            including the organization of relevant
                                            study tours for the Ministry of Energy
                                            and key stakeholders representing
                                            Indigenous Groups, the provision of
                                            specific technical advice on request of
                                            stakeholders and the development of
                                            outreach materials.

                                            The project will coordinate closely with
                                            the División de Participación y Diálogo
                                            Social in the Ministry of Energy in
                                            developing policy recommendations and
                                            will actively engage and consult with
                                            indigenous peoples’ organizations to
                                            seek their feedback.

                                            All TA activities, recommendations, and
                                            advice, will be consistent with the
                                            objectives and requirements of the
                                            World Bank’s OP 4.10.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12   Yes   The policy is triggered as the TA project
                                            will provide direct technical support to
                                            the Ministry of Energy on developing
                                            provisions and guidelines including on
                                            the management of issues of involuntary
                                            resettlement, land acquisition,
                                            concessions, access to protected areas in
                                            the course of proposing relevant legal,
                                            regulatory and procedural reforms for
                                            the geothermal sector. Existing country
                                                                   guidelines and legislation regarding
                                                                   involuntary resettlement, and land
                                                                   acquisition will be reviewed as part of
                                                                   the implementation of the TA project.

                                                                   All TA activities, recommendations, and
                                                                   advice, will be consistent with the
                                                                   objectives and requirements of the
                                                                   World Bank’s OP 4.12.

                                                                   No resettlement instruments are required
                                                                   because activities will not result in land
                                                                   acquisition or involuntary resettlement.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                     No               The Project will not support the
                                                                   construction or rehabilitation of dams
                                                                   nor will support other investments which
                                                                   rely on the services of existing dams.
    Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No                   The Project will not affect international
    7.50                                                           waterways as defined under the policy
                                                                   nor will the Technical Assistance
                                                                   prepare any projects that would directly
                                                                   utilize underground geothermal
                                                                   resources.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60         No               The Project will not affect disputed areas
                                                                   as defined under the policy.
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
    describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    This is an upstream TA project that will provide direct technical support to the Ministry of Energy on
    developing provisions and guidelines on issues in the geothermal sector. The project support will not
    include any physical investment or the implementation of any geothermal program on the ground.
    Therefore, this TA project will not have any direct large scale, significant or irreversible
    environmental impacts.

    The stakeholder engagement process and strategy aims to address social and environmental
    considerations of geothermal development, will enhance consultations with stakeholders (including
    Indigenous Peoples), and could result in significant positive impacts if transparently and effectively
    implemented.
    2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
    the project area:
    This is an upstream TA project that will provide direct technical support to the Ministry of Energy on
    developing provisions and guidelines on issues in the geothermal sector. The project support will not
    include any physical investment or the implementation of any geothermal program on the ground. It
    is however, expected that geothermal energy development will lead to increased industrial activity in
    areas immediately surrounding geothermal development areas as downstream development of the
sector will require the construction of access roads and transmission lines.

A number of the locations with geothermal energy potential are in areas where Indigenous Peoples are
present, in protected forests, or in areas with a cultural significance and potential for touristic
development. In these areas, stakeholders may be sensitive to increased geothermal development.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
No project alternatives were considered given that i) geothermal power generation is a key component
of the GoC Energy Strategy to boost the utilization of renewable energy and diversify the country’s
power generation mix; ii) there is a low likelihood that adverse social or environmental impacts will
originate from Technical Assistance; and iii) no site specific impacts/alternatives can be assessed in a
Technical Assistance operation. It is expected that the enhancement of the policy and regulatory
framework by taking into account social and environmental considerations will contribute to avoiding
potential adverse downstream impacts.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The borrower will undertake a broad based Social Assessment to evaluate the positive and adverse
impacts of the proposed changes in the legal and regulatory framework, including and specifically on
Indigenous Peoples. The Social Assessment will also inform the stakeholder engagement strategy with
a view on improving consultation and participation of Indigenous Peoples throughout potential
downstream geothermal development projects. The findings and recommendations of the Social
Assessment will be developed, consulted and disclosed in accordance with OP 4.10.

The División de Participación y Diálogo Social in the Ministry of Energy was established in 2014 and
has the specific objective to engage with communities and listen to their concerns in regards to energy
projects. The division is well staffed, technically strong, and has been actively engaged in the
consultation processes among geothermal developers, Chilean local and national authorities, and
Indigenous Peoples. Technical Assistance activities include capacity building of the División,
including providing international expertise to aid the implementation of the stakeholder engagement
strategy and improve on the management, evaluation, and consultation processes of downstream
geothermal development activities.

The environmental management and evaluation process in Chile is regulated under the following laws

Ley No 19.300, (Sobre Bases Generales del Medio Ambiente); DS No 40, (del Ministerio del Medio
Ambiente, Reglamento del Sistema de Evaluación de Impacto Ambiental; and Ley No 19.880,
(Establece Bases de los Procedimientos Administrativos que Rigen los Actos de los Órganos de la
Administración del Estado)

The Servicio de Evaluación Ambiental, an agency that is based within the MMA, (Ministerio de Medio
Ambiente) is responsible for the environmental approval process of the majority of infrastructure
projects, including energy generation facilities that are greater than 3 MW, HV transmission lines, and
associated substations. Applications are made to the SEA describing the proposed project, and based
on the level of environmental impact, either a Declaration of Environmental Impact (DIA) or a full
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) is prepared. An EIA is required if it is determined that one of
the following conditions exists: (1) risk to human health (for example, as a result of air or water
pollution); (2) risk to natural resources (e.g., groundwater, trees) (c) resettlement or alteration to a
community’s livelihood (4) protected species are in the project area, and (5) protected peoples
(indigenous communities) live in the project area.

The difference between the DIA and EIA is the level of information provided, and the proposal of
concrete measures to mitigate impacts in the case of an EIA. Both are made public prior to final
approval. Consultations are only held on the DIA if there are any perceived environmental issues and
it is requested by stakeholders. Consultations are always held on the EIA, and always when indigenous
peoples are present in the project area (as their presence automatically triggers the requirement for a
full EIA). EIAs are comprehensive documents, and also include social issues, such as payment of
compensation and resettlement plans.

Both DIAs and EIAs are submitted for evaluation to the Administracion del Estado con Competencia
Ambiental (OAECA), and at the same time are made available to the public. Any requests for
clarification, correction or amplification are submitted to the EIA preparer ( the project sponsor) and
after further review by SEA ( Informe Consolidado de Evaluacion - ICE) the Evaluation Committee
(which includes all concerned ministries – Hydrology, SNASPE – Sistema Nacional de Areas
Silvestre Protegidas por el Estado) , Agriculture, Roads, CONAF, etc.) issues a Resolucion
Calificacion Ambiental (RCA).

It is important to note that all environmental permits are still required for smaller projects that do not
require a DIA or EIA. It is just that there is no consolidated process for approval, and the project
sponsor must apply separately for permits from each ministry for each project. The process of
application is explained in detail on the website of the Ministry of Energy:
http://infopermisoselectricos.minenergia.cl/sitemap

Grievances (in the case of a DIA) are directed to the Executive Director of SEA, and in the case of the
EIA, to a Committee of Ministers. Following a submission to the Committee of Ministers, appeals can
be made through an Environmental Tribunal, then to the Court of Appeals, and finally to the Supreme
Court.

The procedure followed in determining the requirement for a full Environmental Impact Assessment,
and the required contents of an EIA, are largely in line with OP 4.01, with the one exception that
project alternatives are not explicitly considered within the scope of the EIA. However, given that the
development of geothermal energy is entirely linked to the existence of the resource in a specific
location, the project alternative would be not to proceed with the project at all.

The SEA is a well-staffed and technically robust agency. While the environment team within the
Ministry of Energy itself performs largely a liaison function, officers in the Sustainable Energy
Division of the Ministry of Energy are well–versed in the environmental evaluation process, and have
on-staff geologists and engineers who are familiar with the environmental impact of geothermal
energy development (for example, heavier groundwater use during the exploration phase/disposal of
brine during generation).

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders are the División de Participación y Diálogo Social in the Ministry of Energy who
will continue supporting geothermal developers and local communities in the consultation processes,
the geothermal developers, Indigenous Peoples Organizations and Civil Society Organizations
representing Indigenous Peoples at national, regional and local levels. Key stakeholders are also
    Indigenous Peoples present in areas where geothermal concessions were granted to private developers
    under previous laws and were geothermal exploration or exploitation might occur downstream.

    The development of the Social Assessment in the first phase of the Technical Assistance project is a
    key component of the implementation of the safeguards policies and will include a detailed description
    of the stakeholders, the positive and adverse impacts on different groups of the population, and
    recommendations for the stakeholder engagement strategy. The SA will be consulted with
    stakeholders and will be disclosed publicly in country and through Infoshop in accordance with the
    provisions and spirit of OP 4.10.

.




    B. Disclosure Requirements
    Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
    Date of receipt by the Bank
    Date of submission to InfoShop
    For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
    EA to the Executive Directors
    "In country" Disclosure
    If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
    respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
    Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
    If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

.




    C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
    OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [ ]        No [ X ]     NA [   ]

    If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager Yes [     ]   No [ X ]     NA [   ]
    (PM) review and approve the EA report?
    Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in   Yes [    ]   No [ X ]     NA [   ]
    the credit/loan?
    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [      ]   No [ ]       NA [ X ]
    Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [    ]   No [     ]   NA [ X ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
    to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional          Yes [    ]   No [ ]       NA [ X ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in     Yes [ X ]   No [ ]   NA [   ]
    the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [ X ]   No [ ]   NA [   ]
    the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
    safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [   ]   No [ ]   NA [ X ]
    the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
    legal documents?
.
.




    III. APPROVALS
.




    Task Team Leader(s):           Name: Mariano Gonzalez
    Approved By:
    Practice Manager/Manager:      Name: Antonio Barbalho                    Date: 24-Sep-2015
