                            Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
Section I ­ Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: November 2, 2005
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
COUNTRY: Republic of Chile                   PROJECT ID: P096469
PROJECT: CL ­ Composting in Santiago         TTL: Dan Hoornweg
Project
APPRAISAL DATE: December 19, 2005            IBRD AMOUNT ($m): 40
BOARD DATE: Not applicable
MANAGING UNIT: LCSEN                         SECTOR: Solid Waste Management
                                             (100%)
LENDING INSTRUMENTS: Purchase of             THEME: Climate Change
Emission Reductions




                                                                             1

Project Objectives (From PDS)


The objective of the Santiago Composting Project is to build and operate a composting facility to treat
urban biodegradable waste and non-toxic wastewater sludge. The plant will use at least 20 percent of the
organic waste generated in Metropolitan Santiago. On average, the composting plant will treat
approximately 216,000 tons of waste per year that would be disposed in a sanitary landfill if the plant were
not constructed.

The Santiago Composting Project will mitigate nearly 326,000 tCO2-e per year and will receive Certified
Emission Reductions (CERs), often referred as carbon credits. In the context of the Clean Development
Mechanism (CDM), these carbon credits are based on the difference in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
between the most likely future practices (known as baseline scenario) and proposed practice due to project
activities (known as project scenario). The difference in GHG emissions of CO2 sequestration is called
"additionality". By avoiding methane production (a GHG 21 times more potent than CO2) through
composting of organic wastes, and producing CO2 (the less potent GHG), the Project will contribute to a
reduction in the impact on climate change and is therefore eligible to receive carbon credits.

The Santiago Composting Project will also contribute towards achieving sustainable
waste management in the city. The design and operation of this Project, in conjunction
with the avoidance of methane emissions and production of compost as a soil amendment
(and a source of revenues), will serve as an example to many other urban areas in the
country that are facing similar waste management challenges. The Project will also
demonstrate that the carbon credit finance mechanism can catalyze environmentally
sustainable and profitable waste management practices. The project is the first of its type
in Latin America.

The carbon credit component of the Santiago Composting Project will be funded by the Prototype Carbon
Fund (PCF), which is managed by the World Bank. PCF supports projects which are expected to generate
GHG emission reductions (ER) while complying with requirements of the CDM of the Kyoto Protocol
(KP), Article 12.

The Santiago Composting Project has two key performance indicators and corresponding goals:

    ·    Maximize the generation of CO2 ERs ­ project is expected to produce at least
         6.52 million tons of C02-e in ERs over 20 years, which will be achieved by
         annually treating an average of 216,000 tons of biodegradable waste and non-
         toxic sludge;
    ·    Minimize health and environmental risks ­ the project will follow the guidelines
         proposed in the Compost Quality Norm 2000 developed by CONAMA
         ("Comisión Nacional del Medio Ambiente"), which prohibits the use of hazardous
         and infectious organic waste in composting. The project will provide a critical
         component in Santiago's overall waste management program.

Payments by PCF for ERs achieved during the project cycle are to be made in accordance
to the Emission Reduction Purchase Agreement (ERPA). Such payments typically follow
annual certification of ERs and are only provided upon verifies successful facility
operations.




                                                                                                           2

Project Description (From PDS)

The proposed Santiago Composting Project has two main components: waste
management through composting, and carbon credits based on methane avoidance.

- Composting plant. The Project will include investments in a compost facility for
treating biodegradable waste generated from Metropolitan Santiago. It will also treat non-
toxic sludge produced from wastewater treatment plants within the city. Today, almost
100% of Santiago's wastes are disposed in sanitary landfills. In contrast to the anaerobic
decay of biodegradable waste in landfills and the resultant emissions of methane,
composting involves an aerobic decomposition of organic waste, with generation of only
CO2.

There are no official statistics on the market for biodegradable waste disposed in Santiago. Nevertheless,
Agroindustrial Pullihue Ltda. (the Project Sponsor) conducted a study of the composition of biodegradable
wastes generated within the city during the year 2001. The findings of the study are as follows:

    ·    Yard trimmings: 670 tons per month
    ·    Fruits and vegetables: 11,090 tons per month
    ·    Sawmill waste: 500 tons per month
    ·    Animal manure: 300 tons per month
    ·    Industrial organic waste: 65,000 tons per month

These estimates did not include sanitary sludge because wastewater treatment plants were not operating at
that time. Recent analysis nonetheless suggests that currently operating wastewater treatment plants
generate about 5,760 tons of sludge per month (dry weight).

Above estimates indicate that organic waste production in Santiago is at least 83,320 tons per month. Since
the compost facility will treat 18,000 tons of waste per month at full capacity, the project can treat about 22
percent of Santiago's total organic wastes.

- Carbon purchases. The avoidance of methane emissions through composting (and the production of only
CO2 ­ which is a much less potent GHG than methane) will generate ERs which can be monitored,
independently verified, and sold to the PCF. The income resulting from the ER sales will help eliminate the
financial barriers to implementing this project and promote GHG mitigation projects throughout Chile.
(Preliminary project financial analysis shows that without carbon finance, the project would have an IRR of
-5.49%; the corresponding IRR with carbon finance included is 34.19% at an assumed price of US$
5/tCO2e.)

The Carbon Finance Unit of the World Bank, on behalf of the PCF, recommends a
purchase of ERs amounting to approximately 2 million tCO2-e during a contract period
up to 2012 (i.e., first 7 years of project operation), at a price to be negotiated in the range
of US$ 4.50 to US$ 5.00 per tCO2-e. The CFU has also agreed to pay up to an additional
US $0.2/tCO2e for community benefits, if the sponsors create an appropriate plan for the
allocation of this amount. This component, if implemented, may add US $400k to the
ERPA ($0.2/tCO2e x 2MtCO2e). Therefore, the ERPA could reach $10.4M. However,
final price may vary depending on residual risk, price negotiation and final estimates of
the CDM related project costs.

Total carbon purchases will include recovery of project preparation expenses such as those related to
baseline establishment, validation, monitoring, verification and certification. The purchases by PCF will
represent 100% of the potential ERs produced in an average year, until year 2012. (Additional ERs may be
optioned to purchase beyond this date).


                                                                                                              3

Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social characteristics of the
area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical natural habitats, or
any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)


The Project will be implemented in the city of Santiago. Specifically, it will be located on 50 ha of property
owned by the Universidad de Chile, "Rinconada de Maipu," within the Municipality of Maipu. The
Municipality of Maipú covers an area of about 13,550 ha which is largely urban, and has 468,390
inhabitants. The climate is Mediterranean, with hot dry summers (November to March) and temperatures
reaching 32 degrees Celsius in some days. The winters (June to August) are more humid with maximum
temperatures of 15 degrees Celsius being the norm, and minimum temperatures of a few degrees above
freezing. Mean rainfall is 360 mm per year.


B. Check Environmental Classification A [ ], B [X}, C [ ], FI [ ], TBD [ ]
Comments:
The Environmental Assessment (EA) prepared by the sponsor concluded that environmental impacts of the
project are expected to be minimal and manageable given the planned activities. In fact, the project has a
strong environmental emphasis from both a global and local perspective.


C. Applicability of Safeguard Policies (from PDS)
Click on Policy name for brief summary of objectives, triggers and requirements
Click on Policy reference number for full policy
                                                                                 Yes         No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                                         [X]         [ ]        [ ]
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                                            [ ]         [X]        [ ]
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                    [ ]         [X]        [ ]
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                      [ ]         [X]        [ ]
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                        [ ]         [X]        [ ]
Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.30)                                               [ ]         [X]        [ ]
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                     [ ]         [X]        [ ]
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                    [ ]         [X]        [ ]
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                                      [ ]         [X]        [ ]
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)                              [ ]         [X]        [ ]


Section II ­ Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project
Project interventions would trigger the Bank's Environmental Assessment Safeguard Policy OP 4.01. To
comply with this policy, the project sponsor has prepared and completed an Environmental Assessment
(EA); the Environmental Management Plan includes specific provisions to be implemented during the
construction and operation phases of the plant.




*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the
parties'claims on the disputed areas



                                                                                                                          4

2. Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Describe any potential cumulative or long term impacts.
The Environmental Assessment prepared by the sponsor concluded that environmental impacts of the
project are expected to be minimal and manageable given the planned activities. In fact, the project has a
strong environmental emphasis from both a global and local perspective.

From the global perspective, the project will avoid approximately 2,881,080 tons of CO2e emissions to the
atmosphere during the first 10 years of operation. These estimates do not include the greenhouse gas
benefits of the reduced need for synthetic fertilizer in agriculture. As this practice is associated with large
CO2 emissions during manufacture and transport, and important N2O releases during use, according to
USDA research compost usage can reduce fertilizer requirements by at least 20% and thereby significantly
reduce net GHG emissions.


From a local environmental perspective, composting urban biodegradable waste would reduce the pressure
over sanitary landfills in Santiago, and therefore avoid land use for this purpose and its degradation. In
addition, the compost produced in the plant can be used as an important input for the recovery of degraded
land and for the construction and maintenance of gardens, parks and green areas in general. As the usual
substrate used for these purposes consists of accumulated organic material of pre-mountainous forest
environments, providing these markets with compost would help in conserving these valuable ecosystems.

The two most important identified impacts were the increase in traffic, and odor problems. In both cases,
the EMP adequately takes care of these matters.


3. In light of 1 and 2, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not applicable.
4. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The borrower in collaboration with the project preparation team (including consultants)
has prepared the appropriate Environmental Management Plan, which will be revised and
finalized during the project appraisal period.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The main stakeholders are in the consultation process coordinated by CONAMA; the final report will be
available to the Bank before the Decision Meeting. Once approved by CONAMA and satisfactory to the
Bank, the EA will be available at the offices of the sponsors and in World Bank's Infoshop before appraisal.


E. Safeguards Classification (select one). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and
institutional risks in management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their
impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven
development or similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic
approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements




                                                                                                                    5

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                     November xx, 2005
Date of "in-country" disclosure                 November xx, 2005
Date of submission to InfoShop                  November xx, 2005
For category A projects, date of distributing   N/A
the Executive Summary of the EA to the EDs
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:
Date of receipt by the Bank                     N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure                 N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop                  N/A
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:
Date of receipt by the Bank                     N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure                 N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop                  N/A
Pest Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                     N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure                 N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop                  N/A
Dam Safety Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                     N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure                 N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop                  N/A
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain
why.

Signed and submitted by:
Task Team Leader:                               Dan Hoornweg           Date: xxxxx/2005
Project Safeguards Specialist 1 (Environment):  Roberto Gabriel Aiello Date: xxxx/2005
Project Safeguards Specialist 2:                                       Date: xxxxx/2005
Project Safeguards Specialist 3:                                       Date: xxxxx/2005
Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator                                        Date:
Sector Manager                                  Abel Mejia             Date: xxxx/2005




                                                                                          6

