Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC949 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: August 10, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P086505 
Project Name: CN-Ningbo Water and 
Environment Management Project 
Task Team Leader: Greg Browder 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 8, 
2004 
Estimated Board Date: May 13, 2005 
Managing Unit: EASUR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (50%);Sewerage 
(50%) 
Theme: Pollution management and 
environmental health (P);Water resource 
management (P);Municipal governance and 
institution building (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Peishen Wang, Zhefu Liu 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: $164 million 
Other financing amounts by source:  
Ningbo Water Supply Company:  
Cixi Sewage Company Limited:   
Ningbo Municipal Government:   
($m) 
93 
70 
3
B.  Project Objectives  
 
The Project development objective is to facilitate the expansion of water and wastewater services 
in Ningbo City and Cixi County, and thereby protect public health, improve the environment, 
and sustain the area’s rapid economic growth.  
 
C.  Project Description  
 
The  Project will include the following three components.  The total estimated cost is US$324 
million, with US$164 million in IBRD financing. The Project Management Office (PMO) will 
be under the Planning Commission, and the two implementing agencies will be the Ningbo 
Water Supply Company (NWSC) and the Cixi Sewage Company Limited (CSCL). 
 
Component 1: Ningbo Water Supply
(US$185 million; IBRD-US$94 million):The component 
includes: i)  raw water supply line consisting of an intake tower in Jiakou reservoir and a 9.6 km 
Page  2
tunnel; ii) 500,000 m3/day Maojiaping water treatment plant; and iii) treated water transmission 
pipes, including a 37 km main from Maojiaping to a new 47 km ring main around Ningbo City. 
The component is a significant part of Ningbo’s overall plan to cover the entire City, improve  
water quality by accessing new water sources and upgrading water treatment, and enhance 
distribution system reliability and flexibility.  
 
Component 2: Cixi Wastewater
(US$132 million; IBRD-US$64 million):The component 
includes: i) two wastewater treatment plants, one located in  the north of Cixi (100,000 m3/day) 
and one in the east (50,000 m3/d); and ii) associated collection system mains and link sewers 
(230 km of pipe and 58 pump stations).  
 
Component 3: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building
(US$7 million; IBRD-US$6 million): 
Support will be provided to improve water planning, utility price and service regulation, and 
enhance the NWSC and CMSC operational and business management capacities. Design review 
and construction management technical assistance will also be provided to ensure smooth 
implementation of the infrastructure works. 
 
D.  Project location  
 
Ningbo is located on the East China Sea, approximately 175 kms south of Shanghai on the 
southern edge of Hangzhou Bay.  Ningbo Municipality is part of Zhejiang Province, but is 
classified as a “sub-provincial municipality” which means it is a separate economic planning unit 
and is not administratively controlled by the provincial government. The Ningbo Water Supply 
component will cover the six urban districts in Ningbo which together are termed the “City” with 
a
total population of 2.5 million people. The urban districts are: Haishu, Jiangdong, Jiangbei, 
Zhenhai, Beilun, and Yinzhou Districts. The wastewater component will cover the suburban 
county of Cixi, located north of Ningbo City and bordering on Hangzhou Bay. Cixi has 
approximately 1.2 million residents. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies  
 
Ningbo Municipality has participated in two previous Bank-financed projects in the urban sector: 
i) Zhejiang Multi-Cites Project (1993-99) and ii) Zhejiang Urban Environment Project (approved 
FY04), and has good understanding and experience implementing World Bank safeguard 
policies.  
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[
Yes] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
The project is classified as a Category A project given its regional scope, 
significant construction activities, and focus on water and wastewater issues. 
Draft EA reports have been disclosed at the World Bank Infoshop on August 5, 
2004. Public consultation and local information disclosure has been initiated since 
April 2004 (for Cixi) and June (for Ningbo). A detailed Public Consultation Plan 
Page  3
has been prepared for each of the two components which outlines the overall 
consultation and information disclosure plan during EA preparation in accordance 
with Bank’s policies.   
 
Key issues identified at the concept stage include: i) development of reclaimed 
coastal area along Hangzhou Bay in Cixi, and ii) regional water resource issues 
associated with the Ningbo water supply component.
 
[TBD ] 
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
Natural habitats may be located in two places in the project’s area of influence: I) 
reclaimed coastal land in Cixi; and ii) watershed above Zhougongzhai reservoir. 
The extent to which these areas are ecologically important will be examined in the 
EIA. 
[
No] 
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
The project will not procure any pesticides nor will an increased use of pesticides 
result from the project.  
[
Yes] 
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
Resettlement  Action Plans (RAP) have been prepared for both the Ningbo and 
Cixi components and indicate that impacts are relatively small given the scope of 
the project. Permanent land loss is estimated at 27 hectares, including 1.2 hectares 
of collective farming land, 14 hectares of collective forest land and 12 hectares of 
state-owned land. Temporary land use during the construction period is estimated 
to involve 467 hectares of collective farming land. Seven rural households will be 
affected by house demolition.   
[No ] 
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
There are no known indigenous peoples in the project area. 
[No ] 
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
The project will not finance activities that involve significant conversion or 
degradation of critical forest or related critical habitat defined under the policy. 
[Yes ] 
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
The raw water from for Ningbo City comes from five reservoirs located 
approximately 25-100 kms from the city: i) Zhougongzhai (under construction); 
ii) Jiaokou (1975) iii) Baixi (2002); iv) Hengshan (1994); and v) Tingxia (1985)
.
The Bank team will conduct a due diligence review of  dam safety procedures and 
status for the five dams and identify any significant safety issues.   
 
The Bank-financed project has direct linkage to two of the reservoirs: i) 
Zhougongzhai (under construction) and ii) Jiaokou (1975), because these directly 
supply water to the Maojia
ping water treatment plant. The Bank team has   
conducted site inspections and review of technical designs for these two dams 
during the identification mission, and did not find any obvious safety issues.   
 
[TBD ] 
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
There will be significant excavation works financed under the project which have 
the potential for uncovering culturally valuable relics. The usual precautions will 
Page  4
be followed. 
[No ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[No ] 
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[X] A   [ ] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared: November 2004 
 
B.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies:   
 
1. Draft final EIAs have been prepared for both Ningbo Water Supply and Cixi Wastewater 
components. The PMO is currently revising the EIAs, incorporating them into one report, and 
preparing the Executive Summary. 
 
2.  Draft final RAPs have also been prepared for both components and the PMO is revising the 
RAPs. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Greg Browder 
Date: 8/10/04 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Name: Glen Morgan 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Name: Keshav Varma 
Date 
Comments 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
