Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1725 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/31/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P091020 
Project Name: China-Fujian Hwy Sector Investment (3rd Fujian Hwy) 
Task Team Leader: Aurelio Menendez 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 17, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: December 19, 2006 
Managing Unit: EASTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Trade facilitation and market access 
(S);Other public sector governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
1,270.00
1,270.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project aims to increase the effective use of the road infrastructure in the Fujian Province, 
improving the flows of passenger and freight traffic in an efficient and safe manner.  This 
objective seeks to contribute to the goals of (a) improving living conditions in rural areas--
particularly those in the areas of the Province where poverty rates are higher--by enhancing the 
transport accessibility of the rural communities to economic opportunities and social services; (b) 
stimulating higher economic growth in the Fujian Province by reducing transport costs; and (c) 
facilitating interconnection across the coastal provinces and the balance in the use of their ports.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
To achieve the above-mentioned objective, the project will include:  
 
-
Implementation of FPCD's Rural Roads Improvement Program (RRIP) that aims at improving 
conditions of the lower class roads (largely Class III and IV) that connect administrative villages 
to the main provincial road network.  The Bank loan will support the overall program and 
finance a subset of the roads, in line with the criteria already being applied by FPCD and other to 
be agreed upon during project preparation (such as specific institutional conditions in a county 
Page  2
and the number of inhabitants in the area of influence of a road per kilometer of road to be 
rehabilitated).  The overall program of rural roads is stored in a data bank built upon the results 
of consultations at the village and country level and approved by the provincial government.  The 
interventions on this network usually consist of the paving of those roads with the use of 
concrete pavements, all with due consideration to the adequate resettlement and environmental 
measures.  Consideration will be given to a disbursement mechanism based on complete output, 
piggybacking on the current FPCD system which provides an amount per kilometer that varies 
depending on the physical standards of the road and the socioeconomic characteristics of the area 
where the road segment is located. Appropriate application of safeguards will be required.  
 
-
Construction of an expressway of about 195 km connecting Yong'an with the border of the 
Fujian and Guangdong Provinces, at Yanqian in Wuping city, (YWE), including the acquisition 
of the relevant electrical and mechanical (E&M) facilities.  The expressway would consist of 
four lanes and be designed for a speed of 80 km/hr in the heavy mountainous terrain from 
Yogn?an to Liancheng, and of 100 km/hr for the remaining section.  The design will include the 
appropriate road safety features, based on the experience of the two previous World Bank-
financed projects in Fujian.  
 
-
Pilot implementation of maintenance contracting on some segments of the non-expressway 
network, to explore results-based approaches that can help increase the efficiency of current 
force-account maintenance practices, currently being applied by city and county highway 
bureaus.  The scope of this component will be confirmed during the next preparation mission.  
 
-
Supervision of the investment components of the project, with: (a) a joint local-foreign 
consultant firm for the construction of the YWE, in a manner similar to the one implemented 
under the expressway component of the Second Fujian Highway Project, and (b) a local firm for 
the RRIP component, in a manner that complements and strengthens the mechanisms currently 
under implementation by the FPCD.  
 
-
Strengthening the maintenance management systems of the FPCD towards maximizing the 
use of the often limited resources allocated to preserve the condition of road assets, through the 
establishment of an information system (like the HDM) and carrying out the surveys to collect 
the necessary data.  The scope of this sub-component would be confirmed by FPCD upon visit to 
the Henan Province where such a system is already in operation.  
 
-
Enhancing the capacity at the county highway bureaus in managing the improved network 
under the RRIP, as part of the incentive framework for supporting the RRIP in a particular 
county.  
 
-
Impact evaluation and monitoring studies to measure the impacts of a sample of rural roads, 
establishing a complementary knowledge base for future interventions on those types of roads 
across the Fujian Province.  
 
-
An analysis of toll rates for the YWE in the context of the road network in the Fujian 
province, towards evaluating the possible adjustments that could help maximize the use of the 
network and optimize its economic value.  
 
-
Institutional strengthening through the training of staff of the agencies/institutions involved in 
highway research, planning, construction, operation and maintenance of highways and related 
social aspects, building on training carried out under previous Bank-financed projects and to be 
defined during project preparation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Page  3
The RRIP consists of the rehabilitation of existing lower class roads (largelly Class III and IV) to 
paved standards in order to improve the connection of up to 7,500 administrative villages to the 
main provincial networks all over the Fujian Province.  
 
The expressway component will connect Yong'an city with the border of Fujian and 
Guangdong Provinces, at Yanqian in Wuping City, over a distance of 195 kilometers, in the 
Southwestern area of the Fujian Province.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Fujian Provincial Communications Department (FPCD) has maintained a good 
implementation track record for the Bank projects in the transport sector with the Fujian 
Provincial Highway Project completed in December 2003 (ICR rated satisfactory) and the 
ongoing Second Fujian Highway Project, now in its final stage of implementation (with 80% of 
the loan funds disbursed).  In addition to the institutional capacity in the development of the 
high-grade highway network, the FPCD has sucessfully implemented a provincial/rural road 
development program under both projects.  In both cases, the implementation of safeguards 
policies has been satisfactory.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (EASSD) 
Mr Naoya Tsukamoto (EASEN) 
Mr Hiroshi Ono (EASEN) 
Mr Peishen Wang (EASEN) 
Ms Youlan Zou (EASSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The FPCD has prepared the Terms-of-reference (ToRs) for the preparation of the 
Environmental Impact Assessment for the proposed exrepssway and has identified a reputable 
entity, the Research Institute of Highways of the MOC, with vast experience in this area of 
assessment.  The ToRs were reviewed by the Bank team during the identification mission and the 
comments raised by the team were discussed with the FPCD. The ToRs and the EIA report to be 
drafted will be submitted to the State Environment Protection Agency (SEPA) for its approval.  
 
The expressway alignment will traverse relatively flat and some mountainous terrain, and 
will pass by the proximities of several urban and semi-urban areas.  The 195-km expressway 
includes about 28 km of tunnels and about 27 km of viaducts, and several interchanges.  The 
preferred alignment was selected to avoid major adverse impacts on the environment.  The 
design of the expressway will consider the minimization of environmental issues.  The ToRs for 
EIA of the expressway alignment singled out environmentally sensitive spots including schools, 
hospitals, residential areas, rivers, and ponds.  As the alignment would pass by several urban and 
semi-urban areas, the major environmental issues to be addressed will be those related to noise 
control.  
 
The possible environmental impacts of the RRIP component will be more limited given that 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
the engineering works will remain within the right-of-way of existing roads.  For the RRIP 
component an environmental framework will be prepared.  The Table of Contents for this 
Environmental Framework was developed and agreed during the identification mission.  FPCD 
has already agreed with Fujian Provincial Environmental Bureau on the rules and methodology 
to deal with EIAs for such small but numerous sub-projects and the Environmental Framework 
will be developed based on those rules and methodology. The framework will be required to be 
applied to all the eligible RRIP roads subject to World Bank financing and the project will 
support its application to the entire of the RRIP.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The initial survey by Chang'an University EIA team has revealed that there are no protected 
areas or primary forests within the expressway-component impacted area. The nearest nature 
reserves are 20 to 30 km way from the proposed alignment.  The EA will address natural habitats 
and critical natural habitats in addition to protected areas, as stated in the provisions of the 
policy. Further surveys will be conducted as part of the preparation of the EIA.  
 
For the rural roads component, there are no known natural habitats issues other than those 
typically encountered in rural roads projects.  It was agreed again that the broad-base 
environmental analysis described under the discussion of OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) 
would include provisions to identify natural habitats.  The negative list in the environmental 
framework includes financing of roads near sensitive areas, and it was agreed that improved 
monitoring would be needed since project beneficiaries often live in protected areas.  The project 
would not prohibit work on roads that lead into protected areas but that the project would adopt 
higher environmental standards and improved monitoring systems.  This issue will be 
specifically addressed in the EMP and project will ensure that there is adequate monitoring 
capacity for the work.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
As part of the preparation of the EIA, a local archeological institute will conduct a survey to 
identify any cultural relics along the proposed YWE.  As to the RRIP, chance findings of cultural 
relics are not expected since the engineering works will remain within the right-of-way of the 
existing roads.  
 
In addition, Chinese legal and regulatory framework on the protection of cultural relics fully 
meets the requirement of the World Bank policy. In this regard, Chinese policies and regulations 
will be strictly followed for any such impacts identified upfront or encountered during 
construction.  In the event of change findings of goods or sites that might appear of cultural 
significance are encountered during project implementation, works will be stopped and the 
relevant authorities called upon to investigate the site. If these goods and sites are found of 
cultural significance, the area of the project around these goods or sites will be redesigned to 
avoid any harmful effects to such goods or sites.  Current policies and regulations would need to 
be summarized and reflected in project documents.  An appropriate clause will be included in all 
construction contracts regarding the procedures to be followed in the event of chance finds of 
culturally significant artifacts or sites.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 
X
Initial screening indicates that there are no ethnic minority villages along the proposed 
alignment of the expressway in the project area.  Project activities under this component will not 
affect Indigenous Peoples as defined in the policy.  
 
The RRIP component may cover areas of ethnic minority villages.  Because the road 
segments for this component have not yet been identified, the need for further action under this 
policy remains to be determined.  The Policy Framework for Involuntary Resettlement section 
will include provisions in compliance with OD 4.20 on Indigenous people to guide project 
activities in areas of ethnic minority communities.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
A
two-prong approach has been adopted under the project.  For the expressway component 
YWE), a resettlement action plan (RAP) will be developed.  Consultants have been mobilized 
from Fujian and MOC to carry out the resettlement planning.  Initial screening indicates that 
there is substantial land acquisition, but limited relocation of structures.  Different alignment 
alternatives have been compared and impacts on productive land and human residences have 
been much reduced.  
 
The three criteria listed in para. 4 of the policy that must be met to confirm the existence of 
linkage issues were analyzed. First, there are two highways in Fujian directly and significantly 
related to the Bank-assisted project since they are immediately adjacent to the endpoints of the 
expressway.  Second, they are currently under construction and still will be when the expressway 
construction begins so they are being carried out contemporaneously with the project.  Third, 
neither of the Fujian highways nor the Guangdong highway is necessary to achieve the 
objectives of this project.  Because the third criterion was not met, it was agreed that there is no 
linkage issue as defined under the policy.  A due diligence exercise will be conducted by 
reviewing the EAs for the Fujian highways.  Unresolved issues will be reported to inform Bank 
management of potential risks.  
 
For RRIP component, the impacts are expected to be marginal given the rehabilitation 
nature of the works within existing rights-of-way.  Nevertheless, a policy framework will be 
developed to guide planning of any necessary mitigation measures.  This framework will be 
strictly applied to the eligible roads that would be subject of World Bank financing.  As with the 
environmental framework, the project will support the application of the resettlement framework 
to the rest of the RRIP.  
 
Since counties will receive only 25% of the subsidized cost up front, and will not receive 
the remaining 75% of the subsidy until the project is completed to the satisfaction of FPCD, 
technically those subprojects funded by the Bank will not be known until they are complete.  
However, as subprojects are identified in different counties, a â
 
œpre-qualifyingâ
  
exercise 
will be conducted to determine their capacity for planning and implementing safeguards 
procedures if it appears safeguards policies are likely to be triggered.  During preparation and 
implementation the counties will design and implement RAPs with the assistance of FPCD, and 
at the conclusion of implementation a review will be conducted to ensure the RAPs have been 
adequately implemented.  Once this is determined, Bank financing will be forthcoming for the 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
subproject.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/28/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
TORs of the EIA for the expressway component, Table of Contents of Environmental 
Framework for RRIP: prepared by FPCD and reviewed and approved by the Bank in May 
2005.  
 
The following reports will be submitted by FPCD to the Bank by the dates indicated:  
 
Draft Environmental Framework for the RRIP: by September 30, 2005  
 
Draft Resettlement Action Plan for Expressway: by November 30, 2005  
 
Draft Resettlement Framework for RRIP: by November 30, 2005  
 
Draft EIA for expressway component: by November 30, 2005  
 
Final Environmental Framework for RRIP: by November 30, 2005  
 
Final Resettlement Framework for RRIP: by January 31, 2006  
 
Final Resettlement Action Plan for Expressway: by January 31, 2006   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Aurelio Menendez 
10/18/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
10/24/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jitendra N. Bajpai 
10/19/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
