                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                      PROJECT RESTRUCTURING STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 12/01/2017                                  Report No.:122362
1. Basic Project Data
Country: China                               Project ID: P121414
Project Name: Sichuan Wudu Irrigated Agriculture Development Project
Task Team Leader: Liping Jiang
Appraisal Date: January 24, 2011             Board Date: September 15, 2011
Managing Unit: EASCS                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (60%); Water supply (20%);Agricultural extension and
research (20%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           100.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                   558.00
                                                                    558.00
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Repeater [ ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives

The project restructuring has readjusted the PDO as follows:

The objectives of the Project are to: (a) increase the command area for irrigation in the
project area; (b) increase bulk water supply capacity for small rural communities and
industries in the project area; (c) introduce community-based participatory approach in
the management of water facilities and infrastructure in demonstration areas.

The above PDOs would be achieved through (a) the construction of new water supply
and main irrigation systems (main canal, sub-main canal and branch canals) and new on-
farm works (lateral canals, sub-lateral canals and farm ditches); (b) the provision of a
complementary package of integrated agricultural inputs and support services to assist
farmers in increasing agricultural yields; (c) the establishment of Water User
Associations (WUAs) based on a Community Driven Development (CDD) approach; and
(d) provision of intensive training and technical assistance for project staff and farmers
on water management and operation and maintenance (O&M) of the main and on-farm
irrigation systems.
3. Project Description

The Sichuan Wudu Irrigated Agriculture Development Project (WIADP) consists of the
following three components:

Component 1: Construction of main irrigation systems

The total cost for Component 1 was estimated as US$648.74 million including Bank
financing US$97.29 million. This component includes:

   (a) Construction of Xizi main canal with a total length of 108 km;
   (b) Construction of Jinfeng Reservoir with a total storage capacity of 98 million cubic
       meters; and
   (c) Construction of Jinlong sub-main canal (24 km) and 16 branch canals (325 km in
       total).

The irrigation systems developed under this component would cover an irrigated area of
70,200 hectares and provide a domestic water supply in bulk to about 1.7 million rural
people and industries in the project area from outlets on the system. Note that the Bank
would finance the first section (23 km) of Xizi main canal, the entire Jinlong sub-main
canal (24 km), and 10 branch canals (228 km). The rest of the main systems will be fully
financed by the government.

Component 2: Development of CDD-based on-farm demonstration areas in each of the
three project counties

The total cost for Component 2 was estimated as US$4.49 million including Bank
financing US$1.02 million. This component includes:

   (a) Construction of on-farm irrigation works including 1 lateral canal and 3 sub-lateral
       canals with a total length of about 48 km in the demonstration areas;
   (b) Establishment of 3 CDD-based WUAs in the demonstration areas; and
   (c) Provision of agricultural inputs and supporting services in the demonstration areas.

The demonstration areas would cover 1,340 hectares in total and the agricultural
supporting services and institutional mechanisms set up as part of this component are
designed to help maximize and sustain the benefits of having water delivered to the
demonstration areas through the main irrigation systems constructed under the project.

Component 3: Institutional capacity building and project management support

The total cost Component 3 was estimated as US$1.44 million including Bank financing
US$1.44 million. This component includes:

    (a) Capacity building, including study tours and training; and
     (b) Project management support, including consulting services, work vehicles and
         office equipment.

This component aims to strengthen the managerial capacity of project staff and the three
WUAs established in the demonstration areas.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis

The WIADP Project is located in Mianyang Prefecture in eastern Sichuan Province,
China, in an area between the Fujiang River in the west and Jialingjiang River in the east.
The region is characterized by rolling hills, and while the area upstream can be classified
as a mountainous zone, the middle and downstream areas are a hilly and a flat zone. The
project area is at the junction of Sichuan’s western, middle, and northern structural belts
of the Neocathaysian tectonic system. At the project area’s northwest corner is the Mt.
Longmen structural belt and at its southwest corner the Mianyang loop structure of a
rotational shear structural system. The southeast zone of the project area is a combination
of the southeast tectonic belt and hilly loop structure and the northeast zone is the
northeast tectonic belt. Groundwater in the project area can be classified as pore water in
loose accumulative stratum and bedrock crevice water under quaternary system.

The irrigation districts covered by the Wudu Water Diversion and Irrigation Scheme
involve many river systems. The Fujiang river system is the most dominant one, and also
the primary tributary on the right bank of the Jialingjiang River. The Fujiang River
originates from the east side of Mt. Mingshan and is 675 km long with a catchment area
of 36272km2. The irrigation return flow from the WIADP-covered area would discharge
into Mijiang River, Zitongjiang River, the main course of the Fujiang River, and finally
into Fujiang River. According to the statistics, in a dry year, only the main streams of
Fujiang River and Tongkou River will have some flow; other rivers all have recorded
non-flow. There is no big reservoir to regulate flow on the upstream parts of the Fujiang
river system and in summer heavy rainfall leads to flash floods, causing large variations
in the water surface area, water table, and flow of Fujiang River. As a result, water
resource development and utilization of the Fujiang river system is rather low.

The project area is in the western part of China’s monsoon region and south of the
Qingling mountain chain. Affected by a southeastern and southwestern warm and wet
flow of air, the area belongs to the sub-tropical monsoon climate. It is rather dry during
spring and early summer. Precipitation is concentrated during summer and autumn.
Average annual precipitation ranges from 860.9 to 1089.6 mm and two-thirds of it falls in
July, August and September.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr. Songling Yao (GSU02)
   Mr. Yiren Feng (GEN2A)
   Mr. Zongcheng Lin (GSU02)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                      X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                    X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible
impacts:

Environment Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)

The Project is classified as a “Category A” project based on the type, location, sensitivity,
and scale, as well as the nature and magnitude of the potential environmental impacts of
the Wudu Second-phase Water Diversion and Xizi Irrigation Scheme and the Wudu
Reservoir. Environment Assessment (EA) reports were prepared in accordance with
national requirements and the Bank’s OP 4.01. The reports include an (a) EA summary,
(b) EA, and (c) Environmental Management Plan (EMP). The EA Report has been
prepared incorporating the Bank’s comments, and found to be satisfactory.

The EA covers baseline information on environmental and socio-economic conditions.
The EA identified and assessed the Project’s benefits and impacts to the natural and
social environment. The EA report did not identify serious adverse or irreversible
environmental impacts, and it concluded that the Project will (i) bring significant positive
impacts to the natural and socio-economic environments, (ii) provide reliable, equitable
and stable water supply for the irrigation areas of 1.053 million mu (70235.1hectares),
(iii) increase agricultural yields, improve the livelihood of the farmers in the irrigated
areas, and promote benign circulation for economic, social and ecological environment
and sustainable development for the region.. However, some negative impacts may arise
during project implementation, such as limited negative impacts on soil, air, water,
acoustic environments, and solid wastes mainly during construction, and potential
increased use of pesticides, fertilizers during operation. The key beneficiaries of the
project are about 1.35 million poor farmers (397,000 households) who will be able to
receive a reliable irrigation water supply and change from mainly dry farming to irrigated
agriculture and thus boost their agricultural production. The project implementation will
substantially relieve the contradiction between severe water demand and water supply
because of the long draughts. During project operation, the positive social benefits, such
as increased agricultural products values, improved rural water supply safety health
conditions, and an increased use of land resources, will be larger than the negative
impacts. All Project investments have been designed to avoid or minimize any adverse
impacts to acceptable levels on the physical environment. Preventive measures during
the design, construction and operation phases were prepared to minimize or even
eliminate the negative impacts, and are noted in the EMP. The main environmental issues
of the project are the soil erosion caused by the construction activities during the
construction phase and potential pesticides issues (if not well managed) during the
operational phase.

Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)

There are no any critical natural habitats, natural reserves, protected areas, endangered
Species within the project influence areas. It is concluded that activities financed by the
IBRD loan will not have adverse impacts on natural habitats. However, Wudu dam,
which is under construction by the government, will have impacts on the fish species in
the Fujiang River. Current water regime of Fujiang River at Wudu Reservoir section has
been changed to some extent after Wudu Reservoir is built. The physical and chemical
characteristics of water are being changed gradually. The Wudu dam separates
continuous ecology of Fujiang River into discontinuous environment units and blocks the
natural passway of fish from short distance communication at this section. Composition
of fish at upstream of the dam tends to be simpler.

Two species of fishes protected at provincial level are distributed in the upper and middle
reaches of Fujiang River, i.e. Schizothorax (Racoma) davidi and Euchiloglanis davidi.
These two species of fish are mainly distributed at the upper reaches of Fujiang River
upstream of Wudu Reservoir and scarcely distributed at the middle reaches of Fujiang
River. Schizothorax davidi and Euchiloglanis davidi are benthic fish species, and usually
inhabit in torrential river sections with many gravel at river bed. Construction and
operation of Wudu Reservoir will force these two types of fish to move towards upstream
gradually.

There are nine local indigenous fish species in Fujiang River, include paracobitis
potanini, hemiculter nigromarginis, xenophys Euchiloglanis kishinouyei Kimura bio
boulengeri tchang, sinilabeo rendahli, schizothorax davidi, jinshaia abbreviate, and
euchiloglanis kishinouyei kimura. Schizothorax davidi and euchiloglanis kishinouyei
kimura are benthic fish species and usually inhabit in torrent sections while other species
in sluggish flow area near the river bank or spaces among the gravels in torrent area.
None of these species has long distance migration. Construction and operation of Wudu
Reservoir will not have significant impact to fish species at downstream of the dam. The
impact to fish species at upstream of the dam is obvious. The downstream fishes cannot
swim to upstream due to the blockage of dam. The fish species in upper reaches tend to
be reduced and become more simplex. Fish resources at river sections downstream of
Wudu dam tend to be reduced.
To compensate the loss of fishery resource of Fujiang River due to Wudu dam,
appropriate mitigation measures were incorporated into the EMP including ecological
flow, monitoring of native fish species, and implementation of fishery development plan
during the operation phase of the Wudu dam.

Pest Management (OP4.09)

The project will improve on-going integrated pest management in the Mianyang
Municipality. Specifically, it will: (a) disseminate the application of high efficiency, low
toxic, low residual effect chemicals and biological pesticides; (b) prohibit the use of high
toxic, high residual effect pesticides; (c) reduce the reliance on chemical pesticides and
chemical fertilizers; and (d) promote the use of non-chemical technologies for insect and
pest control. A Pest Management Plan (PMP) was prepared for the project.

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)

Resettlement: the Bank supported Wudu Irrigated Agricultural Development Project will
be undertaken in three counties of Mianyang Municipality. It includes construction of a
segment of the Xizi main canal (23.19 km of 108.18 km in total) and 11 branch canals
(231.15 km) that will require about 4,245 mu (283 hectares) of village land in 136
villages; the 2, 318 mu (155 hectares) of the affected village land are farmland. About
3,848 farmers in 1,063 households will be affected, but only 990 people in 264
households will lose their houses. In addition, there will be 3,257 mu (217 hectares) of
land to be temporarily occupied for civil work of canal construction among these rural
villages.

In a broader sense, the Bank supported project of canal construction is a small part of the
government financed Wude Water Diversion Phase II. The overall Wudu Phase II also
contains construction of Jinfeng reservoir (capacity of 98 million cubic meters), Xizi
main canal (108 km long) and six other branch canals. Beside the Bank financed canal
construction, the domestic financed part of the Wudu Phase II will require 10,037 mu
(669 hectares) of land and remove 185,309 m2 of structures that will relocate 3,523
people. Another 3228 mu (215 hectares) of land will be also temporarily occupied. As
affected by land loss, a total of 4,716 people will have to be entirely resettled in new
production arrangement.

In the meantime, there is a newly constructed Wudu reservoir (capacity of 572 million
cubic meters) designed to be the water resources of the Wudu Phase II irrigation district,
and hence linked to this Bank supported project. The Wudu reservoir affected 14,400 mu
of village land from 18 villages in two townships, and relocated 6,163 people. The
reservoir resettlement started in 2001 and was basically completed 2010. According to
the relevant national policy and the Resettlement Plan for this reservoir resettlement, the
reservoir resettlement post-support subsidies have been already allocated to each of the
resettlers (Y600/person per year), beside other compensations as paid before resettlement.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated
future activities in the project area:

The key beneficiaries of the project are about 1.35 million poor farmers (397,000
households) who will be able to receive reliable irrigation water and, as a result, change
from mainly dry farming to irrigated agriculture, thus boosting their agriculture
production. The other key beneficiaries are about 1.7 million poor people in rural and
small urban communities, in addition to the industries in Mianyang Prefecture who will
also be provided a steady water supply, in bulk, from the irrigation infrastructure for
drinking and industrial purposes.

The project will bring significant positive impacts to the natural and socio-economic
environments. However, as discussed above, some negative short-term impacts during
construction (including limited negative impacts on soil, air, water, and acoustic
environments and solid waste) and long-term operational impacts (such as potentially
increased use of pesticides and fertilizers) may result from project implementation. These
impacts will be temporary and localized.

In addition, proper mitigation measures during the construction and operation period can
minimize or eliminate these negative impacts, which has been noted in the EMP.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or
minimize adverse impacts.

In order to prevent potential adverse environmental impacts, the project has been
subjected to an intense analysis of alternative options during the design stage, including
the use of with and without-project scenarios and various options for the Jinfeng reservoir
site, canal alignments, the arrangement of borrow pits, and access roads for construction.
Optimal alternatives were selected based on the avoidance of or possibility to mitigate
adverse social and environment impacts, as well as other economic, technical, and
financial considerations for the least-cost solutions.

During the design phase the EA teams worked closely with project planners/ owners and
the feasibility study teams to compare and evaluate alternatives; this was done
quantitatively to the extent possible. The EA identified, evaluated and compared various
options for Jinfeng dam sites. Detailed comparative analyses were made between the two
sites at Wangjiagou stream in terms of topography, engineering geology, construction
conditions, quantities of earth and stone works, land occupation, inundation damages,
people to be affected, impact on rare and endangered species, aquatic biology, other key
environmental concerns, and total investments. The dam site at the lower reach was
recommended as the optimal site because of its sound topographic, geologic and
construction conditions, fewer disturbances of topsoil, and smaller impact on water, air,
and the acoustic environment during construction, as well as lower investment costs.

A “no project” scenario was also considered as an alternative. The with-and-without-
project analysis was conducted based on socio-economic benefits and potential positive
and negative environmental impacts. Under the “without-project” scenario, the low
agricultural water utilization and unsustainable water resources utilization would
continue and further deteriorate the local rural ecology. The conflict between water
demand and water supply would therefore not be solved. On the other hand, the #with-
project# scenario will generate long-lasting social and economic benefits, while the
environmental impacts, mainly during the construction period and thus temporary, can be
avoided or mitigated by using well known environmental protection measures. In
summary, it was established that environmental benefits clearly outweigh the
environmental impacts.

In addition, in-depth analyses were carried out for canal routes, access roads, and other
construction arrangements. As a result, the routes of the canals, access roads and other
construction arrangements were optimized by significantly shortening their length,
reducing the areas to be excavated and spoils to be disposed, reducing the land
acquisition, decreasing the number of people to be resettled, and reducing the overall
costs.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues.
Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures
described.

Environment Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)

An EMP was developed as a separate and stand-alone document. It addresses policy
bases, applicable environmental standards, the environmental management system,
mitigation measures, monitoring plans, institutional arrangements, capacity building,
estimated costs for the mitigation measures, and monitoring programs during the
construction and operation phases. The EMP mitigation measures and environmental
monitoring plan (including the monitoring for water and soil conservation works) aim to
reduce negative impacts to acceptable levels during the construction and operation phase
for both Bank and Government financed projects. Generic measures for environmental
management of construction were also designed as technical specifications to be included
in contracts.

Construction phase: Some project components will have short-term impacts, such as
water pollution, noise, dust, increased traffic, soil erosion, solid waste, and worker safety
and public health issues. These concerns are relatively minor, localized and temporary,
and measures to reduce them to acceptable levels, as well as to monitor these measures#
effective implementation, have been discussed and detailed in the EA and EMP. In
addition, all mitigation measures related to contractors, including Chance Finding
Procedures for PCRs, will be included in the bidding documents and contracts.

Operations phase: Appropriate mitigation measures have been designed including
minimum ecological flow management, water quality management and monitoring,
installation of a wastewater treatment facility for the dam#s administrative building, and
the establishment of an emergency preparedness plan. These measures are detailed in the
EMP.

Environmental Monitoring: The contractors are fully responsible for complying with the
mitigation measures stipulated in their contracts and detailed in the EMP. An
environmental monitoring program for the construction and operation phases is designed
in the EA as a component of the EMP. The monitoring program covers, among others,
air, construction and domestic wastewater, surface water quality, ground water quality,
noise levels, human health, the ecological environment, and water and soil conservation
monitoring. The program specifies parameters, frequencies, times, locations, responsible
agencies, and estimated costs of monitoring. Both environmental monitoring and water
and soil conservation monitoring will provide key and timely information, especially on
environmental impacts and mitigation, to the borrower and the Bank, which can be used
to evaluate the success of the environmental management. This monitoring process will
verify compliance with the EMP and determine further mitigation measures if the EMP is
not properly implemented.

Environmental Protection Budget: The costs associated with the EMP measures have
been budgeted as indicated in the project cost estimates and the component-specific costs
are detailed in the EMP. The environmental monitoring and water and soil conservation
monitoring will be conducted by external monitoring institutes, and monitoring activities
will be financed by counterpart funds. During the operation phase, costs related to
mitigation and monitoring will be borne by the implementing agencies.

The total environmental protection investment, including environmental management and
mitigation measures is estimated at about RMB 42.77 million (6.43million US$).

Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)

To compensate for the loss of fishery resources in Fujiang River as a result of the
construction of Wudu dam, appropriate mitigation measures have been incorporated into
the EMP, including minimum ecological flow management, monitoring of native fish
species, and implementation of a fishery development plan during the operation phase of
the Wudu dam.

Pest Management (OP4.09)

A Pest Management Plan (PMP) was prepared for the project. The PMP includes an
introduction and covers major pest issues, current pesticides management methods,
pesticides management organizations and their respective responsibilities in Mianyang
Prefecture, environmental, occupational and safety risk assessments, monitoring and
evaluation activities, and capacity building.

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
The resettlement component of the entire Wudu Water Conversion Phase II project
includes land acquisition and relocation for Xizi main canal, 17 branch canals, and
Jinfeng reservoir, which needs to be fully compliant with the Bank#s safeguards policies
and requirements. The works which the Bank financed include a part of Xizi main canal
and 11 branch canals, for the resettlement of which the Bank has requested the project
entity to prepare a full Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). The Bank team has also
reviewed the existing domestic full Resettlement Plan (RP) for the entire Wudu Phase II
project, which has now been revised to be in compliance with the Bank requirements and
hence has been found to be satisfactory by the Bank team. The domestic RP was thus
included as one section in the RAP.

During project restructuring in 2017, the PDO has been modified to more pertinently
reflect the project scope (which remains unchanged), particularly the focus on the
construction of the main canal and some selected branch canals. In terms of safeguards
instruments application, in case some associated works to the water system, such as
laterals, distributions systems and on-farm ditches are built by the countries during the
active life of the project (until the closing date), the safeguards instruments should apply.
Works on laterals, on-farm and distributions systems that go beyond the closing date of
the project are not obligated to follow the project’s safeguards instruments. The main
social safeguard instrument as elucidated above, the RAP, remains the same to cover the
activities financed by the Bank and the associated irrigation and water supply activities
beyond the Bank-supported project. The Bank will continue to supervise and monitor the
application of all safeguards instruments, with particular attention to the activities relating
to land acquisition and resettlement till the Wudu Irrigated Agriculture Development
Project is closed in October 2019.

The resettlement preparations have proceeded as follows:

In late 2008, the Wudu Water Diversion Bureau (the owner of the Wudu Phase II Project)
invited the Sichuan Provincial Water Resources and Hydraulic Design Institute and the
Mianyang Municipal Institute, along with the relevant county government line agencies
and with local village communities# participation, to carry out census and socio-
economic surveys and impact investigations. In the first half of 2010, a Resettlement Plan
(RP) for the overall Wudu Phase II resettlement was prepared and reviewed as part of all
the domestic verification procedures, and finally approved by the Sichuan Provincial
Resettlement Bureau and Ministry of Water Resources.

Against this background, in April 2010, the Bank supported canal construction PMO
invited a resettlement expert team from Southwest Communication University to prepare
a RAP for the Bank financed project. After additional rounds of surveys and
consultations among the 136 villages and households to be affected, the team developed a
RAP with a detailed impact inventory and socio-economic analysis, which sets forth a
series of measures to mitigate and compensate the impacts, as well as to rehabilitate
people’s livelihoods. The resettlement investment for this compensation and
rehabilitation was budgeted at RMB 236.84 million. In addition, special grievance
redressing mechanism and resettlement monitoring and evaluation systems were also
established.

Because the Bank-supported canal systems are only one part of the Wudu Phase II
Project, the RAP also contained a section to address the resettlement related to the other
part of the Project that is purely domestically financed. This RAP section included all
necessary mitigation and compensation elements compliant with the national laws,
regulations and the Bank policy requirements. The section described and evaluated the
Wudu Phase II RP and determined it had the same level of detail as the RAP for the
Bank-supported canal systems on the impact surveys, compensation measures, and
rehabilitation approaches, and was also based on broad consultation with the project
affected people. The section also included a due diligence report of the Wudu Reservoir
resettlement, which was being completed in the end of 2010, because the Wudu
Reservoir was viewed as a linked project. Internal and external Monitoring and
Evaluation Mechanisms for the project resettlement were established. During
implementation, as the RAP indicates, progress status, outstanding issues, and proposed
actions related to the project RAP would all be closely overseen and included in the semi-
annual monitoring reports. The RAP was prepared under Bank mission oversight, and the
project entity and local resettlement authorities, as assisted by the resettlement experts,
assumed the responsibility for the RAP implementation.

Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)

The Project triggers Dam Safety Safeguard Policy (OP 4.37) because the project sites are
located downstream of an existing dam (Heping dam), a dam under construction (Wudu
dam) and another dam (Jinfeng dam) to be constructed. Failure of these upstream dams
could cause extensive damage to or failure of some or all of the investments under the
Project. Furthermore, reservoirs formed by the Wudu and Jinfeng dams are supposed to
provide water to the water users in the project area.

The government, as the owner of these dams, has (a) strengthened the existing Heping
dam with remedial works completed by the end of 2010; (b) prepared an Operation,
Maintenance and Surveillance Plan (OMS) and Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) for
the Wudu dam under construction, and also (c) prepared draft OMS and EPP outlines for
the Jinfeng dam to be constructed. All three dams were or will be fully financed by the
government. The operators of these dams are or will be the state-owned institutions or
bureaus entrusted by the government.

The guidelines and regulations on dam safety management issued by the government
include: (a) dam safety management regulations; (b) regulations on dam safety review;
(c) guidelines on dam safety review; (d) guidelines for an emergency preparedness plan;
and (e) guidelines for the operation, maintenance and surveillance of dams. During
project implementation, the Bank will, together with the Dam Safety Panel employed by
the PMO, supervise the implementation of the dam design and construction, and also
review the safety status and operation and maintenance of these dams to ensure that the
Project complies with the Bank#s Safeguard Policy on Safety of Dams#OP 4.37.
Assessment of Borrower Capacity

Although the project entities were involved in a Bank-financed project ten years ago,
most current staff of the project entities has had no previous experience in the preparation
and implementation of Bank projects. The unfamiliarity with the World Bank safeguard
policies of the PMO staff and implementing agencies could mean delays in project
preparation and implementation.

To address this issue, the Mianyang PMO took several actions. The PMO first designated
staff to coordinate the preparation of safeguard documents, and also contracted Chengdu
Investigation, Design & Research Institute (CIDRI) of China Hydropower Consulting
Group (CHCG), a Class A EA Institute with experience with Bank-financed projects, to
prepare the EA Report for this project. The PMO also hired an EA consultant with
extensive experience preparing EAs for Bank-financed projects for additional assistance
in the process. In addition, the PMO contracted experienced consultants from Southwest
Communication University, to form a resettlement team to guide and help with the early
resettlement work and RAP/RP preparation under the guidance provided by the Bank
team, and also established a Dam Safety Panel (DSP) from the national-level Nanjing
Dam Safety Institute under MWR for a review of dam-safety related issues.

Project Implementing Agencies: Management of the project will be the responsibility of
the Mianyang Prefecture Project Management Office (PMO) under the Wudu Water
Diversion Management Bureau and supported by a Project Leading Group (PLG) under
the Prefecture Government. The PLG and PMO at Mianyang Prefecture level had been
officially established, and they played important roles in project preparation. The PLGs
and PMO were also established at the county level. Also, Expert Groups were established
at both prefecture and county levels to provide technical support to the PMO.

The Borrower’s technical and institutional capacity for implementing Bank#s safeguard
policies and procurement and financial guidelines should be further strengthened with
assistance from the Bank team and experienced experts. Trainings and workshops have
been planned and financed or will be financed with domestic funds before project
implementation when the consulting work with Bank financing starts. Plans have also
been made for the establishment of related environmental, social, and dam safety panels
or groups. The Bank task team will continuously help to build up the project entity#s
capacity during the preparation and implementation of the project.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Environment Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)

Two-stage public consultations including expert consultations, questionnaires, symposia,
and interviews, have been conducted with those affected by the proposed project and
included persons from different gender, socioeconomic and educational backgrounds,
groups, and occupations. The primary objective of the first round was to survey the
public’s opinion about the project, while for the second round it was to communicate the
EA findings, discuss intended mitigation measures, and confirm public acceptance and
satisfaction. In addition, there have been several rounds of consultations with government
agencies, local governments, experts, and other stakeholders to discuss site location,
scope, and potential environmental and socioeconomic impacts of the proposed project.
The majority of those consulted expressed strong support for the project, and acceptance
of short-term inconveniences, such as noise and dust during the construction phase.

Information about the project was disclosed in January 2010 and September 2010.
Telephone hotlines were established. The availability of the EA reports, and how to
access to them, was announced in the #Mianyang Daily# on Dec 2, 2010. The EA, EMP,
EA Summary, Dam Safety Report, and PMP were disclosed on the websites of various
government agencies and are available at each PMO and from the project owner. All the
Environmental safeguard documents mentioned above were disclosed at the Bank#s
Beijing Office website and at the InfoShop in Washington, D.C. on December 16, 2010.

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)

The project affected people (PAP) include the farmers directly affected by the Bank
financed Wudu Irrigated Agricultural Development Project, namely more than 3,800
people in 136 rural village affected by the land acquisition for branch canal construction.
In addition, it includes those affected by the Wudu Water Diversion Project Phase II as a
whole, namely, more than 6,680 people who will lose land and therefore will need to be
reinstated in economic production. In view of the project resettlement impact, the project
entity, the Wudu Water Diversion Management Bureau and PMO, cooperated with local
authorities, conducted a broad project information dissemination campaign in Zitong,
Jiangyou and Yanting counties, and also extensively consulted with rural village
communities and farmers, who in return expressed both great interest and enthusiasm for
the water diversion and delivery under the project, as well as provided concerns and
suggestions to compensate for the land acquisition and handle the livelihood
rehabilitation.

In late 2008, invited by the project entity, the Sichuan Provincial Water Resources and
Hydraulic Design Institute and the Mianyang Municipal Water Resources and Hydraulic
Design Institute conducted detailed resettlement impact investigation and local socio-
economic surveys in the overall resettlement areas. During late 2008 and early 2009 and
in cooperation with local county, township and community authorities, staff from the
project entity and the design institutes also conducted consultations with villages and
farmer representatives through meetings and household interviews on the mitigation of
resettlement impacts and the rehabilitation of village livelihoods. An overall Resettlement
Plan for the Wudu Water Diversion Project Phase II was developed by the institutes
based on these investigations and consultations. In addition, a resettlement expert team
from the Southwest Communication University was invited in May and June of 2010 to
join in the RAP preparation specifically for the Bank financed Wudu Irrigated
Agricultural Development Project as a part of the Wudu Phase II. The RAP expert team
further conducted a sample socio-economic survey among 136 villages under the project,
and conducted intensive household interviews and a questionnaire survey on PAP#s
views of resettlement impacts and compensation/restoration measures among the
villagers. All results were incorporated into the RAP, in which all the resettlement
elements of the overall Wudu Phase II project were also included and described clearly

 The RAP was disclosed locally in November 2010 in the county level resettlement
offices and libraries, as well as directly in the affected villages and on the project
owner#s website and in a local newspaper. At the same time, the RAP was also made
available in the InfoShop for broad public dissemination.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/06/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/02/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              12/16/2010
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                              12/31/2010
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/06/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/02/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              12/16/2010
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 11/07/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/02/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              12/16/2010
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        Yes
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                      Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                     Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or    Yes
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                            Yes
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts       Yes
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements         Yes
been made for public awareness and training?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's        Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the            Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the              Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                           Name                    Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr. Liping Jiang                    12/01/2017
Environmental Specialist:           Mr. Yiren Feng
Social Development Specialist       Mr. Songling Yao
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):   Mr. Zong-Cheng Lin                  06/16/2017

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr. Surhid Gautam, Acting RSA       12/29/2017
  Comments: As a delegated project to the WBOB Safeguards Focal Point
Sector Manager:                     Mr. Sudipto Sarkar                  12/29/2017
  Comments:
