Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC710 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: March 23, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P086629 
Project Name: CN - Heilongjiang Dairy Project 
Task Team Leader: Mohamed N. Benali 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 15, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2005 
Managing Unit: EASRD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: Animal production (75%);Agricultural 
extension and research (15%);Crops (10%) 
Theme: Other rural development (P);Rural services 
and infrastructure (P);Technology diffusion (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  IBRD: 100 
Other financing amounts by source: Borrower and beneficiaries 
 120 ($m) 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN] 
 
1. 
The proposed project would have two key development objectives.  The first objective would be to increase 
the income and number of farming households engaged in dairy production in selected areas of Heilongjiang 
province.  The second objective would be to improve the genetic potential and management of the dairy herd in 
Heilongjiang.  The proposed project will be designed to include as many smallholders as feasible to increase its 
poverty reduction impact.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN] 
 
2. 
Initially, the local project team proposed a concept under which only large dairy parks (area of 2 or more 
hectares, surrounded by a brick wall enclosing a milking station, feed storage and processing facilities and about 
fifty cow sheds where 500 to 1500 dairy cows are kept) would be set up and operated exclusively by large private 
sector companies (dragonheads), where individual dairy farmers would rent space (a shed) to raise between 20 and 
100 dairy cows.  This approach was rejected because: (i) it would not have targeted the smallholders and the poor 
who should be the primary beneficiaries of Bank assistance; and (ii) the potential negative environmental impact 
that these very large dairies could have had.  The initial project concept also proposed the creation of 15 dairy 
breeding farms, exclusively owned and operated by private sector companies.  This alternative was also rejected 
because: (i) the proposed breeding farms by themselves would have had only a marginal impact on improving the 
genetic potential of the Heilongjiang herd; and (ii) financing assets for private sector enterprises that do not have a 
public goods element and do not positively impact the income and livelihood of significant numbers of dairy 
households would not be within the mandate of the World Bank. 
 
3. 
In view of the above, it is proposed that the HDP focus on: (i) helping about 10,000 households increase 
their income by engaging in dairying activities or by increasing their milking herd and production; and (ii) 
improving the genetic potential of the Heilongjiang dairy herd.  The later would be achieved by creating a few dairy 
breeding farms, importing superior semen and embryos and most importantly by setting up a dairy herd performance 
recording and selection program to help select and propagate genetically superior animals.  The HDP would be a 
five-year specific lending operation and would finance the following two project components: 
 
a. 
Household Dairy Production Component
 (estimated cost US$190 million).  Under this component, the 
project would finance the construction of civil works, the import of dairy cattle, and the purchasing and 
installation of equipment for about 90 dairy parks, each with a group of 50 households owning up to 10 
Page  2
 
 
dairy cows each.  The Project would also finance dairy cows, sheds and dairy equipment to assist more 
than 5,000 individual households engage in dairy production or increase the size and productivity of 
their existing herds.  It is expected that dairy parks infrastructure would be owned by local government 
or by private sector enterprises. The Task Team is discussing with the Borrower the feasibility of 
organizing smallholders into dairy producers associations and/or shareholding companies in order for 
them to own and operate their own parks and associated equipment (milking station, milk transport 
equipment, etc.).  
 
b. 
Dairy Breed Improvement Component
  ( estimated cost US$10 million).  Under this public goods 
component aimed at improving the genetic base of the dairy herd in Heilongjiang province, the Project 
would finance the establishment of a sustainable dairy cow genetic improvement program.  The 
constituents of this program would include civil works, equipment and capacity building for a central 
milk testing station, a herd performance recording system, data input, analytical and household 
reporting and genetic evaluation systems, a young bull rearing station and reserve semen collection and 
storage facility.  The Project would also finance the import of about 70 bulls and 300,000 doses of 
semen to bridge a short-term semen supply gap. 
 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
4. 
The Project would be implemented within the “one zone and two belts” dairy production areas of 
Heilongjiang Province.  The “one zone” refers to the central dairy production area of the Province and includes the 
suburbs of Harbin Municipality and the Cities/Counties of Hulan, Bayan, Wuchang, Yilang, Shangzhi, Beilin and 
Zhaodong.  The “two belts” refers to the western and eastern dairy production areas.  The eastern belt includes, inter
 
alia
, the suburbs of Mudanjiang, Jiamusi and Jixi Municipalities, Mishan and Hulin Cities, as well as Nenjiang and 
Jiding Counties.  The western belt includes, among other locations, An Da City, Wangkui, Qinggang Counties and 
the suburb of Daqing Municipality.  The project area would include a total of about 25 cities/counties.  About nine 
of these counties (33% of the project counties) are classified as either provincial or national poverty counties.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
5. 
One safeguard policy  -  4.01 Environmental Assessment  -  will apply to the project.  Other safeguard 
policies that might apply to the project are
: 
4.09 Pest Management, and 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement.  During 
preparation, a detailed examination of: (a) the potential environmental impacts of the expansion in the number of 
dairy parks, and (b) the technical alternatives available to mitigate them will be carried out.  According to the 
Chinese Environment Protection Agency (CEPA), all dairy parks of 300 head or more must complete an EIA before 
they are built.  In addition, given the system of land tenure, it is possible that some resettlement will be required in 
the establishment of the household dairy parks, which, in turn, would demand the preparation of a resettlement 
action plan once the need for an RAP is confirmed by the planned social assessment.  During preparation, attention 
will also be paid to the issues of pest management, in the case of an intensification in the production of fodder crops.      
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X ] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management
 (
OP 4.09
)        To be determined. 
 
 
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.12)         To be determined. 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples
 (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
Page  3
 
 
[ ] 
Forests
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property
 (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that EA category 
(mandatory): 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A. 
Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared. 
 
B. 
For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS 
 
August 2004. 
 
C. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  The specific 
studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
Safeguard studies will be launched in April 2004 and will be completed in July 2004. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Mohamed N. Benali 
Date March 15, 
2004 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Name 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Name  Rahul Raturi 
Date  March 16, 
2004 
Comments 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
 
