t




                             INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                            CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                     Report No.: AC609



    Date ISDS Prepared on February 4, 2004 and Updated on September 6, 2004

     I. BASIC INFORMATION

     A. Basic Project Data

    Country: China                                   Project ID: P070519
    Project Name: Fuzhou Urban Transport             Task Team Leader: Shomik Raj
    Development Project                              Mehndiratta
    GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change                 Global Supplemental ID: P086724
    Estimated Appraisal Date: November 1,            Estimated Board Date: February 15, 2005
    2004
    Managing Unit: EASTR                             Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                     Loan
    Sector: General transportation sector            Theme: Other urban development (P)
    (100%)
    Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:
    Loan/Credit amount ($m.): IBRD: 100
    Other financing amounts by source:                                                 ($m)

     B. Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN]

         1. To assist Fuzhou city development as it expands to include Nantai Island by:

        (i) Financing transport and associated infrastructure to facilitate development of existing
            peri-urban land in Nantai Island; and

        (ii) Assisting the city in developing a strategy that promotes fiscally, socially and
             environmentally sustainable development of Nantai Island.

    C. Project Description [from section 4 of PCN]

        2. Three components (with estimated total cost of $419 M have been tentatively identified
            under this project:

        (i) Road component (total US$396M, IBRD US$120M): There would be three sub-
            components:
        *   NanJiangBin Road andFlood-controlDyke. This 9 new km road section will extend
            the existing road along the north of Nantai Island (total US$86.5 M, US$40.8 M
            construction, US$27.6 M resettlement). The prime objective ofthis road is to facilitate
           urban development and improve environment of the riverbank. The City is planning to
            start works on a 3 km section (total US$36.3 M, US$13.8 M construction). The Eastern



                                                SCANNED

        section of this road is to be constructed on a yet to be built dyke along the Minjiang River
        (construction US$16.3 M).

   *     nd Section ofthe 3d RingRoad. This 12.5 km road section is proposed as a 100 meter
        2
        wide 6-lane expressway (US$227 M) serving the development and expansion of the
        Southern parts of Nantai Island. To be consistent with the future traffic, the City has
        decided to adopt a phased approach for its construction. The Phase 1 as advance works
        (31.5m width, 9 km long, andUS$70 M including resettlement) will begin this year.

   *    Kuiqi bridge. Fuzhou municipality is also considering a bridge that would connect the
        section of the rd Ring road described above to the North end of the river, connecting a
                       3
        harbour and the newly developed/developing industrial areas in Nantai Island (US$73.4 M
        total, US$ 39.3 M construction).

    (ii) Public Transport(US$ 18M, IBRD US$ 3M). Investment in public transport
         infrastructure to facilitate introduction of high quality bus services in tune with the
         growth in demand. Current proposals include two new bus maintenance depots
         (including a city public transport controlling center) and an advance bus information
         system.
    (iii)Technical Assistance (US$ 5M tentatively). This component will include training,
         capacity building and institutional development related to urban development
         management practices, as well as planning, implementation and operation of urban
         transport investments and services. Participation ofBank experts (including consultants
         with experience with integrated transportation land development and municipal finance
         to conduct City's fiscal capacity assessment) in the design ofFuzhou's new masterplan is
         scheduled to start in February 2004. Coincident with that effort, the design of the
         technical assistance component will be further discussed during preparation.

D. Project location (if known)

The Project is located in Nantai Island of Fuzhou Municipality in Fujian Province. Parts of the
Island (12 sq km) have been urbanized, but much of the island (total area 142 sq km) is in a state
peri-urban transformation with a mixture of farms, irregular settlements and some organized
development.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]

Fuzhou Municipality Government (FMG) has strongly committed to social and environmental
protection and improvement and has also demonstrated its capacity in implementing national
social and environmental policies. Last year, Fuzhou was awarded as one of the 39 "Garden
Cities" by central government. The city is also making full effort to become an "Environmental
Protection Model City" in China, which has been laid out in Fuzhou's Tenth-Five Year
Economic and Social Development Plan (2001-2005).

However, since this is the first Bank financed project in the city, FMG has limited experience
with Bank's safeguards policies. In the meantime, FMG has also set up an ambitious schedule
for preparation ofthe project. In order to effectively and efficiently address all social and
environmental safeguard issues before project appraisal, FMG has appointed advisors (from

Guangzhou Environmental Science Institute) with significant experience in preparing projects
compliant with Bank policies. In addition, a short safeguards training has been provided by the
Bank mission to PMO in September 2003, and brochures and CD-ROMs of Bank's OP/BPs were
distributed among relevant government agencies in Fuzhou. Currently FMG and their
consultants are working closely with the Bank's social and environmental specialists on
Environmental Assessment and preparation of Resettlement Action Plans.

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY


Applicable?    Safeguard Policy
               if Apiable, How Might It Apply?
     IIXJ      Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
               It is an urban transport project which includes construction of dykes, new roads
               and bus maintenance depots, and upgrading of existing roads. Therefore it should
               be classified as Category A, and OP4.01 Environmental Assessment shall apply.
               A full environmental assessment is required and currently is being conducted by
               the consultant.
   [TBD ]      Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
               Since Fuzhou is located at the estuary area of Min River, there are pieces of
               estuary wetlands scattered in the river bed. Selection of final alignment to avoid
               or minimize the impact to these wetland is critical for the project design. As the
               final alignment for Nan Jiangbin Road (together with new dyke project) is not
               decided yet, so a TBD is assigned to OP4.04.
      [ ]      Pest Management (OP 4.09)

     [X ]      Involuntary Resettlement (Qj/BP 4.12)
               This project includes construction of dykes, new roads and bus maintenance
               depots, and upgrading of existing roads, which may require land acquisition and
               resettlement. Hence OP4. 12 Involuntary Resettlement is triggered. It is expected
               all land acquisition will be identified during project preparation, and RAPs for
               each subprojects are currently being prepared by PMO and its consultant, with
               assistance from the Bank.
      [ ]      Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)

      [ ]      Forests (0j/BP 4.36)

      I]       Safety of Dams (2/BP 4.37)

     [XI       Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)
               A provincial level culture property FanchuanpuChurch is to be affected by the
               Nan Jiangbin Road, i.e. an administration building (as part of protected property)
               is to be relocated, though various alternatives have been considered and studied.
               Extensive public consultation is being conducted, relevant domestic approval
               procedure will be followed and the rehabilitation plan is being developed as a pre-
                condition of Bank's appraisal. There are also several cultural relics likely to be
               impacted by the proposed project for which further study is needed during EA

                    preparation.
       [ ]          Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)

       [ ]          Projects on International Waterways (                       /P/1PIGP   7.50)




Environmental Assessment Category:
[X] A [ ] B [ ] C           [ ] FI [ ] TBD (to be determined)

If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine                                that
EA category (mandatory):

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
     would be prepared.

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
     ISDS
    N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be                                  needed.
     The specific studies and their timing' should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.

     Environment Assessment:

                    1. A draft general ToR of EIA for entire project was submitted to the Bank on
                        Jan 16, 2004.
                    2. A draft EIA for the advance works was submitted to the Bank on April 20,
                        2004.
                    3.  Separate ToRs for all five investment components, such as the NJB Road,
                        NJB Dyke, The Third Ring Road, Kuiqi Bridge, and Bus Depots) were
                        submitted to SEPA on August 31, 2004
                    4. EIA ToRs disclosure locally by September 30, 2004
                    5.  Revised draft EIA for the advance works in NJBL will be submitted to the
                        Bank by October 8, 2004.
                    6. Two final draft EIAs (one for road components (including NJB Road and
                        Dyke, Third Ring Road, and Kuiqi Bridge) and the other for public transport



 By supportingtheproposedproject, the Bank does not intendto prejudicethefinal determination ofthe        parties'claimson the
disputedareas
I Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related  documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations andin a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.

                     component (Bus Depots)     will be submitted to   the Bank by November      15,
                     2004.
                 7. EIA disclosure  locally and in Infoshop    by November 30,    2004.

    Resettlement
                  i. A draft RAP for the advance works     in NJB Road was submitted      to the Bank
                     on February 3, 2004.
                 ii. A revised RAP for   the advance works    in NJB Road incorporating    Bank
                     comments was submitted     to the Bank on July  15, 2004 and was found
                     conditionally acceptable  by the Bank.
                iii. FMG approved   the revised RAP    for the advance works    in NJB Road on
                     August 18 and publicly  announced commencement         ofthe implementation    of
                     the RAP (except the  section in front of the Fanchuanpu Cathedral).
                iv.  PMO will distribute  RAP information booklet     to all affected persons  by
                    August 30.
                 v. PMO will submit   to the Bank the draft   of the second RAP    covering the rest of
                    resettlement activities of the project by Oct  15, 2004.
               vi. PMO will disclose    the draft of the second  RAP locally by Nov     15, 2004.
               vii. The two RAPs    will be available in the Infoshop by Nov     30, 2004.

   Cultural Property
                 1. PMO will commission     a qualified consultant  to work with the Cathedral     and
                    the road design instituteto develop a Cultural   Heritage Protection   Plan
                    (CHPP), as required   by PRC Cultural Heritage    Law, by Sept 30, 2004.     FMG
                    will submit the CHPP   to Fujian Provincial   Government and State
                    Administration of Cultural   Heritage (SACH) by     Oct 15, 2004.
                2. EIA consultants  will conduct cultural   property surveys in   line with PRC
                    Cultural Heritage Law   and OP 4.11 requirements     by Sept 30, and include
                    provision of cultural property in the draft  EIA reports.


IV. APPROVALS


 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:
                                                                                       Date: 9/7/04


                                     Shomik Rai Mehndiratta
 Approved by:                                                        /
 Regional Safeguards  Coordinator:  'Glenn Morgan                                     Date:    /v
   Comments
 Sector Director:                    JitendraN. Bajpa              -                  Date: qlf/o4
   Comments

