Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/30/2005 
Report No.:  AC1402
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P082993 
Project Name:  PCB Management and Disposal Demonstration Project 
Task Team Leader:  Helen Chan 
GEF Focal Area: Persistent Organic 
Pollutants 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 17, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 28, 2005 
Managing Unit:  EASEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other industry (100%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
18.34 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
11.73 
 
BILATERAL AGENCIES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
2.02
13.75 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the project is to identify and demonstrate environmentally-
sound and cost-effective policies, procedures and techniques for safely managing and 
disposing of China?s unique temporarily stored PCBs and associated PCB-contaminated 
wastes (e.g., PCB-contaminated soils and water).  The project will also serve as a 
demonstration of how this objective can most cost-effectively be achieved throughout 
China and in other countries that face the same challenge.  The criteria for selecting 
Zhejiang as the demonstration province include its comparatively: (1) longer history of 
PCB transport, storage, disposal, remediation at different levels of government -- 
provincial, county, and district; (2) higher level of PCB risks posed to both human health 
and the environment; (3) better and existing PCB management system at different levels 
of government for the project to be built on; (4) deeper economic development at 
different levels; and (5) stronger local government support.  
 
The Project will implement various cleanup measures in Zhejiang Province to mitigate 
the impact of PCB threats to human health and the environment, including the global 
environment.  In parallel, the project will strengthen Zhejiang Province?s PCB 
Page  2
institutional and regulatory system, management practices, and public awareness to 
prevent a recurrence of PCB pollution in the future.  PCB cleanup activities are not 
expected to adversely affect human health and the environment in the province.  The 
principal outcomes of the project will be that Zhejiang Province has successfully and 
cost-effectively disposed of its PCBs and PCB wastes in PCB storage sites, and that 
China has established a cost effective PCB cleanup framework, which can also be applied 
to the rest of the world.  
 
Project activities include:  
 
a. 
Establishment of an institutional and legal framework for PCB management and 
disposal in the Zhejiang Province,  
 
b.
Cleanup/removal of PCBs from about  56 PCB storage sites  in Zhejiang,  
 
c. 
Disposal of an estimated amount of 2,000 tons of PCB oil, PCB equipment, and 
high-PCB contaminated soils (PCB>=500ppm) in Shenyang.  
 
d.
Cleanup of an estimated amount of 20,000 tons of PCB-contaminated soils (PCB 
<500ppm) in Zhejiang,  
 
e. 
If the PCB-contaminated transformers are identified under the Sino-Italian 
Project, then 10 in-use large transformers in Zhejiang will be decontaminated; and  
 
f.    A draft national replication program of PCB management and disposal will be 
developed to the rest of China.  
 
The project will contribute to both national and global objectives.  On the national level, 
it will support implementation of the China?s recently prepared National Hazardous 
Waste and Medical Waste Management Plan, and will contribute to China?s ongoing 
efforts to reduce the risks to human health and the environment from industrial pollution.  
On the global level, the project will help China meet its obligations under the Stockholm 
Convention and contribute to global efforts to control toxic chemicals in general and to 
eliminate PCBs in particular.  It will also indirectly contribute to the objectives of two 
other international environmental agreements ? the Basel Convention on the Control of 
Trans-boundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal and the Rotterdam 
Convention on the Prior Informed Consent Procedures for Certain Hazardous Chemicals.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project has six components: (a) institutional strengthening; (b) development of a 
policy framework for PCB management and disposal; (c) PCB management in the 
Zhejiang Province; (d) disposal of highly-contaminated PCB wastes in the Liaoning 
Province; (e) project monitoring and evaluation; and (f) design of a national replication 
program.  
 
The major project activities will include characterization of PCB sites, remediation of 
PCB sites, and decontamination of low concentration PCB soil, storage of PCB wastes, 
transportation of PCB wastes, and disposal of PCB wastes.  Decontamination 
technologies for transformers will be evaluated and applied in some PCB transformers 
installed prior to 1980.  
 
a. 
Characterization of PCB sites will be conducted to identify the exact location of 
the buried PCB coffins using Georadar, then to determine the extent of soil 
contamination, if any, through soil sampling and analysis.  The main pollutant of concern 
Page  3
is PCBs. Soil characterization will be conducted through specific procedures to be 
specified under this project.  Through the characterization effort, the contours and 
quantities of contaminated soil ?distinguished as low (below 500 ppm) and high (over 
500 ppm) PCB concentration soils? if any, will be determined.  
 
b.
Remediation at buried PCB sites will be conducted according to the remediation 
plan to be prepared for each contaminated site and by people fully trained in remediation 
and industrial hygiene techniques. The plan involves site preparation (including 
construction of access roads, if necessary; assuring site security; equipment mobilization; 
prevention of soil collapse; water pumping; construction structures for site entry/exit); 
excavation of soil; removal of PCB capacitors, concrete coffins, and contaminated soil; 
containerization of PCB wastes that will be shipped; evaluation and restoration of the 
remediated site. Containerization will involve filling of contaminated PCB wastes in non-
chlorinated plastic bags, placing these bags in drums, closing and sealing the lids of the 
drums, and cleaning the surfaces and labeling of the drums.  
 
c. 
Decontamination of low concentration PCB soil (less than 500 ppm) will be 
conducted by thermal desorption.  Large lumps in the contaminated soil and clayey soils 
will be ground to a top size of 5 mm before the feed is introduced in a horizontal rotary 
thermal dryer.  Feed will be dried, if necessary.  To avoid formation of dioxins/furans, an 
indirectly-fired thermal desorber will be used (such as heat through metal walls or with a 
medium such as heated gas), where the heat will be conducted to the PCB-contaminated 
soil to evaporate the PCBs along with water vapor.  The gases will be either condensed 
(with the condensed PCBs adsorbed onto an activated carbon) or combusted in an 
afterburner (with the combusted gases rapidly cooled, and cleaned from chlorinated gases 
through scrubbing followed by activated carbon adsorption and baghouse filtration.  The 
scrubber water will be cleaned through neutralization/metals precipitation and recycled).  
To ensure that dioxins/furans are not emitted to the environment, dioxin/furan sampling 
in these discharge streams will be conducted. The spent carbon ?as a highly-contaminated 
PCB waste? will be containerized and sent to the Shenyang incineration facility after 
storage at the temporary storage facility.  
 
d.
Highly contaminated soil will be stored at a storage facility in Zhejiang before 
being shipped to the Shenyang incineration facility.  In addition, some low-concentration 
PCB wastes will be temporarily stored before thermal desorption.The design and 
operation of the temporary storage facility will be according to the requirements of 
Chinese regulation GB 18597-2001 for hazardous wastes and international standards.  
 
e. 
Highly contaminated PCB wastes will be incinerated at the Shenyang Hazardous 
Waste Incineration Center.  The design and operation of the PCB incineration facility will 
be according to the Chinese regulation GB18484-2001 (Pollution Control Standard for 
Hazardous Waste Incineration) and GB13015-1991 (PCB Wastes Control Standard).  
Under the project, additional equipment will be procured and installed to ensure that 
environmental discharges from this incineration facility meet the Stockholm Convention 
requirements.  The PCB incineration facility will include the following operations: PCB 
storage, shredding, and rotary kiln incineration with an afterburner; heat recovery; flue 
gas cleanup (using quenching, alkali absorption, carbon adsorption, and baghouse 
filtration); and environmental discharge of clean flue gases through a stack.  The PCB 
incineration facility will also have a wastewater treatment plant that will recycle all 
treated wastewaters and the treatment sludge to the incineration facility (so, there will be 
Page  4
no wastewater discharge to the environment).  The Shenyang Hazardous Waste 
Incineration Center will also house a medical incineration facility with its dedicated gas 
cleanup and wastewater treatment systems.  In addition, a plasma destruction facility is 
planned at another building of the Center in the future.  The EA for the Shenyang 
Hazardous Waste Incineration Center covers all operations at the Center.  
 
f. 
Public consultation for contaminated sites (in each city/town/village where PCB 
wastes have been identified) will be conducted after site characterization and prior to site 
remediation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Geographical areas involved in this project are the Zhejiang province and Xinming 
county near Shenyang city.  
 
a. 
Zhejiang Province is located in eastern coast of China with a population of 46 
million and covers an area of 100,180 km2. There are 11 cities (90 counties and districts) 
under the provincial administration. In May 2004, Zhejiang was selected as a 
demonstration province for PCBs inventory survey and management. Currently, there are 
43 storage sites identified from the survey, and it is expected that about 18 more sites 
would be potentially found as the inventory survey goes on. These sites are scattered 
throughout the province.  Buried PCB sites have been found in such locations as 
wastelands, backyards of previous power stations (now under the roads and buildings). 
There are also some PCB wastes placed in caves at mountainous areas.  Because of 
personnel changes resulting from power sector reform and poor recordkeeping practices, 
the specific numbers of capacitors at most storage sites are unknown. The exact locations 
for some sites are not certain, and have to be identified/detected during the following 
clean-up.  
 
b.
The Shenyang PCB Waste Disposal Facility is located in Xinmin County, which 
is about 70 km west of Shenyang, the capital city of Liaoning Province, northeast of 
China.  The plant site, which was established in 2002, occupies an area of 3 ha within a 
52,000 ha state-owned forest farm.  The area has relatively flat landscape and is part of 
alluvial sandy plain.   There are no environmentally or culturally sensitive sites around 
the project area. The nearest residential village is 2 km away, and the nearest surface 
water is Liuhe River, which is about 3 km away to the east (which is a seasonal tributary 
of Liaohe River). The ground water is about 3.4-4.7 m. deep.  
 
Shenyang Municipality has conducted a review of the land acquisition process and 
submitted to the Bank. Selection of this site followed a consultative process with various 
stakeholders, including local governments, related institutions and local communities. 
The facility information was shared with local communities.Public acceptance of the site 
was assessed through a survey and a final agreement was signed.  The site required about 
three hectares of forest land.  The acquisition process and all payment were completed in 
early 2002.   
 
5. Environment & Social Specialist's Team 
Mr Bekir A. Onursal (EASEN) 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (EASSD) 
Mr Peishen Wang (EASEN) 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental impacts associated with the project may result from possible PCB 
discharges (e.g. spills) resulting in contamination at storage/burial sites and during PCB 
waste excavation, clean-up, containerization, treatment by thermal desorption, temporary 
storage, transportation, and destruction by incineration.  No large-scale, significant and/or 
irreversible impacts are anticipated as mitigation measures will be taken to prevent, 
control and countermeasure environmental discharges of PCBs/dioxins/furans.  The main 
social safeguards issues associated with the project include possible acquisition of land 
and structures for the treatment of the PCB burial sites.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
This environment project aims at safe destruction of PCB wastes found in the Zhejiang 
Province.  Therefore, the project is environmentally beneficial.  However, because of the 
nature of hazardous wastes involved in this project, any adverse short-term impact 
through an inadvertent discharge of PCBs or dioxins/furans to the environment coupled 
with potential mismanagement of such discharges would likely have long-term adverse 
environmental impacts.  For this reason, the project will incorporate the necessary 
preventive measures to control discharges (e.g. spills) of PCBs or dioxins/furans to the 
environment through appropriate design, construction, and operating practices.  In 
addition, necessary measures will be taken under this project for containment and 
countermeasure of these environmental discharges.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternatives were evaluated for selecting: (i) the location of the temporary storage 
facility, (ii) the technology of soil decontamination in Zhejiang, (iii) the location of the 
PCBs incineration facility in Shenyang, and (iv) the technology used for PCB 
Page  6
incineration.  Final selection was chosen considering environmental, social, technical and 
financial factors.  
 
a. 
Two sites at Qiaosi and Chongxian were considered for temporary storage of PCB 
wastes in the Zhejiang Provinces.  The Chongxian site was selected due to its remote 
location from residential areas and surface waters, proper geological conditions, and 
proximity to transportation routes.  
 
b.
The alternative technologies considered for treatment of low concentration PCB 
contaminated soil in Zhejiang included: land filling, incineration, plasma, in situ 
vitrification, base-catalyzed dechlorination, solvated electron technology, gasification, 
thermal desorption and biological remediation.  The thermal desorption technology was 
selected given the large amount of PCBs contaminated soil, technology effectiveness, and 
low costs.  
 
c. 
For the Shenyang incineration facility, three locations were compared. The 
current location was decided based on its distance from local villages (more than 2 km), 
no requirements for resettlement, no requirements for farmland acquisition, convenient 
access by road transportation, and availability of power and water resources.  
 
d.
Rotary kiln incineration was selected for PCBs disposal in Shenyang through 
comparison of various options, including plasma and non-incineration technologies. The 
selection was made based on the following factors:  treatment efficiency to meet the 
national and international discharge requirements (after flue gas cleanup), the extent of 
waste reduction, and maturity of technology worldwide and successful experience with 
this technology in China since 1995 (in pilot operations).  
 
e.    If PCB transformers are identified during testing, then a study will be conducted to 
compare the transformer decontamination technologies (metallic sodium technology and 
continuous dehalogenation process (CDP) such as KPEG).  Based on the selected 
technology, a small EA will be prepared prior to the decontamination of selected 
transformers.  This EA will be cleared by the Chinese authorities and the Bank.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Zhejiang Provincial Environmental Science Institute, which was retained by SEPA, 
prepared the EA for the proposed PCB management activities in Zhejiang. The EA report 
for the PCB disposal facility in Shenyang was prepared by China Coal Mining Industry 
Corp. International Engineering Group (Shenyang Design & Research Institute) and 
Shenyang Academy of Environmental Science in 2002 and approved by Provincial EPB. 
Given the additional funding for equipment in Shenyang, the EA was revised/updated to 
meet the Bank?s requirement.  
 
The EA Report (covering the activities in the Zhejiang Province) describes the currently 
identified 43 PCBs sites in Zhejiang (from the Sino- Italian Inventory Project) in terms of 
baseline information, and assesses potential impact/risks on environment and human 
health.  The project will develop a set of remediation procedures covering the whole 
cleanup process based on previous experience in the Zhejiang Province on PCBs site 
cleanup and relevant national regulation/standards and international practice.  These 
mitigation procedures, which will be implemented/improved as demonstration for 
nationwide replication, include procedures for inventory survey, PCBs site identification, 
Page  7
data collection and characterization, preparation prior to excavation (design, training, 
etc), protection of site security, site cleanup, PCB waste packaging, on-site soil 
decontamination, transportation, temporary storage, record keeping, interagency 
coordination, public consultation and information disclosure.  For the currently identified 
43 PCBs storage sites, prioritization was conducted based on limited data gathered from 
site visits with consideration of both environmental and social concerns (e.g. way of 
sealing, distance to local community, possibility of surface/groundwater contamination, 
pollution status if known, land development status etc) using weighting factors.  Based on 
the results of prioritization, the top 10 sites is planned to be cleaned-up starting from the 
second year of the project, with the first year focusing on infrastructure construction 
necessary for the following cleanup (i.e. PCBs waste storage and disposal facility).  The 
detailed site characterization will be conducted during the implementation stage 
following the procedures developed in the EA.  
 
The EA Report addresses the potential environmental impacts and risks associated with 
the design/construction and operation of the temporary storage facility, and proposes 
mitigation measures.  The location of storage has been carefully selected through 
evaluation of alternatives, and the design and operation of the storage facility will strictly 
follow the relevant national standards for hazardous waste storage.  Prior to construction 
of this storage facility, an EA will be prepared for approval by Chinese authorities and 
clearance by the Bank.  
 
Thermal desorption is a mature technology commercially used in developed countries 
for decontaminating soil from hazardous wastes, including PCBs.  The thermal 
desorption facility to be constructed under this project will include the appropriate design 
and operating conditions to ensure compliance with standards.  The thermal desorption 
facility will be equipped with the treatment systems for the treatment of the flue gas and 
wastewaters resulting from condensed gases.  In the first year of project implementation, 
a
feasibility study will be carried out to determine which technology is best utilized in 
Zhejiang.  The study will include evaluation on a fixed or mobile thermal desorption 
facility or other technology that are available for soil decontamination.  Prior to 
construction of the thermal desorption facility, an EA will be prepared for approval by 
Chinese authorities and clearance by the Bank.  
 
For the PCBs disposal in Shenyang, the EA report addresses the potential environmental 
impact of the overall Shenyang Hazardous Waste Disposal Center, including PCBs waste 
incinerator, medical waste incinerator and plasma incinerator.  Air dispersion modeling 
was used to assess the potential impact from PCBs, HCl, SO2 and dust. The EA 
concluded that with the proper technology selected for emission control and mitigation 
measures, the environmental impacts of gas emission, water discharge, noise and solid 
waste will be controlled to bring the discharge and ambient pollutant concentrations 
under compliance with relevant national regulations and standards.  
 
The long-distance transportation of PCB wastes from Zhejiang to Shenyang would 
impose a potential risk to the environment. A set of management procedures and 
emergency response procedures have been developed in the EA to avoid/minimize the 
Page  8
risk (e.g. training of drivers, use of signs on trucks, manifest system, and emergency 
equipment and procedures).  
 
The project will be implemented directly by POPs Convention Implementation Office of 
SEPA with support from its expert group, local PIU in Zhejiang and Shenyang Hazardous 
Waste Incineration Center. As a national environmental administration agency, SEPA has 
the strong capacity and authority to fully implement the project. This will be further 
strengthened by extensive institutional capacity building and training activities planned as 
part of the project.  
 
a. 
Zhejiang Resettlement Policy Framework.    The general locations of the PCB 
burial sites have been identified and the exact locations will only be known after further 
field work.  Impacts related to the site treatment will only be known when the treatment 
design is completed.  Therefore Zhejiang Province has developed a Resettlement Policy 
Framework to deal with the possible land acquisition and resettlement issue.  
 
b.
Liaoning Resettlement Action Report.  The Shenyang PCB Waste Disposal 
Facility involved in this project is built at a developed site on a state forest farm.  This 
site was selected and established in 2002.  Its selection followed a consultative process 
with various stakeholders, including local governments, related institutions and local 
communities.  The facility information was shared with local communities.  Public 
acceptance of the site was assessed through a survey and a final agreement was signed.  
The site required about three hectares of forest land.  The acquisition process and all 
payment were completed in early 2002.The PCB incineration would not require any 
relocation or additional land acquisition.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Public consultation was conducted in Shenyang and Zhejiang respectively, with project 
affected people specifically in Shenyang and general public in Zhejiang. Given the fact 
that site characterization and clean-up will be conducted during the implementation, it is 
agreed that detailed public consultation with specific project-affected people will be 
conducted prior to site cleanup, following the consultation/disclosure procedures 
developed in the EA/EMP.  
 
In compliance with Bank?s Policy on Information Disclosure, the Shenyang EA 
document has been disclosed to the public in Xinmin City Library, relevant village 
committees for Shenyang component on December 30, 2004, and the Zhejiang EA has 
been disclosed to the public on the Zhejiang EPB?s external website on February 8, 2005.  
The Shenyang and Zhejiang EAs were disclosed in the InfoShop on January 14, 2005.  
 
The resettlement planning in Zhejiang for this project would involve local governments, 
the affected villages, institutions and the affected households in the inventory of impacts 
and development of the compensatory packages.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Page  9
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/10/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/08/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/14/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
04/15/2005  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/10/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/10/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/14/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Page  10
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Helen Chan 
03/29/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bekir A. Onursal 
03/29/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaohua Zhang 
03/29/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Peishen Wang 
03/29/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
03/29/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
 
 
Comments:   
