Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC796 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: April 19, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P075732 
Project Name: CN-Shanghai Urban Environment 
APL Phase 
Task Team Leader: Mats Andersson 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 27, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: November 10, 2005 
Managing Unit: EASUR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: Sewerage (50%);Water supply (25%);Solid 
waste management (25%) 
Theme: Access to urban services for the poor 
(P);Municipal finance (P);Pollution management 
and environmental health (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Bekir Onursal; Ke Fang; Chaogang Wang 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 300 
Other financing amounts by source:  Borrower 
($m) 
 
 
2.  Proposed project development objective(s) 
 
The three loans under this first programmatic APL in China have the objective of improving 
environmental conditions in Shanghai by progressive development and implementation of integrated, 
metropolitan-wide measures.
1
  Implementation of APL1 --which objective is to put in place some of the 
underpinnings and enabling conditions to pursue these measures-- has started with about US$10 million 
(5%) of the loan disbursed to date.  Progress is being made on infrastructure finance and PPP, including a 
proposal for an enterprise bond issue, recently submitted to the SMG for approval; design of a District 
Financing Vehicle (DFV) by an existing SMG investment company (UDIC) is  underway; various joint 
venture O&M contracts have been signed with foreign firms for solid waste disposal; and a long term 
O&M contract is underway for a wastewater treatment plant to be financed under APL1.     
 
This second phase of the program aims to deepen the urban environment agenda through further 
investments, and policy/institutional reform initiatives.  While the development objective of APL2 
remains ”to have the surrounding districts participate increasingly in the metropolitan-wide measures to 
improve wastewater and solid waste management, and to deepen the scope of the environmental agenda 
being addressed across the Municipality.”, SMG wish to, based on updated strategic sector master plans, 
consolidate and enhance the water/wastewater and solid waste systems in the core city as priority for 
APL2, and cautiously diversity the APL program to new sectors and outer districts. This is consistent 
with SMG’s development letter submitted to the Bank at the APL1 stage.  Investments will be positioned 
in the context of Shanghai’s strategic plans for the greater municipality and ensure short-term benefits as 
well as longer-term, strategic investment effectiveness.  For example, the APL2 water investments are 
                                                          
 
1
 According to the APL PAD, “Phase 2 will support implementation of programs that address environmental issues 
of greater complexity and respond to the deepening of SMG’s work on the environmental agenda (including solid-
waste management program consolidation, bond finance and a district financing vehicle, and continue to expand the 
pilot approaches to upgrading urban environment services in poorer, underserved areas.”  
Page  2
 
 
positioned within SMG’s strategic shift towards Yangtze River as a main water source, in order to by year 
2010 achieve European water quality standards.    
 
The institutional and policy agenda in APL2 will particularly be enhanced to: (a) optimize water/ 
wastewater and solid waste sector strategies and management, particularly in the core city; and (b) further 
expand the agenda in these sectors for the greater metropolitan area, in the outer Districts where the 
economic and urban population growth is most rapid, and the environmental protection and the service 
levels are lagging; (c) implement initiated infrastructure finance and private (social) sector participation 
initiatives (e.g. bond finance, DFV, PPP); and (d) deepen institutional strengthening and reform initiatives 
supported by the APL1, including heritage protection and related strategy development.  While SMG’s 
overall environmental agenda is broad, including air quality improvement and energy and transport sector 
initiatives, as mentioned above, SMG wishes to concentrate the Bank support to the water/wastewater and 
solid waste sectors to achieve the highest impact and implementation efficiency, preventing fragmentation 
of efforts. 
 
3.  Preliminary project description 
 
The proposed project would consist of three main investment components and an institutional 
development and capacity building component.  The total costs of the proposed project is estimated at 
about RMB 5,600 million ($675 million) with an anticipated loan in the order of $300 million. 
 
While at the time of APL1 approval it was expected that APL2 would include an air pollution 
management component, SMG does not wish to include any related investments in APL2 in order not to 
fragment efforts, but would rather maintain the focus on the water/wastewater and solid waste sectors,  
where significant investment needs still exist, in both the core city and outer districts.  SMG will carry out 
a study on improved air quality in Shanghai during APL1, creating a base for considering such 
component in APL3.  A study on the potential use of Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) fuel for buses will 
also be carried out by SMG under APL1.  The Bank team has proposed limited financing under APL2 for 
work on a comprehensive air quality management system/plan. 
 
 
Rationale for financing proposed investments:  
SMG, with the support of the Bank, is increasingly using 
multiple sources of funds for its infrastructure, and proposes to use APL funds for investments within its 
strategic environmental investment program that do not easily lend themselves to private sector financing;  
e.g. upgrading or closing of existing facilities, network investments, and to some extent investments in 
outer districts and other under-serviced areas.  This is reflected in the identified project scope below.  
These investments are strategic in the sense that they are part of the broad urban and environmental 
services development program, for which SMG also has other sources of funds (own funds, private, local 
bank loans;  Shanghai raw water company is listed on Shanghai stock exchange).  Bank engagement will 
continue to include the broader sector issues, such as sector master planning, user charges, social 
participation, services benefiting relatively poorer communities, and infrastructure finance development. 
 
 
 
 
(i)
 
Water/Wastewater Management (loan of about $150 million) 
 
Objective: 
Improved drinking water quality through strategic rationalization of SMG’s water supply 
system and related treatment enhancements, upgrading of wastewater management  infrastructure 
including sludge treatment and disposal. 
 
Page  3
 
 
Identified investments are: (a) upgrading of treatment processes at two large water treatment plants
2
; (b) 
trunk sewer replacement and system strengthening; and (c) sludge disposal facilities.  This would include 
support for related construction management and municipal level sector development (water supply 
system optimization and rationalization, financial management reform, etc.). 
 
(ii) 
Solid Waste Management (loan of about $50 million) 
 
Objective: 
Environmentally sound and cost effective metropolitan-wide solid waste systems, 
applying market-based instruments with user charges and private sector operators.  
 
Identified investments are: (a) domestic waste separation, transfer facilities and trucks; (b) closing of 
three large open dumps; and (c) MIS system.  This would include support for related municipal level 
sector development (urban solid waste survey, studies on source separation, compost market and 
performance of incineration plants, implementation of market-based instruments, and optimization of 
disposal facilities). 
 
(iii) 
District Government Infrastructure (loan of about $90 million) 
(through a District Financing Vehicle (DFV) or otherwise) 
 
Objective: 
Environmental and service improvements in suburban districts, applying a new, and for 
China innovative inter-governmental mechanism. 
 
Suburban districts of Shanghai face challenges in accessing low cost funds and attracting private investor 
interest for developing and financing urban infrastructure.  In this context Shanghai through its UDIC 
proposes to set up a DFV as a special purpose vehicle or subsidiary to: (a) act as a vehicle to arrange 
effective financing for infrastructure projects in the districts -  including pooling of obligations, e.g. for 
eventual securitization through syndicated loan or bond markets; (b) act as an intermediary for attracting 
strategic investors to infrastructure projects in the suburban districts; and (c) act as an intermediary for 
World Bank (WB) lending in both sub-project preparation and implementation/supervision phases.   
 
From a project management standpoint, DFV would add value as an intermediary between districts / 
utility companies and the WB, constituting a wholesale approach for its financing.  WB has supported 
similar approaches (sometimes including guarantee facilities) globally by delegating project identification 
and appraisal to a financial intermediary which operates in compliance with Bank environmental and 
other guidelines.  APL2 would include support for DFV management and related sub-project preparation 
and supervision. 
 
The World Bank Group (WBG) can potentially assist with loans, equity, risk management products 
(credit enhancement guarantees, partial risk guarantee, etc.), as required, to help reduce the cost of capital 
and project risk.  MIGA guarantees are available for private investors.  Capacity enhancement support 
would be provided through WBI.  A WBG support team has been established to this effect.  
 
DFV’s legal status and its relationships with UDIC and SMG (upstream), and districts and end utility 
companies (downstream), is under review and design.  It is anticipated that development of DFV will 
occur in stages towards a long-term vision.  Shanghai prefers to start with a simple and flexible model to 
avoid legal and regulatory hurdles. A cautious approach is proposed for APL2, with 2/3 of the DFV sub-
projects for financing pre-defined and appraised before APL2 approval, as summarized below. 
 
                                                          
 
2
  
Possibly including renovation of related water distribution networks  
Page  4
 
 
Identified District Government level investments are: (a) Jinshan WWTP expansion and domestic solid 
waste collection; (b) Qingpu (Zhujiajiao) sewerage system and lake water quality improvements; (c) 
Chongming County solid waste system; and (d) Hongkou District urban planning and infrastructure 
upgrading incl. items related to Shanghai’s Heritage Strategy.  These would correspond to Bank loan of 
about $60 million.  In addition, an allocation is proposed of $30 million for projects to be identified 
during APL2 implementation.   
 
4. 
Institutional Strengthening and Training (IST)  (loan of about $10 million) 
 
This would include support of special studies --beyond IST-type items included in each investment 
component-- and continued activities related to APL1 initiatives on infrastructure finance, air quality, 
heritage strategy, and management training. 
 
Implementing Agency 
 
APL Project Coordination Office (PCO) is led by the Shanghai Development and Reform Commission 
(SDRC) with most project resources being staff of relevant authorities and agencies. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
All main locations are determined.  Some locations in Districts are to be determined as project preparation 
proceeds.
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
The Academy of Environmental Sciences (for EIA) and the Academy of Social Sciences (for RAP) in Shanghai, have 
experience from previous similar projects.
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management
 (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[X] 
Involuntary Resettlement
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples
 (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[X] 
Cultural Property
 (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[X] A   [ ] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that EA category 
(mandatory): 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A. 
Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared. 
 
B. 
For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS 
 
C. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  The specific 
studies and their timing
3
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Mats Andersson 
Date 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Name 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Name 
Date 
Comments 
                                                          
 
3
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
 
