INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: AC958
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: October 4, 2004
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country: China                        Project ID: P083322
Project Name: Sichuan Urban           Task Team Leader: HirDaki Suzuki
Development Project
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 1, 2005  Estimated Board Date: November 15, 2005
Managing Unit: EASUR                  Lending Instrument: Slpecific Investment
Loan
Sector: Roads and highways (60%);     Theme: Pollution management and
General water, sanitation and flood   environmental health (]P'); Other urban
protection sector (40%)               development (S)
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the Task Team: Chongwu Sun, You]an Zou
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):
IBRD: 190
Other financing amounts by source: Municipal Counterpart       240 ($m)
B. Project Objectives
The development objectives are to address infrastructure bottlenecks to facilitate continued
economic growth, and to improve environmental conditions and the quality of life of growing
populations in the key provincial cities of Mianyang, Panzhihua, Suirning and Yibin.
C. Project Description
The size of these cities (near 500,000 people), their rapid growth rates and strong revenue bases
make them suitable project candidates.
Panzhihua was established in the 1960's as a major industrial center -to extract and exploit its
substantial mineral resources. With a population of 550,000, the city is an important industrial
center and a supplier of raw materials and electric power. Major addiitional power generation
facilities are planned in the area to serve the Changjiang River Basin. Proposed investments are
intended to protect against continued, substantial riverbank erosion a]ong the Jinshajiang River,
increase the capture of wastewater and open up new areas for city expansion.
Mianyang (population 570,000) is an economic, cultural, and informnation technology center in
northwest Sichuan increasingly renown for scientific research and electronic goods production.
Proposed investments are intended to both accommodate its continuing rapid population growth



and help expand its solid electronics industry through development of mixed land-use expansion
areas to the south and west of the city.
Suining (population 420,000), equidistant from Chengdu and Chongqing, is a regional service
and market center on the Fujiang River in east Sichuan that is well connected to regional road
networks. A new rail link to Chengdu and Chongqing is being constructed. Proposed
investments would develop a necessary city expansion area to relieve the high density of existing
development, accommodate continuing rapid population growth (around 7% p.a.), and attract
new economic activities and livelihood opportunities. Two new bridges across the Fujiang River
are also proposed.
Yibin is a communication and commercial center near the borders of Yunnan, Guizhou and
Sichuan provinces. The city's population of over 400,000 (including its floating population) is
projected to grow rapidly based on its thriving economic activity in energy, chemicals and wine
manufacturing, and its plans for major new power generation facilities at Xiluodu and Xiangjiaba
on the Jinsha River. Proposed investments would improve the arterial urban road network
linking the downtown area to adjacent urban districts slated for rapid growth.
Proposed investments include; a) infrastructure (including roads and drainage; water supply and
wastewater networks; and amenity open space) for mixed land use cily expansion programs; b)
road network improvements (including river bridges); and c) riverbank protection and
wastewater improvements that both reflect relevant growth oriented p riorities and complement
ongoing development programs including environmental infrastructure.
City/Proposed Investments          Estimated Cost    Estiniated Cost  Bank Financing
(RMB millions)    (US 5 million)   (US$ million)
Panzhihua                                        1,122             135              71
*   Riverbank strengthening: Jinshajiang     470
River embankment; interceptor sewers
*   Bingcaogang-Renhe Road to open up         325
new development area south of
Jinshajiang River
*   Land acquisition & design costs, etc.     326
Mianyang                                         1,090            131               50
.   Infrastructure for mixed land-use        278
expansion in southern development zone
*   Infrastructure for mixed land-use         402
expansion in Pioneer Park
*   Land acquisition & design costs, etc.    410
Suining                                          620               75               30
.   Infrastructure for mixed land-use        223
expansion in Xining District
*   Arterial road link connecting Xining site  99
*   Bridges across Fujiang River              200
*   Land acquisition & design costs, etc.     98
Yibin                                            608               73               39
*   Widening of distributor road on north     380
bank of Min and Chiagjiang Rivers
*   Extension of distributor road on south    120
bank of Jinshajiang River



*  Land ac uisition & desi n costs, etc.  120
Total                                     3,455          430            190
TA for capacity building could support urban planning and GIS; infrastructure operations and
maintenance; transport planning, traffic management, and wastewater sector reform.
D. Project location
Project sites have been identified for almost all proposed components in the four cities of
Mianyang, Panzhihua, Suining and Yibin in Sichuan Province. In Panzhihua, alternative
alignments are under consideration by the Municipality and CIECC for the central section of the
Bingcaogang-Renhe Road that links the city center with a rapidly deleloping area to the south,
and will be reviewed under the feasibility study. Panzhihua's intent lo reconfigure and reduce
the number of planned wastewater treatment plants may affect the design of the interceptor
sewers proposed under the project. After Sichuan Province confirmed that city expansion areas,
including Pioneer Park in Mianyang, are consistent with recent State directives relating to
development of economic/industrial zones, NDRC approved the city expansion components for
Bank financing under the project. Revised proposals for Suining now include two bridges across
the river and a potential new link road between Xining District development and new
development around the main railway station area. The need for and timing of these additional
bridges will be reviewed in the context of the existing demand for cross-river travel indicated by
traffic volumes on the second bridge when it opens later this year as well as growth forecasts for
the ongoing development on the east bank of the Fujiang River.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The PMO for the ongoing Sichuan Urban Environment Project has also been designated to
coordinate the proposed new project. The Southwest Jiaotong University has also been involved
with the Resettlement aspects of the existing project, including periodic external monitoring, and
has been appointed to prepare the RAPs. The Institute's work on resi ttlement of bank-financed
projects over the past 10 years, including for all railway projects, has been satisfactory.
The Sichuan Provincial Academy of Environmental Protection Science (SAES) and the China
State Power Corporation's Chengdu Hydroelectric Investigation and :Design Institute (CHIDI)
(both Class A EA institutes) have been selected as EA practitioners fc)r proposed components in
project cities. The SAES will prepare the EAs for Mianyang and Suinirig, and CHIDI will prepare
the EAs of components in Panzhihua and Yibin. The Sichuan Provincial EA Evaluation Center
will be contracted as the quality control institution that will produce tlhe project-wide EA Report
and Executive Summary. All three institutions have previous experience preparing EAs for
World Bank-financed projects.



II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Applicable? Safeguard Policy
If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
[XI      Environmental Assessment (2P/BP 4.01)
The project EA would include a project-wide umbrella EA report, four respective
EA reports for project city components, an EA Execul ive Summary and an
Environment Management Plan (EMP).
The project's potential environmental impacts reflect the range of infrastructure
investments including urban roads, wastewater, river embankments, area
development for city expansion and, possibly, river brjidges. Key aspects to be
reflected in the EAs include: (a) analysis of design alternatives; (b) public
participation, consultation and disclosure arrangements; and (c) any potential
linkages between the project and non-Bank financed projects.
[TBD]     Natural Habitats (2P/BP 4.04)
[I      Pest Management (OP 4.09)
[XI      Involuntary Resettlement (/BP 4.12)
All four project cities would involve land acquisition nMd relocation, which could
be significant in Yibin. One RAP for all sub-projects in each of the four cities,
together with a Project-wide summary, would be prepared.
[TBD]     Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)
A report on the Status of Minority Nationalities in the project area will be
prepared by the PMO verifying, in particular: a) the nLimbers and locations of
each Minority Nationality in Sichuan Province, the four cities and the project
areas in each city; and b) if there are minority nationa[ities living in communities
in the project areas, a comparison of their life and procluction characteristics will
be made vis-a-vis the Han.
I ]     Forests (2P/BP 4.36)
[ ]     Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)
[TBDI     Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)
A historic temple is close to the proposed Xining District development area in
Suining. Possible impacts as well as any necessary mitigation measures will be
determined during project preparation.
I I     Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)
[ ]     Proiects on International Waterways (OPBP/GP 7.50)
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
disputed areas



Environmental Assessment Category:
[X] A [ ] B [ ] C [ ] FI [ ] TBD (to be determined)
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that wil [ be taken to determine that
EA category (mandatory):
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Target date for the Project Performnance Review (PPR), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
would be prepared: January 2005
B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
ISDS: n/a
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related sludies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing' should be specified in the F'AD-stage ISDS. Key
steps/milestones for EA preparation include:
*  Contracts signed with EA institutes:               end August 2004
*  TORs for proposed components in four cities:        October 2004
*  First public consultation when TOR available:       Clot. & Nov. 2004
*  Data collection, monitoring and analysis:           Dec. 2004 to Feb. 05
*  EA report (first draft):                            Feb. & Mar. 2005
*  Second public consultation:                         N'[arch 2005
*  EA revision and final version:                      JLne 2005
*  Information disclosure:                             JLme 2005
IV. APPROVALS
Signed and submitted by:
Task Team Leader:                a
Approved by:                                    /
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Glenn Morg     /                 ' 
Comments                                       /
Sector Manager:                 Keshav Varma                       No_ Nv 4  zoo.
Comments
I Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language th.t are accessible to potentially affected
persons.



