Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC450 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: November 26, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P068752 
Project Name: Inner Mongolia Trade and Transport 
Project 
Task Team Leader: Supee Teravaninthorn 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 28, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: December 16, 2004 
Managing Unit: EASTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (90%);Sub-national 
government administration (10%) 
Theme: Export development and competitiveness 
(P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Municipal 
governance and institution building (P);Trade 
facilitation and market access (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Chaohua Zhang, Naoya Tsukamoto (EASES); Peishen 
Wang (WBOB) 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 100 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN] 
 
Apart from the investment in the transport linkage with Russia and Mongolia and expanding highway 
network capacity in the relatively poor northeastern corridor of Inner Mongolia, the main challenge of the 
project would be to strengthen the institutional capacity and policy development capability in trade 
logistics between China, Russia and P.R. Mongolia.  Some technical assistance will be provided to help 
Inner Mongolia in general, and Hulunbeir League in particular, to plan, facilitate and expand its 
international trade potential.   
 
The proposed project is designed with a clear objective to maximize the use of transport infrastructure as 
a mean to promote international trade of Inner Mongolia in general, and Hulunbeir League in particular.  
Specifically, it will help speeding up the general development of Hulunbeir League, preparing it to cope 
with the increasingly important role the central government has assigned to it to be the country’s main 
contact point for trading with Russia.  In so doing, the project aim to: (i).  Specifically, the project aims 
to:  (i) improve the capacity of transport infrastructure and network planning to effectively handle the 
significantly increasing volume of international freight traffic along China’s northeastern border;  (ii) 
develop the freight transfer and trade facilitation program suitable to meet the growing demand and flow 
of border trade; and  (iii) provide technical assistance to Inner Mongolia Communications Department 
(IMCD), and Hulunbeir Municipality in particular, to build up its capacity in planning, facilitating and 
managing the increasing transport demand and requirement for international trade traffic. 
 
 
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN] 
 
In order to fulfill the above mentioned project objectives, the project would include the following 
components:  
Page  2
 
 
(i) 
an expansion of highway capacity through the provision of about 175 km of Hailar-
Manzhouli Class 1 highway (HMH);   
(ii) 
a local highway network development program to upgrade and rehabilitate about 550 km of 
key highway network identified either as a key linkage for international trade facilitation 
at some smaller border ports with Russia and Mongolia, a critical network missing link, 
or a road for poverty alleviation;   
(iii) 
a freight transfer and trade facilitation program.  While designed mainly for China’s trade 
with Russia and Mongolia, Inner Mongolia recognizes that Eastern Russia’s and P.R. 
Mongolia’s trade with countries beyond China could conceivably transit Chinese territory 
for shipments through Chinese seaports. The facilities and the trade regime that will be 
developed under the proposed project will meet the requirements of such trade in transit.  
The component comprises: 
\01\02
a transfer station in which facilities for transferring cargo between modes (rail and 
road) and between Chinese and Russian trucks as well as warehousing are available; 
\01\02
a process for the fast and convenient examination and clearance of cargo by Customs 
and quarantine authorities; and  
\01\02
trade documentation and practice  internationally accepted by importers/exporters, 
banks and insurance companies and for which parties engaged in international trade 
are familiar with.   
(iv) an institutional strengthening component including a study on measures to facilitate 
trade between China and her land-locked neighbors and various support and training 
aiming to improve the quality of development zone planning, trade promotion, 
transportation efficiency improvement, as well as project management, 
environmental monitoring, and supervision of highway investment.  The training 
program will be defined during the pre-appraisal mission.   
 
The highway capacity expansion and local network development program is straight forward relative to 
the freight transfer and trade facilitation program.  Although the second largest international land port in 
China, Manzhouli is essentially a border check point and there are no terminal handling facilities for the 
loading and unloading of cargo except for some private facilities belonging to large importers/exporters.  
While through transport and door-to-door shipments are always preferred and would be encouraged, there 
is a need for common user loading/unloading facilities for the use of small shippers/traders without 
premises of their own.  A transfer station, initially essentially a truck terminal, with basic facilities such as 
a hardstanding area for the holding of trucks and a few loading/unloading docks and a small warehouse 
will be required.  Russian trucks are not permitted to travel beyond Hailar and cargo for destinations 
beyond Hailar would have to be carried by Chinese trucks and hence transfer facilities have to be 
provided at a point between Manzhouli and Hailar. The transfer station will also serve as rest stop for 
truckers who would have to drive long distances.  Essential facilities and services required in the transfer 
station include a documentation center for cargo clearance, and some basic amenities for truckers in 
addition to parking bays for trucks, working areas for the transfer of cargo between trucks, warehousing 
and storage facilities for cargo.  In light that Hailar is centrally located in relation to the five border 
crossings with Russia and two with P.R. Mongolia, the development of a transfer station in Hailar would 
be the most logical.  The proposed transfer station in Hailar would not only serve trade crossing the 
border at Manzouli but at the other border crossings with Russia and P.R.Mongolia as well.
 
 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project will be located in the Hulunbeir League, a prefecture in the northeastern tip of Inner Mongolia 
Autonomous Region.  It borders with Heilonhjiang Province, Russia and P.R. Mongolia.    
 
Page  3
 
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
[Guideline: Refer to Section 5 of PCN]
 
 
Inner Mongolia Communications Department (IMCD) has good experience with two World Bank 
projects, i.e. the Tri-provincial Highway Project and the Inner Mongolia Highway Project, both are 
currently ongoing.  IMCD has demonstrated its institutional capacity to implement RAP and EAPs 
designed for those projects.  Social assessment will also be carried out under the project.  Given IMCD’s 
relatively limited experiences in this exercise, an outside expert institution has been engaged to assist 
them conduct the social assessment.   
 
As the project is located in Hulunbeir, implementation of RAP will have to be arranged by the local 
government of Hulunbeir.  However, it will be the first time the local government of Hulunbeir plans and 
implements safeguard aspects of an investment project funded by an international organization.  With the 
limited capacity at the local level, IMCD agreed to take the lead in planning the safeguard aspects of the 
project and to transferred their experienced safeguard staff to work full-time on the project preparation 
and implementation.  However, it is essential to maintain and improve the capability of staffs working on 
the safeguards issues, and therefore appropriate trainings program in these area will be provided under the 
project. 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[x] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[TBD] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[x] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[x] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[TBD] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[X] A   [ ] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that EA category 
(mandatory): 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A. 
Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared.    
July 30, 2004 
 
B. 
For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS 
 
C. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  The specific 
studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environment:  
 
(1) Terms of reference for the EIA were reviewed by the Bank and the final version was 
submitted to the Bank on October 2003. 
(2) Draft EIA and EAP (in Chinese) were reviewed by the Bank on September and October 2003.  
The English drafts will be submitted in February 2004.  They will be finalized by May 30, 2004. 
 
Resettlement:
 
Resettlement action plans are under preparation to address the various impacts related to land 
acquisition and possible relocation.  A social assessment study has been planned to be conducted 
on the issues relating to ethnic minorities in the project areas.  Ethnic minority development plans 
will be developed if this is determined necessary by the social assessment.  These action plans 
will be prepared by May 30, 2004 
 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Supee Teravaninthorn 
Date 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Name 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Name 
Date 
Comments 
                                                          
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
 
