                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                     RESTRUCTURING STAGE
         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring

                                                                        Report No.: ISDSR15301

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:           18-April-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                       China                  Project ID:                  P126611
 Project Name:                  Liaoning Coastal Economic Zone Urban Infrastructure and
                                Environmental Management Project (P126611)
 Task Team Leader(s):           Da Zhu
 Estimated Board Date:          28-Mar-2013
 Managing Unit:                 GSU08
 Sector(s):                     Urban Transport (72%), Wastewater Collection and Transportation
                                (13%), Flood protection (7%), Wastewater Treatment and Disposal
                                (7%) , Sub-national government administration (1%)
 Theme(s):                      City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                     No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:        225.72                      Total Bank Financing:         150.00
 Financing Gap:             0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
      Borrower                                                                                            75.72
      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                              150.00
      Total                                                                                             225.720
 Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred          No
 project?


 2. Current Project Development Objectives
 To improve the efficiency of urban transport and address water scarcity issues in selected cities in
 Liaoning Province
 Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
To improve transport connectivity and reclaim wastewater in selected cities in Liaoning Province

3. Project Description
The proposed Bank supported project will have three components and seven sub-projects.

Component 1: Improving urban transport. This component will invest a total of US$ 182.36 million, of
which US$117.1 million is an IBRD loan, in improving public transport systems and fostering transit
oriented development along selected public transport corridors by integrating land use and transport
planning. The Project will finance new urban roads and rehabilitation of existing roads, and ensure the
engineering designs incorporate traffic management and traffic calming features and include facilities
that promote cleaner alternative modes of transport, such as bicycling and walking. The designs were
also adapted based on the function and typology of streets within the urban area, such as neighborhood
streets, local access roads, major urban thoroughfares, public transport corridors, and roads servicing
industrial zones. Furthermore, all road designs include necessary underground urban utilities, traffic
signs and management systems, landscaping, street furniture, and other ancillary facilities. In Panjin,
the project will acquire buses and improve bus depots to support the overall improvement of public
bus transport services provided by the Panjin Public Transport Company.

The streets and urban roads were selected based on the following criteria: (i) the quality of the
infrastructure and importance of the road as major public transport corridor, and current and future
traffic demand, (ii) importance as access to major regional transport systems (high speed rails), and
(iii) the demonstration opportunity to design and implement streets that create more livable, safe and
sustainable neighborhoods. Both transport agencies and traffic management authorities have
participated in the selection, design, and preparation of the project. The technical assistance
component will complement the infrastructure investments and provide support to the development of
comprehensive traffic management plans for each.

In Dongang City, the sub-project investments are focused on the development of new areas that are
connected to major regional and urban public transit systems. Designs and land use plans are being
adapted to improve access and incentivize the use non-motorized transport and the bus transport
systems. In Kuandian and Lingyuan City, the sub-projects will support the rehabilitation of critical
roads and local streets within the urban transport network and improve pedestrian, biking and public
transport facilities.

Specific investments in these four sub-projects include construction, rehabilitation and possible
realignment of roads and streets in urban areas; investment in bus lanes, stations and other related
facilities; traffic signs and management equipment; sidewalks and other pedestrian amenities; bicycle
lanes, parking and other facilities; landscaping and street furniture; and basic urban service pipelines,
including drainage, wastewater, communication and electricity infrastructure.

In Panjin City, the sub-project will finance the improvement of the local bus transport system, and
investments include the acquisition of new buses, the construction of bus depots, bus maintenance and
complementary facilities, and bus operation systems.

Component 2: Improving urban wastewater treatment and reclamation. This component will invest a
total of US$ 41.71million, of which US$ 31.25 million is an IBRD loan, in wastewater treatment
facilities and water reclamation systems, while also separating sewage and drainage networks in
selected cities. The main objective is to rationalize the use of scarce water resources, reduce
groundwater abstraction, and reduce the pollution loads on surface water resources. Investments
include the construction of new and rehabilitation of existing wastewater plants, separation of sewage
and drainage networks, and replacement of groundwater supply systems by water reclamation supply
systems. Sub-project investments include:
(a)      Wastewater treatment and reclamation and drainage in Lingyuan City, including the
installation of separate stormwater and municipal sewerage collection pipelines, improvement of the
wastewater treatment plants, and construction of reclaimed wastewater distribution system, which will
be connected to the Industrial Park in Lingyuan City;


Component 3: Technical assistance, training and advisory services. This component is closely linked
to the infrastructure investments under components 1 and 2 and will help increase impacts and
sustainability of investments, as well as build the capacity of the local staff and officials involved in
delivering water and urban transport in participating cities. This component will be fully financed by
the IBRD Loan, with an allocation of US$ 1.7 million. During project preparation, the team worked
closely with Provincial and local authorities and identified technical assistance needs and topics that
are common to the project cities and will help increase long-term impacts of the project. The identified
and agreed areas of technical assistance support to be financed by the project, include:
(a)      Building the capacity of local transport management agencies and support them in preparing
or revising urban transport investment and management plans, focusing on promoting public transport,
pedestrian, bicycles and overall traffic safety;
(b)      Developing comprehensive capital investment and asset management plans for local
implementing agencies to ensure long-term sustainability of project investments; and,
(c)      Supporting project management and supervision, including consultancy services and training
in: technical supervision, procurement and financial management; contract supervision; environmental
management plans, and resettlement action plans.

Summary of proposed changes in restructering:

The proposed changes in this restructuring are: (a) to drop two subprojects due to the lack of
counterpart financing and changing local priorities; (b) to increase the disbursement ratio of civil
works category to fully cover the existing appraised project costs; (c) to reallocate the funds from two
dropped subprojects to the one consolidated works category; (d) as a result of dropping two
subprojects, the Borrower’s contribution and total project cost reduced; (e) to modify the Project
Development Objective (PDO) and Results Framework as a result of cancellation of subprojects.

The project restructuring will not change the project safeguard category (category B), will not trigger
any new safeguard policies, and will not introduce new safeguard instruments. As no new subprojects
are being added, there are no changes to the safeguard policies. The implementation of the
environmental management plan has been adequate to date. The project is in compliance with
resettlement policies and action plan, although implementation has been slow, but shows good signs of
improvement over the last six months.

4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The project will be implemented in five small to medium sized cities located in Liaoning Province,
northeast of China. The cities are spread along the coastal zone, but most of them are actually located
tens of miles inland on flat terrain with a temperate climate and average precipitation ranging from
around 700mm to nearly 1000mm per year.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Chongwu Sun ( GEN02 )
Shuang Zhou ( GSU02 )
Zhefu Liu ( GSU02 )

6. Safeguard Policies                         Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01           Yes
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                   No
Forests OP/BP 4.36                            No
Pest Management OP 4.09                       No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11        No
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                 No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12           Yes
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                     No
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No
7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60         No

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Social Safeguards

The project has significant environmental and social benefits, as it supports the development of the
economic growth along the coastal area of Liaoning province and promotes the development of the
infrastructures in those supported small cities for better living environment. The public consultation
and participation process undertaken during preparation enables the project to combine the public
concerns into the project preparation to minimize the project negative impacts and mitigate the
negative impacts on land acquisition and private housing requirement.

Involuntary Resettlement

The Bank Policy OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement is triggered. The project will affect 11
townships/residential committees, 18 villages/communities, and one State-owned farming factory in
Linyuang City, Donggang City, Panjing City, County and Kuandian County. The project will require
the permanent acquisition of 77.93 hectares of collective land, including 22.42 hectares of paddy land,
20.84 hectares of dry land, 14.78 hectares of orchard land, 19.27 hectares of housing lots and o.62
hectares of other land. The dominant current land use is growing rice by paddy land and the rest is
mostly growing wheat by dry land and fruits by orchard land. The project will require 49,582 square
meters of private houses, including 27,214 square meters of concrete and brick houses, 2,294 square
meters of brick houses, 16,973 square meters of brick and wood houses, and 1,106 square meters of
simple houses. As the result, the project will impact 7,364 persons. According to the surveys, a total of
1,662 households with 6,794 persons will be permanently affected, including 1,233 households with
4,666 persons affected by land acquisition, 556 households with 1,997 persons affected by housing
demolition, and 204 households with 681persons affected by both land acquisition and housing
demolition, 77 businesses and other entities with 812 persons. The Project will affect 175 households
with 570 persons temporarily (temporary land occupation).

The RAP prepared by the project entity provides detail regarding resettlement policy principles and
regulations to be followed, compensation rates and budget, mitigation measures to restore incomes
where necessary and institutional and monitoring arrangements.
A resettlement office under Liaoning PMO will be set up to supervise the resettlement
implementation. A resettlement office will be established under each PIU and ensure timely
implementation of the approved RAP. The project city land and resources bureaus will be responsible
for the land acquisition approval. The RAPs should be completed prior to contract signature.

The task team conducted due diligence reviews to the local projects that link to the Bank supported
project components. Donggang City and Chaoyang City village-upgraded-programs to be funded by
the municipalities during the project implementation supported by the Bank might be carried out. The
task team identified that those programs are linked to the Bank supported project components in the
cities. A resettlement policy framework was requested to guide the future resettlement activities
funded by local funds. A waste water treatment plant funded by Linyuan city in Year 2008 and
completed in Year 2010 was identified as a linkage project. The due diligence review confirmed
Chinese land law, Liaoning provincial land administrative management regulation and local regulation
have been followed. The living conditions of the resettled people have been restored to the conditions
prior to their rehabilitation program in compliance of the substantive aspects of Bank involuntary
resettlement.

All the adverse impacts were surveyed and addressed during preparation of the project RAP and the
process of due diligence review.

The restructuring in April 2016 will dropped two subprojects: the subproject in Longcheng District
under Component 1, Improving Transport Systems, and the subproject in Suizhong County under
Component 2 Improving Urban Wastewater Treatment and Reclamation. The disbursement percentage
for all civil works categories will be increased to 90%. The restructuring changes will not increase new
land acquisition and resettlement, and will not affect the implementation of projects Resettlement
Action Plan. The restructuring will not trigger any new social safeguard policy. The ongoing project
does not have any significant outstanding social safeguard implementation issues. The update on
reduced PAPs will be reflected in regular external monitoring plan.

Environmental Safeguards

Environmental Assessment

The Bank policy OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment is triggered and the project has been classified as
Category B. An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) was carried out for each proposed project
components in accordance with China’s national policy and regulations. Based on the EIAs, an
environmental management plan (EMP) was prepared to summarize the key environmental impacts, to
determine the mitigation measures and environmental monitoring program and necessary institutional
arrangement as well as capacity building development. The documents have been prepared on the
basis of Chinese legal and policy framework for environmental protection, master plans and
environmental plans as well as applicable Bank safeguard policies and Bank group’s Environment,
Health and Safety Guidelines.
Through preparation of safeguard documentation, there was no any potential large scale, significant
and/or irreversible environmental impacts to be found. From proposed components, following benefits
are expected: improvement of road network and public transport systems in the project cities/counties,
and increase/improvement of wastewater collection and drainage systems. Furthermore, the proposed
project will improve water reuse and increase wastewater treatment efficiency.

The project consists of two major categories of engineering: (1) construction, widening and
rehabilitation of urban roads and improvement of public transport facilities; and (2) construction and
extension of municipal water supply, wastewater collection and drainage, including industrial
recycling water works. The proposed construction activities would cause urban road occupation and
city traffic disruption, which may bring residents inevitable inconvenience, including potential safety
issues. During construction phase, construction machines and transportation vehicles will create
emissions, airborne dust and noise problem.

In the PCN stage ISDS, safeguard policies of OP4.11 Physical Cultural Resources were indicated as
TBD, though there is no significant cultural relics be found in the proposed project areas. Therefore,
it is confirmed that OP 4.11is not triggered because of no any significant cultural relics found in the
project areas. In case any relics to be found during construction, "Chance-Find" procedure and
relevant clauses described in the EMP (in the Generic Environmental Codes of Practice) should be
included in the contracts.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
The proposed project will help improve road network and urban service facilities, thus to improve
local people living condition and welfare. The project is in line with the overall master plan of urban
sector development in Liaoning Province.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Environmental: Alternative study was considered during the project feasibility study and EIA
preparation for more technical details, e.g. site selection analysis, technical options, as well as with
and without project option analysis. Comprehensive comparisons were analyzed with consideration
of technical, economic, as well as environmental and social factors.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Social: The PMO contracted experienced institute to guide the social safeguards documentation and
set up resettlement implementation offices in the engaged counties and cities under the provincial
PMO. The relevant agencies to engage into the project implementation participated into the project
preparation. The staffs from the PMO and agencies are getting familiar to the Bank requirement,
specific to the safeguards requirement.

A consolidated RAP covering the key resettlement information in those 6 counties/cities was
approached and the stand-alone RAP for each engaged county/city was prepared. During the project
preparation, the social safeguards consulting institute worked with the design institute in charge of
project feasibility study on the selections of the subproject locations. The analytical works were
undertaken and the project negative impacts were minimized, and the mitigation measures were
developed according to the Bank requirement. Public consultations were undertaken by the consulting
institute and the project entities in the engaged counties/cities to address the importance of the
safeguards policy. The project preparation was a well-done process to disseminate the Bank
requirement on social safeguards and combined the people concerns into the RAPs and also important
process to provide on-job training courses to each engaged levels of the agencies in the counties/cities
and townships and as well as village level.

An experienced monitoring institute, independent to the PMO and the project agencies, will be
contracted to monitoring the resettlement activities and the monitoring report will be reviewed by the
Bank twice a year as requested.

Environmental: The EA report, prepared by the client and their EA consultants, thoroughly
addressed the potential environmental and social impacts envisaged for the project, and developed
adequate measures in the EMP to avoid, minimize, mitigate and compensate the potential adverse
impacts. The preparation of EA documents followed the relevant national laws/regulations and
guidelines, as well as Bank’s safeguards policies and environmental health and safety (EHS)
guidelines.

A stand-alone EMP has been prepared based on the findings of the EIA report. The EMP summarized
the key environmental impacts and detailed the environmental management and supervision
organizations and responsibilities, mitigation measures, training plan, monitoring plan, and budget
estimates of EMP implementation. It includes sets of Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOPs) for
contractors, which will be incorporated into bidding documents and contracts to ensure effective
implementation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Social: The project will provide significant benefits to the people who are living in the projects and the
adjacent areas as Laobaixing strongly requested through people’s meetings and media. The project
stakeholders are the local communities and the people in the engaged counties and cities. The affected
people considered the project will give them opportunities to have better living environment and
develop their businesses.

During the project preparation process and the stages of the project design, public consultations were
conducted and will be continuous by the resettlement offices in the engaged counties and cities and
also the independent monitoring agency, and the project information were disseminated to the
displaced families for refining the project design, selections of the subprojects and the locations of the
subprojects.

The consolidated RAP, stand-alone RAPs in the engaged counties/cities were disclosed in the
municipal libraries from October 2 to 16, 2012 and sent to Infoshop in October 23, 2012.

Environmental: EMP implementation will be managed by each city PMO under supervision of
Liaoning Provincial PMO. The contractors and supervision engineers will be required to assign
qualified environmental staff to their team to ensure effective implementation of the EMP. During
the EA preparation, public consultations were conducted two times in accordance with the World
Bank’s OP4.01. Main public concerns have been addressed in the EA, and necessary mitigation
measures were developed in EMP and the project design. The EA/EMP documents have been locally
disclosed prior to disclosure at Bank’s Infoshop on October 12, 2012.

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  28-Sep-2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                                               10-Oct-2012
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                                        30-Sep-2012
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  13-Dec-2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                                               14-Dec-2012
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                                        16-Oct-2012
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [X         No [   ]    NA [   ]
                                                                         ]
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [X         No [   ]    NA [   ]
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?                             ]

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or    Yes [ X ] No [      ]    NA [   ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                       Yes [ X ] No [      ]   TBD [   ]

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to     Yes [    ]   No [ X ] TBD [     ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [ X ] No [        ]    NA [   ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [ X ] No [      ]    NA [   ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional           Yes [ X ] No [   ]    NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in     Yes [ X ] No [   ]    NA [   ]
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [ X ] No [   ]    NA [   ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [X]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader(s):           Name: Da Zhu
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:            Name: Surhid Gautam                       Date: April 21, 2016
Practice Manager/Manager:      Name: Abhas K. Jha                        Date: May 9, 2016
