Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1074 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/27/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P081348 
Project Name: HENAN TOWNS WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Takuya Kamata 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 20, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 1, 2006 
Managing Unit: EASUR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (50%);Sub-national government administration (30%);Sanitation 
(20%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Municipal governance and institution 
building (P);Environmental policies and institutions (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
150.00
150.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
2.1 The proposed project would support the development of sustainable water supply and  
 
wastewater management systems in key towns of Henan, to help improve the living conditions  
 
and support their growth, and to establish a model for developing water supply and wastewater  
 
management system for towns of China.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Water supply . intake and treatment capacity expansion or development of 25,000 m3/day .  
 
60,000
m3/day in 44 towns; development of expansion of water distribution network; some 
basic  
 
sewerage facilities in a subset of the towns both the location and scope to be determined.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
44 towns scattered across Henan province, with population from about 30,000 to 100,000   
 
Page  2
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Moderate   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The task team confirmed that the project has started the preparation of individual EAs for all 
the subprojects which are currently at various stages of completion.  The provincial PMO is 
preparing a consolidated EA for the entire project.In order to be consistent and to make sure that 
the EAs for the subprojects are well prepared, the safeguards team asked the task team to send a 
few completed subproject EAs so they can be reviewed by EASES.  The task team agreed to do 
so. 
 
There was some discussion on the possible use of a Strategic EA for the entire project area.  
The task team explained that there is nothing similar to an SEA in the Chinese regulations and 
few precedents, so it would be difficult to proceed with one.  The province will prepare one 
consolidated EA which will cover the entire project with inputs from subprojects. 
 
The meeting also discussed the review process for the subprojects.  It was agreed that the 
team need not review every EA, but there will be a review of a sub-set of the subproject EAs as 
well as some post review of randomly selected EAs to make sure that they meet the agreed 
standard.  The meeting also asked the task team if the EA will include work on the analysis of 
quality and quantity of ground water to be used for this project.  The task team confirmed that 
such analysis has been done as part of the feasibility study.  The safeguards team recommended 
that this be included in the EA as well.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
There will be land acquisition in the project.  Based on the feasibility study, land acquisition 
will average approximately 65 mu. The project will prepare one RAP for the entire project.  The 
first draft is expected to b completed by end of April 2005.  The same resettlement team which 
worked on the Xiaolangdi project is involved this project. 
 
The safeguards meeting strongly recommended that the task team develop a Resettlement 
Policy Framework to cover any subprojects that will not be ready by appraisal.  The task team 
agreed to consider this approach. 
 
There potentially will be an issue regarding the different rates of compensation in different 
counties for similar land acquisition; however, the task team feels confident this issue will not 
present difficulties since counties are distant and distinct from each other. 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
The meeting then discussed possible project linkage.  The meeting agreed that there are no 
project linkage issues.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/29/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  10/12/2005 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
November  
 
2004
.
October 2005   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Songsu Choi 
09/27/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
09/27/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
09/27/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
