INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: AC614
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
0 Counltry: China                       | Project ID: P072721
Project Name: CN-GEF-Heat Reform &       Task Team Leader: Robert P. Taylor
GEF Focal Area:    1   11                Global Supplemental ID:
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 30,   Estimated Board Date: March 8, 2005
2004
Managing Unit: EASEG                     Lending Instrument: GEF Grant
Sector: District heating and energy      Theme: Climate change (P);Small and
efficiency services (100%)               medium enterprise support (S)
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Youxuan Zhu, Bekir Onursal
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):
Other financing amounts by source:                                   ($m)
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY                                            18
B. Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCNJ
The objective of the proposed project is to achieve sustained and growing increases in energy efficiency
in residential buildings in China's cold and severe cold regions and in the heating systems which supply
them.
C. Project Description [from section 4 of PCNJ
The proposed GEF project is the focal point of a broader heat reform and building energy efficiency
program involving World Bank assistance. The other main part of this program is a series of World Bank
policy studies, primarily on implementation options for heat reform. The program could also involve
additional donor support and is coordinated with ongoing international assistance mobilized by the
Government to support its heat reforrm and building energy efficiency program.
The proposed project is a national-level project, including three components: (a) a large demonstration
project in Tianjin Municipality, integrating development of modern, variable flow heat supply systems.
construction of highly energy efficient residential buildings, and implementation of comprehensive heat
billing and pricing reforms; (b) national-level coordination and policy support; and (c) phased-in heating
system and building energy efficiency investments and reform activities in other northern Chinese cities,
to be identified and developed as project preparation and implementation for the first two components
proceed.



D. Project location (if known)
The focus of the project is to implement comprehensive programs in 4-7 northem Chinese cities. Tianjin
municipality, where a large, integrated demonstration project is being prepared, is a city of provincial
rank located 150 km southeast of Beijing. The demonstration project involves partial financing of energy
efficiency equipment to be incorporated within two housing developments, and associated heating
facilities within the Municipality.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCNJ
Since all project sites are not known, the borrower will prepare, with Bank assistance, a framework for
screening projects for safeguard policies that may apply. The Tianjin component is being coordinated by
a project management office which is managing other Bank projects and has gained experience in
resettlement and environmental analysis.
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Applicable?   Safeguard Policy
pp ______e. If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
[ Y]     Environmental Assessment (OP/PB     4.01)
The GEF will finance a portion of the incremental costs of energy efficiency measures
and equipment in housing developments and their associated heating plants and systems.
These housing complexes and heating systems, which involve investments of about 100
times the level of GEF incremental cost financing, have been planned and will proceed
regardless of Bank and GEF involvement following Chinese environmental protection
regulations. Strictly speaking, such GEF-financed parts of the project are not linked to
the broader housing development projects, as defined under the safeguards policies. For
subprojects where GEF project financing is proposed only in support for incremental
energy efficiency equipment and installation investments, EIAs based on Bank
regulations for the full housing development projects and associated heating
infrastructure will not be required. However, environmental impact reports on these
broader investments must be submitted by the project developers to the Bank for due-
diligence review and approval. These reports must include definition of the main
environmental impacts, evidence that all applicable Chinese regulations have been
followed, and description of, and mitigation measures taken against, any potential
environmental risks. In addition, simple environmental impact analysis should be
completed for the energy efficiency investments to be financed by the project, as part of
the above subproject impact reporting. Finally, a Project Environmental Policy
Framework will be prepared by the Grant Recipient, and should be approved by the Bank
before the completion of project appraisal. This Framework will present a screening
procedure to determine if Bank EA policies apply to given future subprojects, the nature
of EIAs to be prepared for any possible investments for which EA policies are triggered,
and the nature of environmental impact reports for the Bank's due diligence review for
investments which are not directly linked, as defined under the safeguards policies of the
Bank, to the project-financed investments.
I NJ     Natural Habitats (OP/HP 4.04)
The project will not finance activities that would significantly convert or degrade any
protected areas, known natural habitats, or established or proposed critical natural
habitats as defined under the safeguards policy. The project EIA and subproject
.___.__L_ screening mechanisms will ensure that subprojects that impact natural habitats are



identified. No subprojects that adversely affect critical natural habitats will be supported
under the project.
[NI      Pest Management (OP 4.09)
The project will not procure any pesticides nor will an increased use of pesticides result
from the project.
[VI Y    Involuntary Resettlement (QP/BP 4.12)
The GEF will finance a portion of the incremental costs of energy efficiency measures
and equipment in housing developments and their associated heating plants and systems.
These housing complexes and heating systems, which involve investments of about 100
times the level of GEF incremental cost financing, have been planned and will proceed
regardless of Bank and GEF involvement following Chinese environmental protection
regulations. Strictly speaking, such GEF-financed parts of the project are not linked to
the broader housing development projects, as defined under the safeguards policies. For
subprojects where GEF project financing is proposed only in support for incremental
energy efficiency equipment and installation investments, RAPs based on Bank
regulations for the full housing development projects and associated heating
infrastructure will not be required. However, social impact reports on these broader
investments must be submitted by the project developers to the Bank for due-diligence
review and approval. These reports must include definition of the main social impacts of
any associated resettlement or land acquisition, evidence that all applicable Chinese
regulations have been followed, and description of, and mitigation measures taken
against, any potential risks. Finally, a Project Social Safeguard Framework will be
prepared by the Grant Recipient, and should be approved by the Bank before the
completion of project appraisal. This Framework will present a screening procedure to
determine if Bank resettlement or indigenous peoples' policies apply to given future
subprojects, the nature of RAPs and/or I's to be prepared for any possible investments
for which social safeguard policies are triggered, and the nature of social impact reports
for the Bank's due diligence review for investments which are not directly linked, as
defined under the safeguards policies of the Bank, to the project-financed investments.
[NJ      Indi2enous Peoples (OD 4.20)
There are no Indigenous Peoples (IP) communities, as defined in the policies, located in
the Tianjin Component project area. Under the Other Northern Cities Component, the
Social Impact Reports descriped above would evaluate whether the subprojects affect
Indigenous Peoples as defined under the policy. In the event that IPs are present at these
sites, appropriate IP plans will need to be developed, and must be reviewed and approved
by the Bank.
[ Nl      Forests (OP/BP 4.36)
The project will not finance activities that would involve significant conversion or
degradation of critical forest areas or related critical natural habitats as defined under the
policy.
[ NJ     Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)
The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any large dams as defined
under this policy.
[ NI     Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)
.___________ It is highly unlikely that the land under the Tianjin Component will contain sites having



archeological, paleontological, historical, religious or unique natural values as defined
under the OPN. Under the Other Northem Cities Component, a screening mechanism
will be incorporated into the Social Safeguards Framework to include the identification
of culturally significant sites, as defined under the OPN, and determine if project
activities will adversely affect them.
Discussions in all subproject areas with local antiquities bureaus will be held and
appropriate clauses will be included in construction contracts regarding procedures to be
followed in the event of chance finds of culturally significant sites.
[ NJ      Projects in Disputed Areas (OPIBP/GP 7.60)
The project is not located in any known disputed areas as defined under the policy.
[ NJ      Projects on International Waterwavs (OPBP/GP 7.50)
There are no known project components involving international waterways as defined
under the policy.
Environmental Assessment Category:
[ ] A [ X] B [] C [ J FI [ ] TBD (to be deterrnined)
III. SAFEGUARI) PREPARATION PLAN
For this simple project, which twill not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-
stage ISDS is November 18, 2004. The environment and social impact reports for the
subprojects to be appraised before board presentation, and project environment and social
safeguards frameworks also will be completed by then.
Unless there are changes in the project scope or design, the EASEG Sector Manager will issue
the safeguards compliance note, following review of the above documentation and following the
project Decision Meeting planned for about November 25.
IV. APPROVALS
Signed and submitted by:                                              qe      ?AQCLJ
Task Team Leader:               Robert P. Taylor \AYV. & ¼ l                 Date
Approved by:                                   A7 " (\                n     - 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Glenn S. Morgan                            ate
Commentst                                         /77-,a
Sector Manager:                 Junhui Wu                                    Date
Comments                                 /   -. *                      z95      Qty
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties claims on tfhe
disputed areas



