Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC708 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: March 12, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P084742 
Project Name: Irrigated Agriculture 
Intensification Loan III 
Task Team Leader: Richard B. Reidinger 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November, 2004
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2005 
Managing Unit: EASRD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (70%); 
Agricultural extension and research (20%); 
Forestry (10%) 
Theme: Other rural development (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Qingtao Xie 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 200 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN] 
 
The overall objectives of the Project would be to help raise agricultural output and farm 
income in the 3-H Basin through environmentally sustainable, modern irrigated agriculture based 
on improved water/agriculture productivity, and to facilitate farmer adjustment to increased 
market competition and integration with the global economy after WTO accession.
  
These 
objectives would be achieved by investments to help intensify and modernize agriculture 
production, build capacity and carry out institutional change and reform, and strengthen CAD 
management and procedures. 
 
 
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN] 
 
IAIL3 would finance sustainable development of modern irrigated agriculture in about 115 
counties in 32 prefectures/cities in five provinces:  Anhui, Hebei, Henan, Jiangsu, and Shandong
, 
with a total cost estimated at about US$466 million (using an IBRD loan of US$200 million and 
counterpart funds of US$266 million).  Project provinces and proposed project scope and 
contents are similar to those of IAIL2, but with several innovations and improvements added.  
The project would have four components: 
 
Page  2
 
 
(a) 
Water-saving Irrigation and Drainage.
  
The main activities of this component would 
be: (i)
 
rehabilitation and upgrading of local I&D systems at the tertiary level and on-
farm, application of improved irrigation methods and technologies, and improvement of 
about 504,878 ha of low-and medium-yield land; and (ii)
 
construction of 298,165 ha of 
water-saving irrigation facilities to demonstrate real water savings and increased 
agriculture production per unit of water through integrated irrigation engineering, 
agronomic and management practices. This component would contribute significantly to 
development and implementation of innovative actions aimed at improving agriculture 
production and the efficiency and economic value of water use in irrigated agriculture. 
 
(b) 
Agriculture Intensification and Support.  
Activities to be financed would include: (i) 
strengthening and modernization of extension and support services; (ii) agricultural 
measures to improve water use efficiency;  (iii) improvement in quality of agricultural 
products; (iv) balanced fertilizer use; (v) integrated pest management (IPM); (vi) 
cropping pattern adjustment to build on local comparative advantages; (vii) improved 
farmers’ access to technical and market information; and (viii) establishment of 
demonstration sites for vertically integrated agriculture based on farmer/agribusiness 
partnerships
 
with a high level of farmer participation, including support for improved 
production, processing, certification and marketing of “green foods” through FAs. 
 
(c) 
Forestry and Environment Monitoring.  
The main activities would be establishment of 
shelter-forestry networks around farmlands, windbreak protection for soil conservation, 
tree nurseries, and environmental monitoring.   
 
(d) 
Institutional Development and Support.  
This would include: (i) development of  
SIDD/WUAs and FAs in the five provinces, plus expansion of pilot WUAs to five 
additional CAD provinces; (ii) establishment of pilot Farmers’ Dragon-head 
Demonstration Bases (FDDBs) to test how vertical integration from production to market 
combined with farmer participation through FAs can improve overall profitability and the 
farmers’ share in the market value of production; (iii) training related to project 
implementation and management; (iv) monitoring, evaluation and research on project 
impacts and issues (e.g., groundwater); (v) and the MIS. Project provinces for IAIL3 are 
the same as for IAIL2, and the components are the same except that special activities 
have been added in four new area of focus: water saving, FAs, green foods, and 
adjustment to international competition after WTO entry. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
[Guideline:  If the location is not yet identified, please indicate if there are alternative locations 
under consideration or how the location is to be determined during project preparation] 
 
IAIL3 would finance sustainable development of modern irrigated agriculture in about 
115 counties in 32 prefectures/cities in Anhui, Hebei, Henan, Jiangsu, and Shandong provinces 
(also known as the North China Plain). 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
[Guideline: Based on past experience and other available information] 
Page  3
 
 
 
The borrower and in particular the State Office of Comprehensive Agricultural 
Development (SOCAD), which is the responsible office, has extensive experiences with Bank 
project and the applicable safeguard policies in such projects. Its institutional capacity is 
adequate. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[x] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
Since IAIL3 is very similar to IAIL2 which is classified as category B, the task 
team would like to seek guidance on the possibility of a waiver of the requirement 
for a new full EIA for IAIL3. In its place would be a review documenting the 
environmental impact of IAIL2 and lessons learned based on the extensive IAIL2 
environmental monitoring database and analysis, with revision of the IAIL2 
environmental management and monitoring plan as appropriate.  This would have 
the advantage of being based on actual experience rather than theoretical 
estimates.   
[ ] 
Natural Habitats
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[x] 
Pest Management
 (
OP 4.09
) 
 
It is expected that the Pest Management (OP4.09) Safeguard policy would apply. 
Agricultural activities such as IPM would address the use of pesticides, and a pest 
management plan built on IAIL2 experience with IPM would be prepared for 
IAIL3. It was agreed with the Borrower that the responsible Bureaus would 
review and approve each provincial IPM (pesticides) Impact Assessment Report 
for IAIL2, and propose mitigation measures as necessary to be reflected in the 
design of IAIL3 as needed.   
 
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples
 (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property
 (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that 
EA category (mandatory): 
 
Per environmental Safeguard requirements (OD4.01), IAIL2 had a complete EIA, and no 
adverse environmental impacts have been found in implementation. The proposed IAIL3 is very 
similar to IAIL2 which is classified as category B, and the proposed IAIL3 investment suggests 
no major environmental issues. Therefore, the project would be classified as category B. A 
review documenting the environmental impact of IAIL2 and lessons learned based on the 
extensive IAIL2 environmental monitoring database and analysis, with revision of the IAIL2 
environmental management and monitoring plan will be completed before appraisal.   
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared. 
 
The QER is scheduled in August, 2004. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Richard B. Reidinger 
March 25, 2004 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Glenn Morgan 
March 25, 2004 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Rahul Raturi 
March 25, 2004 
Comments 
                                                
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
 
