INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/03/2005                       Report No.: AC 1873
1. Basic Project Data
Country: China                        Project ID: P083322
Project Name: Sichuan Urban Development Project
Task Team Leader: Hiroaki Suzuki
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 16,  Estimated Board Date. April 18, 2006
2005
Managing Unit: EASUR                  Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
Loan
Sector: Roads and highways (79.6%), Sewer (10.5%), General Water, Sanitation, and
Flood Protection Sector (8.1%), Sub-national Government Administration (1.6%)
Theme: Other Urban Development (P), Land Management (S), Other Environment and
Natural Resources Management (P), State Enterprise/Bank Restructuring and
Privatization (S), Infrastructure Services for Private Sector Development (S), Municipal
Governance and Institutional Building (S)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):     180.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):        0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):        0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):        0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
BORROWER(USS$m)                                     222.78
402.78
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Simplified Processing                 Simple []        Repeater [3
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)  Yes [  No [x]
2. Project Objectives
The project development objective (PDO) is to improve core urban functions by
removing identified infrastructure bottlenecks hampering land development, transport
and environment in four second-tier cities in Sichuan Province.
3. Project Description
(1) Urban Investment Component (US$ 377.16 million)
Priority infrastructure investments that are integral parts of the urban development plans
of the four cities include (i) infrastructure for urban development area expansion for
multiple purpose land use (industry, commerce, administration and housing): (ii) urban
road network improvements; (iii) sewer and (iv) riverbank protection and landscape
improvement.
MianYang



(a) Pioneer Park Area (438 ha): US$ 45.53 million (local access roads and associated
bridges, sewers, drainage and landscaping and Second Ring Road)
(b) Southern Economic Development Area (SEDA, 410 ha): US$ 67.67 million (local
access road within the SEDA and associated drainage infrastructure and landscaping)
Suinitg
(a) Xining District Development Area (358 ha): US$ 60.19 million (access and
distributor road, bridges, river embankment, sewers and landscaping)
(b) Xining Road: US$ 6.89 million
Yibin
(a) Route A: US$ 41.90 million (6.9km)
(b) Route B: US$ 32.83 million (3.5 km extension of the existing riverbank wall and 2-
lane local road)
Panzhihua
(a) Bing-Ren Road: US$81.61 million (6.7 km section of 4-lane road)
(b) Bin Jiang Road: US$ 8.66 million (2.7 km)
(c) Sewer Investments in city core areas: US$ 8.52 million (31km wastewater collection
system)
(d) River Embankment and Landscape Improvement US$23.36 million
(2) Institutional Development and Capacity Building (US$4.8 million)
This component consists of: (i) TA for Project Implementation and Management; and (ii)
TA for Institutional Development and Capacity Building of the proj ect municipalities.
This component helps the municipalities improve their urban planning and management
capacities, including spatial planning, land management, transport planning, and utility
and asset management, through use of management information system (MIS) and
geographical information system (GIS). The TA would include training programs and
workshops linking the cities in Sichuan with other Asian or worldwide cities via satellite
networks, with possible financial and technical assistance from the Tokyo Development
Leaming Center (TDLC). Furthermore, IFC/MIGA are providing TA to key Sichuan
cities, including the project cities, to enhance their competitiveness by promoting
development and industrial linkages, and by improving their investment climate.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Miantyang
The city's Master Plan envisages growth in both the north-western section (Pioneer Park
Area including a new administration center) and southern section (Southern Economic
Development Area) of the city. This will be achieved by relocating the city
administration and hi-tech and science related enterprises and institutions to the north-
westem section and directing general manufacturing industries to the southern section
from overcrowded inner areas, whilst redeveloping the inner areas for high quality
residential, financial and commercial use.



Suaining
The municipality intends to reduce population densities in the overcrowded core area and
accommodate growth by developing new urban districts to the east across Fujiang River
and to the west in Xining District which has access to the highway and a new express
railway, connecting the cities with two metropolitan areas, Chengdu and Chongqing. The
project components in Suining are designed to assist with the growth of the city in its
westem part and comprise the Xining District Development Area and an associated link
road, Xining Road, to connect the area with the city station area located northwards from
the area.
Yibin
Yibin is located at the confluence of the Min Jiang and Jinsha Jiang, which together form
the Chang Jiang (Yangtse River). The rapidly growing city is set to become the focus of
the prime energy-producing center in Westem China with the development of a series of
major hydro-electric schemes with generation two times larger than the Three Gorges
Dam, on the Jinsha Jiang immediately upstream of the city. The overcrowded old city is
situated between the Min Jiang River and Jingshajiang River. The municipality intends to
reduce the excessive density in the old city center by developing a new administration
center and residential areas across Jinshajiang River and by shifting manufacturing
enterprises to the new industrial zone developed in Tianyuan District north of the Min
Jiang River.
The project in Yibin contains two road components, both of which follow the banks of
the rivers, and which are designed to improve access with the city and enhance the
previously degraded riverbank environment. Route A (6.9km) is a distributor road along
the north bank of the Min Jiang and Chang Jiang rivers connecting the old city and
existing urban areas with Tianyuan District and the proposed new industrial development
zone. The road additionally connects with the northern bridgehead of the new Chang
Jiang Bnrdge (under construction),which forms part of the Ring Road, and provides a key
link within the city. Route B comprises a 3.5 km extension of the existing river-bank wall
and 2-lane local road westwards from the Cultural Square in the center of Nan An
District.
Panzhihua
The city, surrounded by mountains, has been developed on both banks of the Jinsha River.
The lack of suitable development land within the existing riverside areas requires the
development of a new southem area and associated improvements to the transport system.
The city's mineral-based heavy industrial activities have taxed the water quality and led
to degradation of the river bank which requires mitigation.
The proposed Bing-Ren Road is a link between the existing central business district
(CBD) and the newly expanding residential district of Renhe: it comprises a 6.7 km
section of 4-lane road linking the recently completed Airport Access Road to Duren Road
(West) in Renhe. The proposed road improvement (2.7 km) will relieve currently



congested streets in the downtown area and will provide additional capacity for longer
distance cross-town traffic.
The sewer component will help develop comprehensive wastewater collection systems in
Bingcaogang, Geliping and Qingxiangping catchments which connected to the existing
Bingcaogang WWTP and a new Qingxiangping WWTP which will be constructed on a
BOT basis. The project will construct
A senres of measures along the Jinsha river, which include cleaning up of debris and construction
of an embankment in case of slope sliding and soil erosion (selected locations along 30km length
on both side of the riever); landscape improvement at four scenic spots; plantation of trees and
bushes on places where soil permits up and above the 50 year flood level, along the 15 km of
river stretch from Xinzhuang Bridge to Jinsha railway station.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                      Yes       No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                 x
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                   x
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                            x
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                       x
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                   x
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                    x
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)  _              X
Safety of Dams (OPIBP 4.37)                                     x
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                x
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)            _            x
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated wA- :1the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is classified as Category A under OP 4.01. The project mainly consists of
relatively small-scale urban road construction and service infrastructure for the urban
areas expansion in four secondary cities. Environment Assessment is being conducted. So
far, EA has not revealed any serious environmental issues.
The project will bring positive impacts and benefits to the environment and communities.
The sewer in Panzhihua, Yibin, and Suining will intercept wastewater currently
discharged to the environment without any treatment and thus reduce pollutant loads
discharges. This will help improve the water quality of the receiving rivers and important
fish habitats and fisheries protection area in the upper Yangtze river system.



The river embankments will enforce the river banks to prevent slope sliding and soil
erosion and enhance ability for flood control. The landscape component will improve
environmental aesthetics in the project cities and provide more leisure and green space
for the residents.
From the city wide perspective, the road components are expected to contribute to
ambient air quality improvement through reduced traffic jams in city centers and
increased average driving speeds on a city wide basis. The new and upgraded roads will
contribute significantly to community development, attracting outside investment, quality
of life of area residents, convenient outings in the city.
The urban area development components in Mianyang and Suining will meet the urban
demands to accommodate the rapid population growth and urban and economic
expansions.
The project will improve the basic transportation and environmental infrastructure in the
project cities and contribute to continuously improved foundations for sustainable
development and improvement of the standard of living for the cities' residents.
Major potential adverse impacts during the construction of the sewer network, roads,
river embankment and landscape improvement include land occupation, airbome dust,
noise, soil erosion, discharges to rivers and fish habitats, and traffic and urban service
disruptions.
Impacts during the operational phase of these facilities include increased noise and motor
vehicle emissions along project roads, and surface runoff to receiving rivers. The project
roads in Yibin are adjacent to a national level rare fish protection zone. But the impacts
of the road construction and operations to the fish habitat, primarily the surface runoff
containing suspended solids and possibly oils from construction sites and road surface,
are expected to be limited only to less than 1 m from the river bank according to a two
dimensional mathematical model about the pollutants dispersion. The fish habitats and
fisheries resources are not likely subject to significant impacts from these discharges.
The project will get involved in involuntary resettlement. Totally, 10,669 mu of land will
be expropriated, 881,627 M2 of houses will be demolished, 7,191 households will have to
move and 667 non-residential units will relocate. The Resettlement Plans are prepared
for compensation and rehabilitation of land acquisition and relocation. The Provincial
PMO will coordinate key issues with the municipal PMOs who shall take the full
responsibility in resettlement implementation.
The Status Report on Minority Nationalities in Sichuan was prepared. It is showed that
the scattering ethnic minorities in the project area of Panzhihua share a similar living
modality and production pattem with the Han. The definition of indigenous peoples
stated in the Bank's OP4. 10 does not suit them.



2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The urban expansion components will convert existing agricultural (Xining District in
Suining and Pioneer Park in Mianyang) and mostly unused land (Economic Development
Zone in Mianyang) into urban or industrial land. The original lands will lose their current
land features and functions, and the area environment will receive higher pollutant loads
from increased population and new industrial operations attracted to the newly developed
urban development areas. As an indirect and induced impact, the improved road network
in Suining will also result in increased visitors to Guangde temple, a provincial level
cultural relic.
Compensation funds for land acquisition and resettlement are requested to be timely and
fully paid. Rehabilitation programs are further worked out for people affected by land
acquisition and relocation. No long term impacts are anticipated if the resettlement
activities are successfully completed and the resettlement objective of restoring and
improving the livelihood of the affected people is met.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Altemative road alignments, road configuration designs, pavements, bridge designs,
sewer pipe plans, and river embankment designs have been identified. The EA team has
worked with the project feasibility study teams to compare and evaluate alternatives and
optimal altematives were selected based on the avoidance or least adverse impacts on the
environment and communities as well as engineering and economic considerations. All
project cities have considered the "without project" scenario as an alternative.
In the preparation of the feasibility study, the resettlement scale is an important factor in
comparison of various schemes.During the project design the principle of avoiding and
minimizing resettlement was taken; and during construction, measures areconsidered to
reduce the adverse impact on the surrounding people. For instance, the width of the road
and the distance between two bus stations are not fixed in Yibin. \
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The governments of project cities recruited the Chengdu Hydropower Investigation
Design and Research Institute to prepare the project EA and EMPs for Panzhhihua and
Yibin, and Sichuan Academy of Environmental Sciences for Mianyang and Suining.
Each city has its own EA and site specific EMP, prepared by these institute/academy,
following diligently the national procedures and standards as well as the Bank safeguard
policy requirements. The EA documents such as EA reports, EMPs and a project wide
EA Summary have been prepared, incorporating Bank's comments during project
preparation and pre-appraisal, and found to be satisfactory.



The EA covers the project description, baseline environmental conditions, environmental
benefits and project justifications, analysis of alternatives, potential environmental
impacts and mitigation measures both at the construction and operation stages,
environment management plans, public consultation and information disclosure. The
EMP specifies the environmental management and supervision mechanisms, mitigation
measures, environmental monitoring plans, training plans and estimated budget
allocations necessary for implementing the mitigation measures, monitoring plans and
ways to strengthen client capacity. Key environmental mitigation measures during
construction include: dust suppression; erosion control; use of low noise construction
equipment/machinery, proper arrangement of construction activities to avoid sensitive
time and locations, traffic management during construction, borrow pits and spoil
materials disposal sites rehabilitation, and use of proper operational procedures by the
contractors during construction. Major mitigation measures during operation include
installation of noise isolation windows and noise barriers at sensitive receptors and
enhancement cities' motor vehicle emission control programs.
The provincial PMO and all project owners will have environmental specialists on staff
during project construction and/or operation as may be appropriate to coordinate and
management environmental perfonnance. In addition, the project owners will also engage
environmental supervisors for regular inspections and supervision of construction
activities to ensure implementation of EMP and compliance with regulatory and project
requirements for pollution control and environmental protection. In sensitive locations,
such as roads in Yibin which is are near a national level fish protection area, specialists
from protection area administration, local fisheries, forest and environmental protection
bureaus will be invited to supervise construction activities to ensure minimum impacts to
the protected fish habitats. .
Each project cities have also developed detailed environmental monitoring plans. These
plans basically have two tiers: daily and regular monitoring by contractor and
construction supervision companies through visual observations and simple apparatus
such as hand hold noise meters. This would ensure timely identification of environmental
issues during construction so that appropriate mitigation and corrective actions can be
taken promptly. The second tier mnonitoring is periodical compliance monitoring by
professional environmental monitoring stations. This monitoring will determine
compliance status of construction and operation activities.
Considering the lack of environmental knowledge and monitoring methods of contractors
and construction supervision companies in general, a mandatory training of all
contractors anid construction supervision companies have been developed. The training
will be held prior to the commencement of construction and will be attended by at least
one senior management staff and one environmental staff from each of the contractors
and supervision companies. The training programs will include project EA results,
introduction of EMPs, technical background about mitigation measures, detailed
methodologies for the daily monitoring, mitigative and corrective action designs, and
reporting requirements. The cities will also provide training to environmental staff of
PMO and individual project owners as part of capacity building. The training programs



will include environmental regulations, policies and standards, environmental
management, and general pollution control and environmental management technologies.
The Resettlement Plan for each city was prepared, hence four RAPs under SUDP. This is
the second Bank-supported urban project in Sichuan Province. The Provincial PMO and
the extemal monitor do have some experience in resettlement implementation. However,
the borrowers' capacity at the city level to plan and implement the measures described in
the RAP needs to be improved through the Launch Workshop soon after the approval of
the project; through various training of the resettlement staff in each city; and through a
close monitoring system.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Two rounds of public consultation have been conducted in each of the project cities. The
consultation is basically through questionnaire surveys supplemented by the focused
interviews of key affected people and other stakeholders. In total, over 650 people mostly
project directly affected have been consulted for their opinions and concerns about
project. In addition, special meetings or interviews were held with Guangde temple in
Suining, environmental, hydrology and municipal engineering specialists in Panzhihua
and State Upper Yangtze River Rare and Special Fish Protection Areas Administration,
local forests, fisheries, and environmental bureaus in Yibin for specific environmental
and social issues. Concems expressed by the public and other stakeholders have been
incorporated in the project EA and preparation of the EMP.
Project information including major anticipated adverse environmental impact and
mitigation measures has been disclosed to the public through public notices in local
newspapers in each of the four project cities. The draft EA reports have also been made
available to the public at the local project offices and dedicated websites. All cities plan
to release the final EA reports and EMPs once these documents to the public are finalized.
Municipal and project design staff have consulted with the potentially affected
communities when identifying resettlement impacts, formulating resettlement policies,
and preparing resettlement plans. Total number of people involved has reached to 3,357
in the 4 cities (Mianyang: 1,560, Panzhihua: 660, Suining: 285, Yibin: 852). This has
allowed impacts to be minimized, and identification of remedial plans acceptable to the
affected persons. Furthermore, monitoring and gnrevance procedures will be established
and participation will continue during resettlement implementation.
Information regarding the project and the resettlement program will be published in local
newspapers and through TV programs. To ensure that affected persons are informed
about compensation standards, rehabilitation measures, and grievance procedures,
resettlement announcements will be posted in the affected villages and neighborhoods.
As required by the Bank policy, the full RAP has been available at the City PMOs. The
announcement of the RAP disclosure was made in the four cities during the period from
Sep. 24 to Oct. 10, 2005.



B. Disclosure Requiremnents Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
Date of receipt by the Bank                          10/28/2005
Date of "in-country" disclosure                      08-10/2005
Date of submission to InfoShop
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
Date of receipt by the Bank                          10/18/2005
Date of "in-country" disclosure                      09/24/05 -
10/10/05
Date of submission to InfoShop                       10/18/2005
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Process:
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Safety of Dams:
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at thle Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's  YES
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a  YES
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities  YES
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard



policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project  YES
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the  YES
monitonrng of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the    YES
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
D. Approvals
Signed and submitted by:                       Name                       Date
Task Team Leader:              Hiroaki Suzuki                          Nov 10, 2005
/v iF
Environmental Specialist:      Chongwu Sun/Dahong Li                   Nov 10, 2005
Social Development Specialist  Youlan Zhou                            Nov 10, 2005
Additional Environmental andlor
Social Development Specialist(s):
Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  qlenn  organ
Comments:
Sector Manager:
Comments:



