Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/12/2005 
Report No.:  AC1700
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Colombia 
Project ID:  P082520 
Project Name:  CO Sustainable Development Inv Project 
Task Team Leader:  Angela G. Armstrong 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 21, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: October 27, 2005 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (30%);Central government 
administration (30%);Health (30%);General transportation sector (10%) 
Theme:  Environmental policies and institutions (P);Pollution management and 
environmental health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
1.05
1.05 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Sustainable Development Investment Project is to support the design 
and implementation of policy reforms and related investments in line with the Sustainable 
Development DPL Program framework, particularly those policies and plans that address 
environmental problems affecting the quality of life and wellbeing of the Colombian 
population.  Specifically, the project will support (i) the incorporation of environmental 
considerations in the policies of the sectors that result in a high cost of environmental 
degradation (e.g., health, transport, and water); (ii) the implementation of policy 
measures for integrated water resource management; (iii) the optimization of urban 
development policy instruments to improve urban quality of life; and (iv) the 
strengthening of the planning, monitoring, and oversight of national, regional and local 
environmental management and policies.  
 
By supporting these objectives, the project is expected to help alleviate the effects of 
environmental degradation on the most vulnerable segments of the population, 
particularly children who are typically the most affected by this degradation, through 
improvements in public health and quality of life.  These improvements will be supported 
Page  2
through reductions in air and water pollution, as well as through improved hygiene and 
urban environmental management.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed investment project will finance targeted actions and investments to support 
the development and implementation of the DPL Program's policy reforms.  Specifically, 
the Sustainable Development Investment project aims to support policies and programs 
that address environmental problems affecting the quality of life and wellbeing of the 
Colombian population (e.g., air pollution, inadequate hygiene) and that strengthen the 
processes of formulating, coordinating and overseeing national environmental policy.  A 
summary of the project components is presented below.  
 
A. 
Environmental Health (US$ 3.92 million total).  This component will support the 
government of Colombia in the definition and implementation of policies, programs, and 
instruments to prevent environment-related illnesses (e.g., respiratory illnesses caused by 
air pollution and diarrheal diseases caused by poor water quality and inadequate 
hygiene), through the financing of goods, consultants' services and training, and 
operating costs.  It comprises the following sub-components: (i) an air quality 
management program to support the development of a national Air Pollution Control 
Policy, and (ii) promotion of improved hygiene practices, supporting a Water Pollution 
Control Policy.  
 
B.  
Sustainable Urban Development (US$ 1.28 million total).  This component will 
support the implementation of strategies outlined in a recently-approved Urban 
Development Policy (CONPES Document No. 3305, dated August 23, 2004), through the 
financing of goods and consultants' services and training.  These strategies seek to 
improve the quality of urban life and strengthen the management of urban development, 
as well as develop regulations on solid waste management that will back the recently-
issued Decree on the Final Disposal of Solid Waste.  
 
C. 
Integrated Water Management (US$ 0.50 million total).  This component, through 
the financing of consultants' services and training, and operating costs, aims to support 
the government in updating its legal framework for water resource management.  It 
includes the following sub-components: (i) development of associated regulations related 
to wastewater discharge standards and pollution fees and consultations on the draft Water 
Law; (ii) strengthening the accreditation processes for regional laboratories responsible 
for water quality monitoring; and (iii) strengthening knowledge on water resources at the 
regional level.  
 
D. 
Planning and Oversight of Environmental Management (US$ 2.35 million total).  
This component will improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the SINA, financing 
goods, consultants' services and training, and operating costs to support (i) planning, 
monitoring, and oversight instruments to facilitate policy implementation and to monitor 
indicators established in CAR's Three-Year Annual Plans (Decree No. 1200); (ii) the 
institutional strengthening of DNP and MAVDT to design and implement policies, as 
well as to improve MAVDT's coordination with CARs and other SINA actors; (iii) the 
Page  3
implementation of two strategic environmental assessments on environmental health and 
fuel quality; and (iv) MAVDT in project implementation and oversight.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Colombia   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Yewande Aramide Awe (LCSEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Not applicable.  The policies and reforms supported by the proposed project are expected 
to have a positive effect on the country's environment, as they will foster improved 
environmental governance and urban environmental management.  Since the raison d'etre 
of the project itself is to help the government to mainstream environment in a number of 
key sectors, the operation's design is proactive with respect to internalizing 
environmental and social safeguards concerns within the operation at the macro level.  In 
addition, the project is designed to directly address environmental problems that have 
been identified as priorities, through detailed analytical work, such as ambient air 
pollution and inadequate water, sanitation and hygiene.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not applicable.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Not applicable.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not applicable.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Angela G. Armstrong 
09/19/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Yewande Aramide Awe 
09/19/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Abel Mejia 
10/11/2005 
Comments:   
