                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                         CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                           Report No.: 94978
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:         March 12, 2015


I. BASIC INFORMATION
 A. Basic Project Data
 Country:                     Republic of            Project ID: P106013
                              Colombia
 Project Name:                Implementation of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
                              Project
 Task Team Leader:            Daniele La Porta
 Estimated Date of            March 20, 2015
 Approval:
 Managing Unit:               GEEDR                  Lending Instrument:     Grant.
 Sector(s):                   Energy and Extractive Industries
 Theme(s):                    Transparency and Accountability
 Fragile and/or Capacity Constraints [   ]
 Financing (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:       USD 1,402,000             Total Bank Financing:    USD 500,000
 Total Co-financing:       USD 402,000               Financing Gap:           USD 500,000
     Financing Source                                                                         Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                     As of 2016
     Total                                                                             USD 1,402,000
 Environmental Category       C
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred        No
 project?

 B. Project Objectives
 The proposed project development objective is to support the development, implementation
 and institutionalization of EITI in the country and enable Colombia to become EITI compliant.


 C. Project Description
 The proposed technical assistance will help Government of Colombia implement the activities
 programmed under the Extractive Initiative Transparency Initiative (EITI) Action Plan and,
more specifically to:

   a. Preparation and publication of the first and second EITI Reports covering the years
       2013 and 2014. An Independent Administrator (usually an auditing company) will be
       hired to coordinate with the CTN the scope of the EITI Reports, including contextual
       information about the oil, gas and mining, the materiality criteria for companies and
       government agencies that will report and the materiality of payments and receipts to be
       reconciled. The Independent Administrator will also agree with the CTN on the data
       templates for reporting payments and receipts. The report will explain any discrepancies
       found after the reconciliation. Training activities for the CTN and interested
       stakeholders will be programmed in the course of data gathering as well as formal
       training of the CTN.

   b. Study to assess company payments to sub-national governments and of payments for the
       transportation of oil, gas and minerals to government entities and state-owned
       enterprises. To the extent that these revenues are material, the study will recommend an
       action plan to disclose them in future EITI Reports. The study will help understand the
       types of transportation arrangements and types of payments and rates, and the
       materiality of these payments. The study will provide materiality definitions and
       recommendations to include these payments in future EITI Reports. The disclosure of
       sub-national payments and of transportation payments will enhance the accountability of
       the sectors. Sensitization of relevant municipalities will be required

   c. Promote the participation in EITI of medium and small-scale mining (MSM) companies.
       A study will be conducted to identify the 20 percent of the mining operators (medium
       and small miners) that contribute to sector revenues; understand their contribution to the
       economy in terms of employment and revenues, the types of minerals exploited, and the
       main municipalities where they operate. The study will include a review of legal
       framework applicable to MSM, and will suggest a strategy to include these companies in
       EITI starting with the second Report.

   d. Implementation of a communication strategy. This includes disseminating the
       information produced by the EITI Report and promoting public debate at the national
       and regional levels around its findings and relevant extractive industry issues. A
       communication strategy will be prepared and a communication plan implemented. The
       strategy contemplates establishing a permanent communication portal involving
       government agencies and is interactive with the public.

   e. Ensure that the adequate structure, administrative capacity and resources are in place
       to enable the National Tripartite Committee to implement the Action Plan.

Given that EITI trust fund is expected to close on December 31, 2015, it can realistically not
support all the activities planned by the Government of Colombia, as per the work plan
approved by the National Tripartite Committee for the period 2015-2017. The activities, which
are neither financed through the proposed EITI grant nor by the Government of Colombia, will
be financed by the follow up trust fund – the Extractives Global Programmatic Support (EGPS)
 – which is being currently developed - if fund availability is confirmed for the proposed project,
 when the trust fund will become effective.


 D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
 (if known)
 The project is a technical assistance for the Republic of Colombia. It is meant to enhance
 transparency and accountability in the oil, gas and mining sectors. There are no physical
 investments planned and the grant will not finance any site specific interventions.


 E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Management
 Not relevant for this project.


 F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 n/a

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
 Safeguard Policies                    Triggered ?    Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/BP              No       The project will provide technical assistance to
 4.01                                                 support the implementation and
                                                      institutionalization of EITI in Colombia. The
                                                      studies to be financed will only make
                                                      recommendations related to improving
                                                      transparency and reporting on financial
                                                      information and will not make
                                                      recommendations that are related to
                                                      investments for specific sites. Therefore, no
                                                      adverse social or environmental impacts are
                                                      expected and this project was assigned an
                                                      Environmental Risk Category C.
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                 No       This policy is not triggered as project
                                                      activities are not expected to have any
                                                      impacts on natural habitats.
 Forests OP/BP 4.36                          No       This policy is not triggered as project
                                                      activities are not expected to have any
                                                      impacts on the management of forest.
 Pest Management OP 4.09                     No       This policy is not triggered as the project
                                                      will not finance the procurement or use of
                                                      pesticides.
 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP           No       This policy is not triggered as project
 4.11                                                 activities are not expected to have any
                                                      impact on physical cultural resources.
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10              No        This policy is not triggered given that
                                                      project activities are not expected to cause
                                                      any impacts on Indigenous Peoples.
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12        No        This policy is not triggered given that
                                                      project activities are not expected to cause
                                                      any physical or economic displacement,
                                                      nor any restriction in access to natural
                                                      resources.
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                  No        This policy is not triggered given the
                                                      project is not financing any dam
                                                      construction or rehabilitation nor any
                                                      activities that rely on the operations of
                                                      existing dams.
 Projects on International Waterways        No        This policy is not triggered given the
 OP/BP 7.50                                           project is not financing any activities in
                                                      international waterways as defined by the
                                                      policy.
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60      No        This policy is not triggered given the
                                                      project is not financing any activities in
                                                      disputed areas as defined by the policy.

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN


    A. Will an Appraisal stage ISDS be required? No
      i.   Explanation. This grant concerns building client capacity. It is not expected to have
           potential adverse environmental and social implications or risks, and therefore no
           safeguard policies are triggered. This grant involves reporting on revenues and
           payments regarding the Colombian oil, gas and mining sectors and pure accounting
           and disclosure of payments and revenue data, which does not trigger any safeguards.
           Additionally, the grant will not finance any physical interventions or propose any site
           specific investments. Therefore the proposed project classification is Category C and
           will not require an appraisal-stage ISDS.
     ii.   If Yes, tentative target for preparing the appraisal stage ISDS




    B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
    needed.

           No safeguard related studies are needed.

    C. The specific studies, their timing and disclosure should be documented in the
    appraisal-stage ISDS.
IV. APPROVALS
 Task Team Leader:                     Name: Daniele La Porta
 Approved By:
 Regional Safeguards Advisor: Glen Morgan., Regional Safeguard Advisor Date: March 11, 2015
                              for LAC Region
 Practice Manager:                     Name: Paulo de Sa, Practice Manager                     Date: February 9, 2015



 1
   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
 InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
 affected persons.
