Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1492 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/26/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Colombia 
Project ID: P091932 
Project Name: Colombian National Protected Areas Conservation Trust Fund 
Task Team Leader: Juan Pablo Ruiz 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 15, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2006 
Managing Unit: LCSEN 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Forestry (40%);Water supply (20%);Agricultural extension and research 
(20%);Flood protection (10%);Vocational training (10%) 
Theme: Biodiversity (P);Land administration and management (S);Water resource 
management (S);Rural non-farm income generation (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
27.40
27.40 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is the design and implementation of the NPACTF as a long-
term financing mechanism to contribute to the goal of financial sustainability of Colombia's 
National Protected Areas System (NPAS) and strengthen the institutional capability of Protected 
Areas and other conservation strategies for their effective management, improving local 
communities' well-being. In addition to this objective, the project will: (i) implement 
Management Plans (MPs) throughout the NPAS; (ii) develop participatory buffer zone 
management activities and connectivity between conservation areas promoting the sustainable 
management of rural agricultural landscapes; (iii) develop broad stakeholder participation and 
co-management between government and local communities, including ethnic authorities, in 
National Parks and buffer zones, and (iv) establish financial mechanisms and market-based 
incentives, such as agreements for environmental service provision, tax exemptions and bio-
commerce initiatives for biodiversity conservation in public and private natural reserves and 
landscapes related to the NPAS.  
 
Page  2
Key performance indicators include: (i) the NPACTF in operation, with US$15 million 
endowment fund and US$27.4 million sinking fund for the NPAS; (ii) implementation of nine 
Management Plans with active community participation in National Parks and, recurrent cost 
financing for three National Parks and three other protected areas and conservation categories; 
(iii) five territorial ordering processes in place contemplating various economic mechanisms 
such as environmental services provision agreements, tax exemptions, bio-commerce initiatives, 
and sustainable production systems, and (iv) three co-management agreements in Protected 
Areas overlapping with indigenous territories.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
With GEF and TFCA resources, the Colombian government will constitute a NPACTF with a 
US$15 million Endowment fund and a US$27.4 million Sinking fund.  The project will finance 
the following priorities: (i) Creation and Implementation of the National Protected Areas 
Conservation Trust Fund (NPACTF) and Project Management; (ii) Support to NPAS 
Consolidation and Action Plan; (iii) National Park System and Buffer Zone Management, to 
include participative Management Plan implementation and (iv) Support to Other Protected 
Areas and Conservation Categories, to include environmental services provision agreements, 
incentives for sustainable production systems, and social sustainability initiatives.  
 
Principal activities in support of these components include: (i) developing planning 
mechanisms in regional and private, natural reserves; (ii) biodiversity conservation initiatives in 
rural agricultural landscapes in selected buffer zones, through the implementation of sustainable 
production systems; (iii) active local community participation processes in protected areas 
management and rural landscape management for biodiversity conservation, and (iv) financial 
support for the management of core conservation areas defined by indigenous authorities and 
Afro-Colombian groups inside their territories.  
 
The Fund?s management board will be integrated by both public and private sector 
representatives, with a private sector majority. Public sector representatives will include the 
Ministry of Environment, Housing and Regional Development as the maximum environmental 
authority, the National Parks Authority as NPAS coordinator and a representative from the 
Regional Environmental Authorities (CARs).  Private sector members will represent various 
academic and social spheres, including national NGOs, ethnic organizations, social sectors (i.e., 
business and peasants) and the academic sector.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Colombia   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The National Parks Authority, responsible for coordinating the National Natural Parks System, 
will execute components related to participative Management Plan implementation in National 
Parks and the signing of co-management schemes with indigenous territories overlapping with 
National Parks.  The NPA has worked since 1999 through its Social Policy of Participation in 
Conservation, whereby participative Management Plans have been drafted with local 
communities for 49 National Parks.  Despite the existence of civil conflict in some zones, 
Page  3
National Park Authority officials receive significant social support to their projects, which have 
provided communities with sustainable livelihood alternatives.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Construction of facilities in Protected Areas may have environmental impact.  
Implementation of sustainable production systems may result in ecosystem degradation.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Potential impacts on the health and quality of forests or the rights and welfare of people and 
their level of dependence upon or interaction with forests; and changes in the management, 
protection or utilization of natural forests or plantations.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Some indigenous ancestral sites containing petroglyphs or cultural relics may be present in 
Protected Areas.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
X
Indigenous communities overlapping with National Parks may perceive an impact from the 
increase in effective conservation of these areas.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Ways of life of communities inhabiting in or near Protected Areas may be impacted through 
restraints on natural resource use.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/17/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  09/15/2005 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
During Q1 and Q2 FY06.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Juan Pablo Ruiz 
 
Approved by: 
 
R
egional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Abel Mejia 
 
Comments:   
