        The World Bank
        Mozambique Disaster Risk Management and Resilience Program (P166437)




                    Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (ISDS)

                      Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 01-Oct-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC23919




May 20, 2018                                                                                          Page 1 of 11
          The World Bank
          Mozambique Disaster Risk Management and Resilience Program (P166437)


  I.     BASIC INFORMATION


  A. Basic Program Data OPS TABLE

  Country                          Project ID                     Additional Project ID (if any)   Project Name
  Mozambique                       P166437                                                         Mozambique Disaster
                                                                                                   Risk Management and
                                                                                                   Resilience Program
  Region                           Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Board Date             Task Team Leader
  AFRICA                           03-Dec-2018                    19-Mar-2019                      Michel Matera, Barry
                                                                                                   Patrick Maher, Bontje
                                                                                                   Marie Zaengerling
  Financing Instrument             Managing Unit
  Program-for-Results              GSU13
  Financing

   Proposed Program Development Objective(s)

       The Program Development Objective is to strengthen the capacity of the Government of Mozambique to prepare for
       and respond to disasters and increase the resilience of key public infrastructure in risk-prone areas.



  COST & FINANCING
 FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL1
 SUMMARY (USD MILLIONS)

  Government program Cost                                                                                          113.00
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                             113.00
        Total Program Cost                                                                                         105.00
        IPF Component                                                                                                 8.00
  Total Financing                                                                                                  113.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                       0.00



  FINANCING (USD MILLIONS)


 Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                                    80.00

       World Bank Lending                                                                                            80.00



May 20, 2018                                                                                                    Page 2 of 11
        The World Bank
        Mozambique Disaster Risk Management and Resilience Program (P166437)



 Total Government Contribution                                                                                          25.00

 Total Non-World Bank Group and Non-Client Government Financing                                                          8.00

      Trust Funds                                                                                                        8.00


  Environmental Assessment Category (IPF Component)           Concept Review Decision
  B - Partial Assessment                                      Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to continue



  B. Program Development Objective(s)

  Program Development Objective(s)

  The Program Development Objective is to strengthen the capacity of the Government of Mozambique to prepare for
  and respond to disasters and increase the resilience of key public infrastructure in risk-prone areas.

  C. Program Description

   The proposed operation will support the implementation of key areas of Mozambique’s disaster risk management
   (DRM) program as constituted by its National Disaster Risk Reduction Master Plan 2017-2030. The government’s
   program aims to reduce disaster risk, the loss of human life and critical infrastructures, as well as avoid the emergence
   of new disaster risks by increasing the resilience of people and infrastructure to climate, other natural and man-made
   hazards. To this end, it has five strategic results areas: (i) Improving the understanding of risk at all levels;
   (ii) Strengthening DRM governance and public and private participation in disaster risk reduction; (iii) Mainstreaming
   DRM in public investment and territorial planning, and consolidating financial protection against disaster; (iv)
   Strengthening disaster preparedness, response and recovery; and (v) Building partnerships and international
   cooperation.

   The overall operation will be financed through a hybrid of the Program fo Results (PforR) and Investment Project
   Financing (IPF) instruments to address the mix of policy actions, investment activity, and technical assistance needed to
   achieve the desired outcomes under the government’s DRM program. This ISDS only covers the potential safeguards
   implications of the capacity building and technical assistance activities financed under the IPF. During preparation, an
   Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) will be prepared for the PforR Results Areas. This ESSA will also
   inform the identification of key areas for capacity and regulatory improvements to be supported under the IPF.

   The boundaries of the proposed PforR Program (US$ 80 million) are defined in terms of: (i) the Program
   duration/timeframe; and (ii) the Program area and activities supported. In terms of timeframe, the PforR Program will
   support the initial phases of the overall government program (5 years). As such, it will support system and process
   building for integrated risk management under the government program, as well as critical institutional and financial
   reforms. In terms of areas and activities, the PforR Program will focus on: (i) improving financial protection against
   disasters; (ii) strengthening capacity for disaster preparedness, response, and recovery; and (iii) building resilience in


May 20, 2018                                                                                                       Page 3 of 11
        The World Bank
        Mozambique Disaster Risk Management and Resilience Program (P166437)


   public investments in priority sectors in hazard-prone areas. Specifically, the PforR instrument will support the
   government program along the following three results areas:

              Results Area 1: Improving financial protection against disasters. This results area will support the Government
               of Mozambique to improve its financial protection against disasters through: (i) the operationalization and
               capitalization of the national Disaster Management Fund (DMF); and (ii) by enabling the placement of sovereign
               catastrophe insurance coverage for cyclones and/or drought with capital or insurance markets. This Pillar will
               include the drafting and adoption of comprehensive regulations to govern the operation of the DMF, with
               technical assistance from the World Bank. The regulations will cover financial management and resource access
               procedures, rules for the execution and accounting of funds (including social and environmental procedures to
               be followed), external audits, and provision for replenishment of the fund. The Pillar will also include the
               preparation and adoption of a National Disaster Risk Finance (NDRF) strategy, detailing the strategic priorities
               of the MEF for financing disaster response.

              Results Area 2: Strengthening National Capacity for Disaster Preparedness, Response and Recovery. This results
               area will support the Government of Mozambique, particularly the National Institute for Disaster Management
               (INGC), to improve capacity, systems, standards, and procedures for preparedness, response, and recovery at
               the national and local levels. Results expected to be achieve relate to the number of functioning local DRM
               committees in hazard-prone areas and the strengthening of flood and cyclone early warning systems (especially
               last mile connectivity).

              Results Area 3: Building Resilience in Public Investment. This results area will support selected sector ministries
               to increase resilience of key public infrastructure in priority hazard-prone areas in Mozambique, which are often
               damaged, destroyed, or rendered temproary inoperable due to adverse hydro-meteorological events. Based on
               a first screening of several sector investment programs, the education and water supply, have been identified
               as likely priority sectors to be supported under this pillar. The public investments to be included under the
               Program will be selected during preparation considering the findings from more detailed technical assessments,
               potential socio-environmental implications, capacity of relevant sector ministry, implementation readiness, and
               availability of resources.

 The Technical Assistance (TA) IPF (US$ 8 million) will complement the PforR Program by financing: (i) capacity building
 activities to help strengthen the institutional capacity of Mozambique’s National Disaster Management Agency (INGC) and
 other government institutions involved in the implementation of the PforR Program (such as the Ministry of Education and
 Human Development – MINEDH), including on socio-environmental and fiduciary management. It is also envisioned to
 include capacity building activities with respect to the management of potential gender-based violence and sexual abuse
 and exploitation risks in emergency response situations (such as in temporary evacuation camps); and (ii) technical
 assistance to support the elaboration and/or revision of regulations, guidelines, strategies, frameworks, etc. necessary to
 support the delivery of anticipated results under the PforR Program. The specific activities to be supported under the IPF
 will be defined in detail during preparation based on the findings of the technical, fiduciary, and socio-environmental
 management assessments. Regarding socio-environmental management, in addition to the identification of key areas for
 regulatory improvements through the ESSA, a TA Scoping Paper will be prepared during project implementation to detail
 the tasks needed to incorporate appropriate environmental and social considerations in the TA activities to be implemented
 under the IPF.

  D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)



May 20, 2018                                                                                                            Page 4 of 11
        The World Bank
        Mozambique Disaster Risk Management and Resilience Program (P166437)


   In addition to institutional capacity building, the TA IPF will support the preparation and/or revision of regulations,
   guidelines, strategies, plans, or methodologies that would guide disaster response (e.g. emergency evacuation,
   temporary shelter), disaster preparedness (e.g. community simulation exercises, early warning systems, preventive
   evacuation), and disaster prevention and mitigation (e.g. building regulations) applicable to the the whole country.
   Consequently, it is necessary to consider the main physical characteristics of the entire Mozambican territory,
   comprising almost 800 thousand square kilometers. Mozambique is divided into two topographical regions: To the
   north of the Zambezi river, a narrow coastline and bordering plateau slope upward into hills and a series of rugged
   highlands punctuated by scattered mountains. South of the Zambezi River, the lowlands are much wider with scattered
   hills and mountains along its borders with South Africa, Swaziland and Zambia. The country is drained by several
   significant rivers, with the Zambezi being the largest and most important.
   Mozambique is among the countries most vulnerable to climate change and ranks third among African countries in
   exposure to risks resulting from climate variability. Major natural disasters have struck the country at least every five
   years. Flooding, tropical cyclones, and droughts are the most frequent cause of disasters in Mozambique, but it also
   faces seismic risk. The frequency and intensity of climate-related shocks have intensified over the past four decades and
   multiple studies predict that climate change will have important implications for the country.
   Most parts of the country are in the subequatorial zone with a rainy tropical climate and dry winter. There are two
   typical seasons: hot and rainy from November to April; and cool and dry from May to October. The annual precipitation
   reaches 1,500mm, with a maximum in January and a minimum in September. Over half of the country’s population is
   vulnerable to climate-related shocks. The Government estimates that 122,000 people are affected by flooding every
   year; the costs of the 2000 floods were estimated at almost US$ 450 million and in 2013 the sum exceeded US$ 517
   million. In the last years, Mozambique has also been facing severe droughts in its Southern and Central regions,
   affecting approximately 1.5 million people and resulting in average annual losses in the range of US$ 20 million,
   compromising agricultural production. Due to the seriousness of the situation, the Government activated the
   institutional red alert in diverse provinces, including Tete, Sofala, Gaza, Inhambane, and Maputo.
   With over 2000 km of maritime coast and many coastal cities, sea level rise due to climate change has significant
   implications for Mozambique’s low-lying coastal areas and beyond, including its major direct impacts - inundation of
   low-lying areas, loss of coastal wetlands, increased rates of shoreline erosion, saltwater intrusion, higher water tables,
   and higher extreme water levels, which lead to coastal flooding.
   Extreme flooding events (floods capable of inundating vast areas) are also recurrent in major river deltas, such as the
   Zambezi and the Limpopo river deltas, causing tremendous hardship for floodplain communities—displacing people
   from their homes, destroying food supplies, drowning livestock—but also depositing nutrient-rich sediments, flushing
   accumulated salts, and recharging groundwater supplies that maintain agricultural systems in the long-run. Additionally,
   heavy rains and flooding in rural areas can result in the destruction of the transport infrastructure, limiting the access of
   low-income communities to water, markets, schools, and health centers.
   Around two-thirds of Mozambique’s population live in rural areas, but urbanization has increased in the last years. The
   urban population is expected to more than double in the next 25 years, adding more than 11 million people to
   Mozambique’s cities. The rural population is affected by both droughts and flooding, especially river flooding as many
   settle in floodplains given its higher agricultural potential. Most river flooding events require the temporary relocation
   (evacuation) of these floodplain communities, until the floodwaters receed and basic infrastructure has been restored.
   Seventy percent of the Mozambique population has access to water, but the coverage in some provinces, districts, and
   municipalities are much lower. For example, coverage of water supply in the province of Zambezia is only around 42%
   on average, and only 29% in Lichinga. While the urban population has not been as affected by droughts, they also suffer
   the consequences of recurrent flooding events, especially in coastal cities. Most of the urban population resides in
   informal neighborhoods and peri-urban areas, lacking proper infrastructure, sanitation, drainage, and basic services.
   Consequently, flooding events in urban areas can result in severe limitations to public services, demanding the
   temporary evacuation of affected people as basic services are being restored.


May 20, 2018                                                                                                        Page 5 of 11
        The World Bank
        Mozambique Disaster Risk Management and Resilience Program (P166437)



  E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

   The implementing agency for the IPF will be the National Disaster Management Agency (INGC), but other government
   institutions (such as MINEDH, DNGRH, DNASS and AIAS) would potentially also benefit from TA activities financed under
   the IPF. The Government of Mozambique has experience in implementing Bank-financed projects, and most national
   agencies have prior experience with the Bank’s Safeguards Policies. However, government agencies are, commonly,
   under-staffed and lack funds to adequately handle more complex environmental and social issues. The preliminary
   assessment indicates that INGC and other involved government agencies will require support to improve their
   environmental and social management systems to achieve environmental and social objectives against the range of
   environmental and social impacts that may be associated with the overall operation. The ESSA will include an institutional
   capacity analysis of INGC and other involved agencies and will identify key capacity-building activities, such as
 . improvements in their institutional arrangements and staff training to be included in the Program Action Plan (PAP).


  F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

  Augusto Ferreira Mendonca, Environmental Specialist
  Paulo Jorge Temba Sithoe, Environmental Specialist
  Maria Do Socorro Alves Da Cunha, Social Specialist
  Mario Rizzolio, Social Specialist




May 20, 2018                                                                                                      Page 6 of 11
        The World Bank
        Mozambique Disaster Risk Management and Resilience Program (P166437)



  II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

 SAFEGUARDS




May 20, 2018                                                                   Page 7 of 11
        The World Bank
        Mozambique Disaster Risk Management and Resilience Program (P166437)



  Safeguard Policies                         Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
  Projects on International Waterways
                                             No
  OP/BP 7.50
  Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60      No
                                                             Since project resources will fund TA for the
                                                             elaboration and revision of regulations, guidelines,
                                                             methodologies, etc. for disaster response,
                                                             preparedness, and prevention/mitigation activities,
                                                             and capacity building for government institutions
                                                             involved in the implementation of the PforR Program,
                                                             the potential impacts are expected to be diffuse and
                                                             induced over the long term. The ESSA will identify key
                                                             areas for regulatory improvements and capacity
                                                             building needs. A TA Scoping Paper, to be prepared by
  Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01        Yes
                                                             the client at the beginning of project implementation,
                                                             will include a more detailed assessment of potential
                                                             social and environmental downstream impacts, and
                                                             define the tasks needed to incorporate appropriate
                                                             social and environmental considerations in the TA
                                                             activities to be carried out under the IPF.

                                                             Proposed EA Category for the IPF project– Based on
                                                             the preliminary assessment of potential impacts of TA
                                                             activities under the IPF is Category B.
  Performance Standards for Private Sector
                                             No              The project does not involve the private sector.
  Activities OP/BP 4.03
                                                             The TA activities to be supported under the IPF will not
                                                             result in direct impacts on natural habitats. However,
                                                             the TA Scoping Paper will assess potential indirect
  Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                No
                                                             effects to ensure that any relevant aspects of this
                                                             policy are included in the TOR for TA activities where
                                                             pertinent.
                                                             The IPF will not support specific TA related to activities
                                                             that require commercial forest harvesting or utilization
                                                             of natural forests formations or plantation, and the TA
                                                             activities will not result in direct impacts on forests
  Forests OP/BP 4.36                         No
                                                             and plantations. However, the TA Scoping Paper will
                                                             contain provisions to incorporate any appropriate
                                                             considerations related to this policy in the TA activities
                                                             TOR.




May 20, 2018                                                                                                Page 8 of 11
        The World Bank
        Mozambique Disaster Risk Management and Resilience Program (P166437)


                                                             The IPF program will not support specific TA activities
                                                             related to the purchase or increased use of pesticides
                                                             and other agricultural chemicals as defined under the
                                                             policy. However, the TA Scoping Paper will identify any
  Pest Management OP 4.09                  No                requirements of this policy that need to be included in
                                                             the TOR for the TA activities with respect to
                                                             regulations, guidelines, etc. for disaster response,
                                                             preparedness, and prevention/mitigation, including
                                                             methods for control of disease vectors.
                                                             The IPF will not support specific TA activities related to
                                                             physical cultural resources. However, the TA Scoping
                                                             Paper will contain provisions to incorporate
                                                             appropriate considerations related to potential
  Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No
                                                             downstream interference with physical cultural
                                                             resources in the TOR for TA covering regulations,
                                                             guidelines, etc. for disaster response, preparedness,
                                                             and prevention/mitigation.
                                                             There are no groups in Mozambique currently
  Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No                identified as meeting the applicability criteria of OP
                                                             4.10.




May 20, 2018                                                                                                Page 9 of 11
          The World Bank
          Mozambique Disaster Risk Management and Resilience Program (P166437)


                                                               TA to support for review and preparation of
                                                               regulations, guidelines, etc. will incorporate the
                                                               relevant requirements of OP4.12. The ESSA will
                                                               identify key areas for regulatory improvements to be
                                                               further detailed in the TA Scoping Paper which will
                                                               identify the tasks needed to incorporate appropriate
                                                               environmental and social considerations in the TA TOR
                                                               and activities. With respect to regulations related to
                                                               guidance for downstream temporary relocation (such
                                                               as evacuation during emergencies) carried out by the
                                                               INGC, the scope of TA will cover ensuring that
                                                               regulations, guidelines, etc. adhere to international
                                                               good practice, including the relevant elements of Bank
     Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes              Safeguard Policies. Among other things, the TOR for
                                                               these guidelines will include defining criteria to
                                                               determine when evacuation plans or conditions are
                                                               likely to involve permanent resettlement (such as any
                                                               situation that might involve precluding people from
                                                               returning to their place of origin once the emergency
                                                               is over), and to require in such cases that INGC
                                                               coordinate with MITADER who is responsible for
                                                               ensuring adherence to the appropriate national
                                                               resettlement guidelines. The TA supported by this
                                                               project will not address the preparation of guidelines
                                                               for permanent resettlement, and will indicate that any
                                                               issues related to resettlement will be communicated
                                                               to INGC for referral to MITADER.
                                                               Technical assistance and capacity building is not
                                                               expected to cover matters related to the construction,
                                                               rehabilitation or use of existing dams. However, if any
     Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                No
                                                               related issues are identified in the Scoping Paper, the
                                                               TOR for the TA activities will include the relevant
                                                               aspects of this policy.

 .

     FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
     The World Bank
     1818 H Street, NW
     Washington, D.C. 20433
     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




May 20, 2018                                                                                               Page 10 of 11
        The World Bank
        Mozambique Disaster Risk Management and Resilience Program (P166437)


  APPROVAL

  Signed and Submitted by

  Task Team Leader(s):                  Michel Matera, Barry Patrick Maher, Bontje Marie Zaengerling

 Approved By
 APPROVALTBL
  Safeguards Advisor:

  Practice Manager/Manager:

  Country Director:




May 20, 2018                                                                                           Page 11 of 11
