COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)
CONCEPTSTAGE
U                                               Report No.: PIDISDSC14061
Date Prepared/Updated:    21-Jul-2015
O
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Sri Lanka                 Project ID:  P156021
Parent
Project ID
(if any):
Project Name: Ecosystems Conservation and Management (P156021)
Region:         SOUTH ASIA
Estimated       16-Nov-2015               Estimated     18-Feb-2016
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Practice Area   Environment & Natural     Lending      Investment Project Financing
(Lead):         Resources                 Instrument:
Sector(s):      General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
Theme(s):       Biodiversity (50%), Environmental policies and institutions (25%), Land
administration and management (25%)
Borrower(s):    External Resources Department
Implementing    Department of Wildlife Conservation, Forest Department, Ministry of Tourism
Agency:         and Sports
Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                               40.00
Total Project Cost                                                        40.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Concept         Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue
Review
Decision:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
Other Decision
(as needed):
Page 1 of 11


﻿B. Introduction and Context
Country Context
Sri Lanka is a country long known for its achievements in human development. Its social
indicators rank among the highest in South Asia and compare favorably with those in middle-
income countries, largely due to the enduring commitment of public policy to investment in the
social sectors. Economic growth has averaged 7.5% over the last 5 years since 2010, driven by
industry and services, which is reasonably good record, especially when viewed against the
backdrop of three decades of civil conflict. Construction has lifted the post-conflict economy,
contributing 15% of growth. Tourist arrivals have tripled. Infrastructure development and post-
conflict reconstruction has increased the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) share of construction
from 7.6% in 2009 to 10.3% in 2013. As a result, the share of industry in GDP expanded from
29.7% to 32.5%, while agriculture dropped its share from 12.7% to 10.8% during the same
period. The share of services remained almost the same. Having achieved per capita income of
US$ 3,625 in 2014, Sri Lanka envisages reaching upper middle-income status in a few years'
time.
Among the binding constraints to rural growth is the mounting evidence of a rapidly degrading
natural resource base with predictable consequences for agriculture and other resource dependent
activities. Poorer communities that live in the periphery of forests are most affected by natural
resource loss and degradation, since they are most directly reliant on ecosystem services for their
well-being. The livelihoods of many of these communities are directly and indirectly depend on
the on the health of the natural resources. Damage to the environment, as well as a lack of clean
water and land suitable for farming or growing food, leads to more hunger, illness, poverty and
reduced opportunities to make a living. Poorer people are also less resilient to natural or man-
made disasters, including climate change. There are many examples within the country that
demonstrated looking after natural resources makes poorer communities more resilient. Healthy
forests, for example, have proven to protect agricultural land and villages from soil erosion and
flooding. Therefore, strengthened management of natural resources is especially significant and
would yield a double dividend by unleashing incentives for rural growth while enhancing the
sustainability of resource-use.
Sectoral and Institutional Context
The value of the nation's biodiversity has not gone unrecognized in recent times as many modern
governments enacted laws aimed at the protection of biological resources. With the highest
biodiversity per unit area in Asia, Sri Lanka is ranked as a global biodiversity hot spot. Yet the
country is confronted with serious degradation of its ecosystems and the biodiversity they host.
About 30% of forests in the dry zone are degraded and forests in wet zone are highly fragmented
losing contiguous nature required by many species to survive. These trends will continue unless
more systematic and stringent corrective measures are taken. Seen from a broader perspective,
the primary causes of ecosystem degradation include unplanned development, a growing
infrastructure footprint, gaps in legislation, poor law enforcement and lack of and weak
implementation of existing Protected Areas (PA) management plans.
Environmental conditions and access to natural resources and other environmental goods and
services are closely linked to the livelihoods, health and vulnerability of people, specifically for
people living in poverty - particularly women and children. Expanded investment to improve the
poor's access to these environmental assets can generate strong returns for poverty reduction and
contribute to pro-poor growth. Yet, despite their critical importance, environmental assets
Page 2 of 11


﻿continue to be degraded at an alarming rate. The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment found that
60% of ecosystem services are used unsustainably and concluded that "any progress achieved in
addressing the goals of poverty and hunger eradication, improved health, and environmental
protection is unlikely to be sustained if most of the ecosystem services on which humanity relies
continue to be degraded."
0
GoSL and the World Bank are aligned toward strengthening environmental protection by
enhancing environmental governance, safeguarding natural habitats and biodiversity and restoring
critically damaged ecosystems in ways that contribute to conservation, poverty alleviation and
environmental sustainability in Sri Lanka's development process. These objectives are embodied
in the proposed Eco-systems Conservation and Management Project. At the heart of the proposed
project is the recognition that human beings live within the boundaries of the protected
ecosystems and rely on life-supporting ecological services. Hence, the proposed project
addresses the need to involve local populations in the development of the specific approaches and
strategies in order to ensure long-term sustainability through benefit-sharing with the
communities by developing income earning opportunities hand in hand with protecting the
ecosystem. Such an approach will minimize not only the human-biodiversity conflict - but also
human-human conflict in specific areas and establish the basis for a common culture of
environment protection among the local population.
Relationship to CAS/CPS/CPF
The project has not been identified in the on-going Country Partnership Strategy (2012-2016).
However, preserving natural assets and addressing the impacts of climate change have been
identified as priorities in the Strategic Country Diagnostic (SCD) to address sustainability
challenges. The SCD will inform Sri Lanka's next Country Partnership Framework that is
scheduled to be finalized in Fiscal Year 2016. There is significant government demand for
support to address these important environmental sustainability challenges. Within these
challenges, the SCD identifies many of the environmental risks identified above and calls for the
need to ensure stewardship of Sri Lanka's natural assets as a basis for lasting prosperity and
quality of life as one of the priorities for sustainability. This is in line with country's own
priorities and new development framework. The SCD also emphasizes the important of natural
resources for further development of tourism in the country. The proposed Project also directly
responds to the World Bank's goals of eradicating extreme poverty and promoting shared
prosperity in a sustainable manner. In this context, the Project will support inclusive economic
growth among some of country's poorest communities living in the buffer zones of Protected
Areas (PAs) by addressing critical issues such as human-elephant conflict that impacts their lives
and livelihood and promote co-management of some of the forest resources aimed at benefit
sharing. It would contribute directly to the government policies of increasing forest cover up to
35% of the total land area by 2020 for number of ecosystem benefits, improve and increase the
revenue generating capability of the wildlife and forest sectors and addressing human-wildlife
conflicts that threatens the wildlife populations and lives and livelihoods of people.
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
The project development objective (PDO) is to improve the management and stewardship of
specific Protected Areas and other selected biologically critical locations in the terrestrial, marine
and wetland ecosystems of Sri Lanka.
Key Results (From PCN)
Page 3 of 11


﻿Achievement of the PDO will entail a series of structured and interrelated interventions that
would: (i) support decentralized management and decision-making in PA conservation agencies
in ways that reward success; (ii) encourage cooperation between Department of Wildlife
O
U            Conservation (DWC) and Forest Department (FD) in managing PAs on an ecosystem basis to
create incentives to promote landscape management and overcome customary boundaries; (iii)
test innovative models for converting human-elephant conflict (HEC) to a situation of human-
elephant co-existence (HECOEX) in partnership with the affected local communities; (iv) invest
in training and institutional strengthening on ecosystems conservation and management; and (v)
improve PA infrastructure facilities and visitor services to raise the quality and revenue potential
of nature-based tourism by value addition without exceeding the carrying capacity of PAs.
The following is a list of the key indicators to assess the progress toward achieving the PDO:
(a) 500,000 ha of landscapes certified by internationally or nationally recognized standards that
incorporate conservation and management considerations
(b) 250,000 ha brought under enhanced biodiversity protection measured through PA area score
cards for PAs managed by DWC and FD
(c) 50% reduction of HEC-induced damages to crops and properties lives in HECOEX project
sites
(d) 75% reduction in the loss of human lives in HECOEX project sites
(e) 50% increase visitor satisfaction with the interpretation services and facilities in the PAs
D. Concept Description
The PDO will be achieved through: (i) improved management of natural habitats within selected
conservation landscapes; (ii) initiation of innovative programs to reduce human-elephant conflict
through co-existence; (iii) enhancement of the revenue earning opportunities of PAs and affected
communities through upgraded nature-based tourism and community partnerships to reduce
dependence on forest resources; and (iv) strengthening of the institutional capacity and
investment capability of PA conservation agencies.
Project's overarching approach: Conservation landscape management. The Project will primarily
concentrate its investments and activities in three priority conservation landscapes comprising
contiguous areas with unique ecological, cultural and socio-economic characteristics. The
selected conservation landscapes are dominated by PAs belonging to both DWC and FD. The
three landscapes also contain ecologically sensitive sites and wildlife corridors outside the
designated PA network which were identified in a Protected Area Gap Analysis Study as needing
strategic conservation interventions. The three landscapes comprise: (i) the biodiversity rich
landscape ranging from the Mirissa large marine mammal gathering area in the South to
Kanneliya-Dediyagala-Nakiyadeniya forest to Galways Land Sanctuary (SA) in the South West
and Central wet zone; (ii) from the South Eastern dry and arid zone, the forest ecosystem ranging
from Bundala National Park (NP) to Maduru Oya NP, which is the landscape with the largest PA
network in the country; and (iii) from the mixed climatic zone, the landscape ranging from
Victoria-Randenigala-Rantambe to the integrated land-seascape of Pigeon Island Marine NP. All
project activities will take place within these landscapes and are expected to contribute towards
establishing effective ecological networks, securing the integrity of ecosystems and viable
populations of species - while promoting green infrastructure development - within the
conservation landscapes. The project would be implemented over five years. The project's four
Page 4 of 11


﻿main components are listed below.
Component 1: Promoting of Ecosystem Conservation and Management (US$15 million)
Component 1 funds will be allocated through an annual competitive call for proposals from DWC
and FD through their regional network to promote demand-driven and decentralized approaches
to conservation and management of natural ecosystems. Proposals will be submitted for funding
under three windows, each of which would support specific objectives. Component 1 consists of
the following sub-components/activities:
(a)    Preparation of strategic conservation landscape plans including: technical assistance and
training to MoTS and MoMDE; organization of workshops to assist in the development of
strategic plans; guidelines for the construction and/or utilization of green infrastructure; and
determination of environmental service values of different ecosystems, particularly outside the
PAs for making informed development planning decisions in selected conservation landscapes;
(b)    Funding Window 1 for carrying out of activities aimed at encouraging coordination of
conservation and management activities in the supported landscapes outside the PA network;
(c)    Funding Window 2 fo r carrying out of activities related to PA conservation and
management, including but not limited to: rehabilitation and development of water resources in
PAs; habitat management, including control of invasive species and creation of habitats;
rehabilitation of existing roads; improvements in existing park infrastructure; species monitoring
and implementation of species recovery program; protection of inviolate areas for species
conservation; implementation of real-time field based monitoring systems; and strengthening
enforcement of laws and regulations aimed at protecting PAs; and
(d)    Funding Window 3 for community participation in reducing deforestation and forest
degradation through mobilization of communities whose livelihoods depend on the forests in the
supported landscapes and adjacent buffer zones; joint identification by FD and the relevant
communities of conservation development priorities; preparation of community action plans; and
implementation of those plans.
O
Component 2: Demonstrating Human Elephant Conflict Management through Co-existence (US
$11 million)
o
HEC mitigation in Sri Lanka and in Asia has been based solely on attempts to restrict elephant
movements by limiting them in national parks through ill-conceived elephant drives,
translocations and attempts to restrict movement by electric fences located on the boundaries of
national parks. They have largely failed because they neglect the root causes of the problem, and
do not consider management on a landscape level. With two thirds of Sri Lanka's elephant
population having home ranges going beyond DWC PAs and with inadequate carrying capacity
for elephants within the PA network to accommodate all elephants in the wild, this component
will explore options for Human Elephant Coexistence (HECOEX) on a landscape basis, utilizing
FD forest reserves as well DWC protected areas as outlined in the National Policy on
Conservation of Wild Elephants. This component consists of the following sub-components/
activities:
(a)    Implementation of projects for demonstrating human elephant co-existence within high
HEC areas in selected conservation landscapes through: (i) implementation of a landscape
conservation strategy aimed at allowing elephants to continue ranging outside PAs based on the
use of ongoing shifting agriculture outside PAs to create optimal habitat for elephants and
providing benefits to farmers through elephant conservation; (ii) management of elephants in
Page 5 of 11


﻿Elephant Conservation Areas (ECA) and Managed Elephant Ranges (MERs) which are lands
outside the PA network without transfer or change in land ownership; (iii) carrying out of studies
to identify viable economic incentives for the purposes of management; (iv) development of
policies and procedures and a governance mechanism for provision of such economic incentives;
provision of viable economic incentives in human elephant co-existence sites including but not
limited to: cash transfers to people residing in the human elephant co-existence sites in return for
environmental services; establishment of insurance schemes and compensation mechanisms to
mitigate the impact of elephant destruction; and promotion of opportunities for community-
managed nature-based tourism, such as elephant viewing, in order to demonstrate the economic
benefits to communities of coexistence with elephants; and (v) and promotion of alternative
livelihood options such as bee keeping that deters elephants from human habitation; and
(b)    Development of a national master plan for mitigation of the human elephant conflict and
practical models for human elephant coexistence.
Component 3: Enhancing the Quality of Nature-based Tourism in support of PA Conservation
and Management (US$8 million)
This component will support responsible nature-based tourism activities for diversifying tourism
products and boosting revenues and promote conservation and environmental education. This
component consists of the following sub-components/activities:
(a)    Development and implementation of plans for nature-based tourism and visitor services
in PAs selected on the basis of needs assessments;
(b)    Carrying out of studies aimed at establishing the optimum number of visitors in selected
PAs based on the carrying capacity limits of such PAs to avoid over visitation detrimental to the
ecosystem; and preparation of guidelines for sustainable tourism management in PAs; and
(c)    Identification and implementation of visitor services in PAs within Supported
Conservation Landscapes including: (i) improvement of visitor facilities through, inter alia,
construction of nature trails, wayside interpretation points, observation towers, wildlife hides, and
campgrounds; (ii) development of innovative services, such as night safaris, non-motorized boats
for wildlife viewing, kayaking or canoeing down rivers flowing through PAs; and (iii) intensive
training opportunities in interpretation services and language skills for game and volunteer guides.
o
Component 4: Strengthening Institutional Capacity and Investment Capability for Ecosystem
Conservation and Management (US$6 million)
This component will strengthen the institutional capacity and investment capability for
conservation and management and support the project management related activities and consists
of the following sub-components/activities:
(a)    Upgrading and strengthening of the capacity of the Wildlife Training Center and Sri
Lanka Forestry Institute through: (i) provision of staff training, and enhancement of the quality of
the training programs, including curriculum revisions; (ii) carrying out basic improvements to
existing infrastructure facilities to the Wildlife Training Centre and Sri Lanka Forestry Institute;
(iii) implementation of training evaluation procedures; and (iv) establishing twinning
arrangements with training institutions;
(b)    Improving skills and capacity of conservation agencies through: (i) strengthening the
strategic management capacity and staff skills of DWC and FD; (ii) provision of equipment and
construction or rehabilitation of infrastructure; (iii) development of adaptive field management;
(iv) enhancement of the enforcement competence of DWC and FD through staff training and
Page 6 of 11


﻿provision of technical assistance; (v) establishing twinning arrangements with international
conservation agencies; (vi) building capacity of FD staff in community approaches; (vii)
monitoring and evaluation of community-related activities;
(c)    Monitoring and evaluation, targeted studies and technical assistance for: (i) carrying out
of project monitoring and evaluation and specific studies aimed at effective project
implementation; (ii) assisting MoMDE in natural resource management planning, policy making
and environmental performance monitoring; and (iii) monitoring of project performance and
evaluation of project outcomes.
(d)    Project management including incremental operating costs associated with project
management, staff recruitment, consulting services, transportation, equipment and training of
administrators covering range of topics such as administration, planning, budgeting, fiduciary
activities and monitoring and evaluation related to landscape and PA management.
II. SAFEGUARDS
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The field level activities of the proposed project will focus on ecosystems in priority areas identified
in Sri Lanka's Biodiversity Conservation Action Plan the National Conservation Strategy and
Protected Area Gap Analysis Study. Priority will be given to three landscapes of contiguous areas
covering three broad climatic zones, which include: (1) the southwest and central wet zones; (ii)
southeast dry and arid zone; (iii) mixed climatic zone consisting of sections of the dry, intermediate
and wet zone. These three landscapes are dominated by Protected Areas (PAs) belonging to
Department of Wildlife Conservation and Forest Department and also contain ecologically sensitive
sites and wildlife corridors outside the designated PA network. The project will support crucial and
high priority interventions to conserve and manage such ecosystems and include, where appropriate,
close collaboration with the local population to ensure the long-term sustainability of the efforts. In
addition, to reduce further fragmentation of critical forest areas that provide ecosystems goods and
services beyond biodiversity conservation, sites will be selected for community forestry initiatives on
the basis of conservation issues faced by the respective forest reserves, including an analysis of the
vulnerability of forests to deforestation and forest degradation covering mainly dry and arid zones of
Sri Lanka.
B. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The borrower has a reasonably good track record and demonstrated capacity for implementing and
monitoring safeguards. Project implementation will entail the creation of a stand-alone project
management unit (PMU) at the Ministry of Tourism and Sports (MoTS), as it is a new Ministry
under the current administration. However, the Project will be primarily implemented by FD (an
agency under MoMDE)) and DWC (an agency under MoTS). Policy guidance to the project will be
provided by a National Project Steering Committee, which will be reconstituted. With DWC and FD
having oversight responsibilities for environmental safeguards in Sri Lanka, there will be no dearth
of environment expertise and input to the project. Sri Lanka has a comprehensive policy and
regulatory framework for natural resource management and conservation. Most of the conservation
ordinances have been reviewed and updated in the last decade or so by the government.
Institutionally, the 2 agencies have been recipients of donor funding for capacity building and have
undergone institutional reforms with the introduction of decentralization and empowerment of field
staff, more accountability and transparency, market based incentives and wider stakeholder
participation in the planning and decision making process. Both departments also have divisions
responsible for working with buffer zone communities, identifying their needs and concerns and
Page 7 of 11


﻿developing programs that are beneficial for the communities and to conservation. Therefore, the
capacity of the implementing agencies and the enabling legal environment are adequate for the
purpose of planning and implementing this project.
The borrower has already prepared number of safeguard instruments including Environmental
Assessment and Management Framework (EAMF), Social Management Framework (SMF) and
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) as part of the preparation of the project before it was
dropped in 2011. Since the scope of the project, especially project components and activities remain
the same, these framework will continue to be applicable. However, in order to identify the current
country context and priorities, these frameworks will be updated following consultations prior to
appraisal, and will be approved again by the Bank and disclosed to public. If site specific activities
are identified prior to appraisal, the relevant management plans (EMPs, RAPs and or IPPs) will be
prepared for review, clearance and disclosed.
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Nadeera Rajapakse (GENDR)
Susrutha Pradeep Goonesekera (GSURR)
D. POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment     Yes         Overall, the proposed project will have a positive
OP/BP 4.01                               environmental impact. However, management of
PAs may involve affecting ecologically sensitive
micro-ecosystems within the PA network such as
removal of invasive species, improving park roads,
water holes and development of interpretation
facilities, etc. Detailed activities are not known yet
and will depend on the proposals submitted by the
PA managers. The borrower will update the EAMF
prepared in lieu of stand-alone Environmental
Assessment.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes          The project will be implemented almost entirely in
ecologically sensitive natural eco-systems. While
there shall be no conversion or degradation of natural
habitats, this policy has been triggered as a
precaution to encourage implementing agencies to be
more cautious with the EA process when carrying
out activities inside sensitive ecosystems such as
construction work, removal of invasive species, etc.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           TBD         Project areas consist of predominantly forested areas,
formally protected or not. While the project shall not
finance activities that will either degrade or convert
forest land, this policy is considered as a precaution
to encourage implementing agencies to be more
cautious with the EA process when carrying out
activities inside sensitive ecosystems. This policy
Page 8 of 11


﻿will also ensure community co-management
activities in forested areas are undertaken based on
relevant guidelines.
Pest Management OP 4.09      TBD         The project is not likely to trigger OP 4.09 on Pest
Management. The EAMF will include screening
procedures for pest management and pesticide use
for activities considered under the Human-elephant
conflict mitigation strategies may involve cultivation
or promotion of production systems. At this stage,
information on the likelihood of the project financing
pest control in cultivated land in the buffer zones, is
not available. A final determination will be made
prior to appraisal stage.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes         The policy applies given the uncertainty regarding
OP/BP 4.11                               the exact locations of activities to be carried out
under the project. Some forests or landscapes
concerned by the project might be considered to have
historical or cultural significance. The EAMF would
include specific provisions to assess the potential
impacts considered to have historical or or cultural
significance prior to any activities are undertaken
and for the treatment of PCRs that may be
discovered during project implementation.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     TBD         It is known that indigenous communities are located
4.10                                     in the periphery of Gal Oya and Maduru Oya
National Parks and may possibly be affected by the
proposed interventions. However, the applicability of
this policy in Sri Lanka is yet to be determined. If the
applicability is confirmed, the Indigenous Peoples
Planning Framework will be updated consistent with
the requirements of this policy.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        Although involuntary land acquisition and
BP 4.12                                  resettlement of individuals and/or families will not
take place as a result of project activities, ecosystem
restoration and conservation planning and the HEC
pilot projects are likely to affect land use patterns of
the communities. OP 4.12 has been triggered in order
to ensure that there are no adverse impacts on
livelihoods.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No           Not applicable as the project does not involve new
construction/rehabilitation of any dams.
Projects on International   No           There will not be any activities in international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                     waterways or land-based activities that could be
detrimental to international waterways supported by
the project and therefore the policy is not triggered.
Page 9 of 11


﻿Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No       There are no disputed areas in the project areas;
BP 7.60                                 hence the policy is not triggered.
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan
1. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS
12-Oct-2015
2. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage
ISDS.
The updated EAMF, SMF and IPPF (if triggered) are planned to be completed by October 9, 2015.
Management/action plans (EMPs/RAPs/IPPs) For site-specific interventions identified during
project preparation will be undertaken by the borrower as part of the appraisal requirements.
III. Contact point
World Bank
Contact: Darshani De Silva
Title:   Environmental Specialist
Contact: Abdelaziz Lagnaoui
Title:   Lead Environment Specialist
Borrower/Client/Recipient
Name:    External Resources Department
Contact: Priyantha Ratnayake
Title:   Director General
Email:   dg@erd.gov.1k
Implementing Agencies
Name:    Department of Wildlife Conservation
Contact: Dayawan Ratanayake
Title:   Director General
Email:   dg@dwc.gov.lk
Name:    Forest Department
Contact: Anura Sathurusinghe
Title:   Conservator General of Forests
Email:   conservatorgeneral@yahoo.com
Name:    Ministry of Tourism and Sports
Contact: M.I.M. Rafeek
Title:   Secretary
Email:   secretary@sportsmin.gov.lk
Page 10 of I1


﻿IV. For more information contact:
The InfoShop
The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 458-4500
Fax: (202) 522-1500
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/infoshop
V. Approval
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Darshani De Silva,Abdelaziz Lagnaoui
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)              Date: 27-Jul-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Kseniya Lvovsky (PMGR)                Date: 28-Jul-2015
Manager:
Country Director:      Name: Rolande Simone Pryce (CD)             Date: 30-Jul-2015
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at
the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to
potentially affected persons.
P
Page 11 of 11


