COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)
CONCEPTSTAGE
U                                                Report No.: PIDISDSC14069
Date Prepared/Updated:    25-Jul-2015
O
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Azerbaijan                 Project ID:  P155983
Parent
Project ID
(if any):
Project Name: Azerbaijan Power Distribution Modernization (P 155983)
Region:         EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Estimated       16-Nov-2015                Estimated    19-Jan-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Practice Area   Energy & Extractives       Lending      Investment Project Financing
(Lead):                                    Instrument:
Sector(s):      Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
Theme(s):       Other rural development (70%), Other urban development (30%)
Borrower(s):    Republic of Azerbaijan
Implementing Azerishig Open Joint Stock Company
Agency:
Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                  100.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     300.00
Total Project Cost                                                        400.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Concept         Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue
Review
Decision:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
Other Decision
(as needed):
B. Introduction and Context
Page 1 of 9


﻿Country Context
1.     Azerbaijan's economic advancement since 2000 has been remarkable. The government's
strategy is to transform the country from a resource-oriented economy to one that is diversified
and globally integrated. Driven by a natural resource boom, Azerbaijan's economic growth
averaged 16 percent per annum during 2002-10. A decline in oil production brought down the
pace of economic growth to almost zero in 2011 with a minor jump to 2.2 percent in 2012.
Growth recovered to 5.8 percent in 2013 but fell once more to 2.8 percent in 2014. Azerbaijan's
economy, while benefiting from booming oil exports resulting in an accumulation of current
account surpluses and reserves, is much more reliant on oil revenues compared to other
hydrocarbon exporters in the region. In 2013, oil accounted for 94 percent of merchandise
exports, considerably higher than Russia (just over 50 percent) and Kazakhstan (close to 65
percent). Therefore, the government aims to diversify the economy through the development of
human and physical capital and institutions and encourage growth in non-oil revenues.
2.     Azerbaijan's economic growth has benefited the poor and strengthened the middle class.
Poverty incidence declined from close to 50 percent in the early 2000s to around 5 percent in
2013. Consumption of goods and services by households in the bottom 40 percent grew by over 2
percent per annum between 2007 and 2012, twice the rate of the top 60 percent. Improvements in
living standards were also accompanied by an expansion of the middle class from just over 4
percent to about 29 percent of the population. In spite of this considerable progress, a sizeable
share of the population elevated from poverty remains vulnerable and could relapse into poverty
should economic conditions deteriorate. This is especially true in non-oil sectors such as
agriculture which contributes about 10 percent to GDP but employs nearly 40 per cent of the
work force, whom are largely concentrated in rural areas and in the rayons, the administrative
regions of Azerbaijan, outside of Baku.
3.     In spite of this strong economic performance, the quality of growth needs strengthening
and fiscal sustainability is an issue. The recent sharp drop in oil prices, coupled with the weak
economic growth of its' main trading partners, is having an adverse impact on Azerbaijan's
economy through reduced exports, declining oil revenues and public investment. In 2015,
Azerbaijan will face its first fiscal deficit in over a decade, albeit cushioned somewhat by the
devaluation of the national currency. The government is responding to the emerging challenges
by accelerating reforms and development programs envisaged by the Vision 2020 Strategy.
Sectoral and Institutional Context
In 1990, Azerbaijan reached historical high in terms of annual energy supply with over 23
Gigawatt-hour (GWh) according to data from the State Statistical Committee of the Republic of
Azerbaijan. However, by 1995, with the same level of installed capacity from existing power
plants (5,044 MW), energy supply had declined by almost 36 percent owning to lack of proper
operation and maintenance of the system. Since then, the power sector in Azerbaijan has evolved
through investments in power generation, transmission and distribution with a total installed
capacity of 7,348 MW. In addition, between 2003 and 2009, more than 30,000 circuit kilometers
of transmission and distribution lines have been provisioned for a total of 100,000 km in
operation today, and a large number of meters installed. Access to the electricity grid is available
throughout Azerbaijan, and there is also a current surplus of power generation that could
potentially be exported to neighboring countries. This is remarkable considering that until 2007,
power generation in Azerbaijan was not sufficient to meet peak demand, prompting the country to
import electricity, mainly from Russia.
Page 2 of 9


﻿5.     In the last decade, signs of aging in the distribution grid began to surface with high
technical losses and frequent outages. With more than 40 percent of the demand required for the
Greater Baku region, most of the public investment went largely into generation and upgrading
systems in large load centers, mainly in the Baku area with much less focus on other rayons in
Azerbaijan investments in rehabilitation works took place there, resulting in improved quality of
supply with distribution losses averaging between 10-11 percent with little or no interruption in
the power supply.
6.     Despite the significant positive developments enumerated above, the sector still faces the
following challenges:
a)     Rehabilitation of aging distribution infrastructure throughout the country. This is
especially crucial for all rayons outside of Baku given the poor condition of the network which
has suffered from lack of sufficient investment and given that economic development in the
various regions will be coupled with forecasted load growth (4 percent per annum) that may not
be possible with the current state of the network.
b)     Sustaining sector operations and functioning. The establishment of a newly-formed utility
with a mandate for operating and maintaining the entire electricity distribution network in all
rayons requires careful planning and institutional development to ensure a smooth transition in the
short-term and for operational efficiency under the new sector structure in the future. This
includes technology, commercial systems, IT, and coordination on the generation dispatch and
transmission functions.
c)     Diversifying the power supply and increasing the utilization of surplus generation: with
almost exclusive reliance on thermal power generation (90 percent), the country must look into
diversifying its energy mix beyond the small amount of generation from hydropower plants. This
is especially critical given the volatility of oil and gas prices, having to utilize the resource for
domestic power generation in lieu of revenue-generating exports of the same.
d)     Lack of robust market policy. With t he sector operating entirely by state-owned entities,
investments in generation, transmission and distribution places a large burden on public finances.
Also, in the absence of market rules and involvement of private stakeholder (such as independent
power producers), the balancing of the energy system in the county is not optimized, and
prospects for future investments decline, especially where there is potential for exporting
electricity in no concept of a regional electricity market.
7.     The proposed project will help address challenges a) and b) above and contribute to the
Government of Azerbaijan's commitment to the modernization of the power sector and improving
quality and efficiency of services to its' population as indicated in the State Program for
Development of Fuel and Energy Sector (2005-2015) and Azerbaijan Vision 2020 Strategy
document.
8.     As noted above, the government has achieved a sustained level of operational efficiency
in the electricity sector through reduction of combined technical and commercial losses from over
22 percent to a little over 16 percent between 2009-2012 according to data from AzerEnergi
(compared to an average of 8 percent of overall losses in very efficient utilities). In addition, there
has been an improvement in commercial performance on billing and collections with rates around
Page 3 of 9


﻿90 percent (well-performing utilities exceed 98 percent). It is important to note that much of this
efficiency is attributed to the Greater Baku area, whereas the situation in the rest of the country is
significantly lagging behind with the highest level of system losses concentrated outside Baku,
thus hitting the bottom 40 percent the most. Poorer communities experience the most
interruptions in the power system and still rely on wood for heating and almost all of these occur
away from Baku. While precise data on the state of the entire distribution grid is being collected,
estimates from 2012 showed that roughly 90 percent of 35 kV distribution lines and substations
needed to be reconstructed, with a high percentage of other lower voltage substations, lines and
equipment needing replacement as well.
9.     As revealed in recent Systematic Country Diagnostics (SCD), critical infrastructure gaps
remain in spite of high public investment and significant improvements over the past decade.
Azerbaijan's per capita power consumption is less than on one-third the Europe and Central Asia
(ECA) average while transmission and distribution losses are more than double the ECA average.
A recent analysis carried out by the government indicated that the needs for investments in the
distribution sector is to the tune of US$ 3.5-4 billion. The condition of the aging distribution
infrastructure in many of the rayons is very poor resulting in technical losses to the utility and can
lead to system failures and outages if not addressed urgently. The provision of reliable and quality
power supply to consumers in rayons is critical for reducing inequality and supporting further the
demand for improved public service delivery outside Baku.
10.    In order to address critical gaps and substantial losses in the power distribution network,
the government decided in February 2015 to unbundle AzerEnerji, the state-owned vertically-
integrated utility, by separating the electricity generation and transmission functions from the
distribution segment. The latter became the mandate of a newly formed utility, Azerishig Open
Joint Stock Company (OJSC). While legally a new entity, Azerishig has acquired assets, staff and
operations from the five regional distribution companies that had been operating under the
auspices of AzerEnerji.
O
11.    The challenges for Azerishig cannot be understated. Part of the rationale for unbundling
the distribution function was due to the large overhaul of the distribution network which has
suffered from poor maintenance and under-investment for the last two to three decades. In
Azerbaijan, the time and cost for new customers to connect to the electricity grid remain
prohibitively high-164 days, compared to the regional average which affects the pace of new
development and economic activities; this situation is further aggravated outsideBaku. In nearby
Georgia, the average is about 71 days and in well-performing countries such as Chile it is only 30
days. The poor condition of the existing power distribution infrastructure and consumer
connections in Azerbaijan poses a serious safety risk for the system, Azerishig staff, and persons/
livestock living in the vicinity. As a newly formed utility, Azerishig will also need support on
developing its corporate systems, procedures and enhance operations and maintenance practices
to bring it in line with international best practices.
Relationship to CAS/CPS/CPF
12.    The proposed project supports two pillars of the draft Country Partnership Framework for
FY 2015-2020. The first pillar focuses on public services delivery, including improving access for
the population to communal services. The second pillar is promoting economic competitiveness,
and the modernization of the power distribution system will enhance opportunities for the private
sector and improve productivity of businesses in the rayons. The proposed project is also aligned
with the government's Vision 2020 Strategy, which defines development and modernization of
Page 4 of 9


﻿infrastructure in the rayons as one of its key strategies for economic diversification and improving
the welfare of its population.
13.    The proposed project will contribute to the World Bank twin goals of reducing poverty
and enhancing shared prosperity by supporting development in 5 rayons that have significantly
lower per capita incomes compared to the national average. The identified rayons are primarily
agricultural areas where a majority of the bottom 40 per cent of the population are concentrated.
Improved electricity supply in the project areas will enhance economic opportunities, productivity
and growth as well as contribute to improved electricity connections to educational and healthcare
facilities.
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
To improve the quality and reliability of power supply in select rayons in Azerbaijan, and
enhance the commercial systems and operations and maintenance practices of Azerirshig.
Key Results (From PCN)
*      Increasing the reliability and safety of substations in the five selected rayons;
*      Integrating the commercial and billing system of Azerishig into a single platform;
*      Improving operations and maintenance procedures and standards in Azerishig;
*      Beneficiary satisfaction through feedback about the quality of completed works.
D. Concept Description
14.    The rehabilitation and distribution system modernization in all rayons will require
significant investments over the next five- to ten years in order to ensure continuous provision of
quality power services to the population in all rayons. For that purpose, GoA has established
Azerishig as a dedicated distribution company, unbundled from AzerEnerji and has recently
concluded the legal transfer of all assets and liabilities to the new company. A review by
Azerishig of the existing state of the distribution system concluded that investments are urgently
needed to reconstruct and upgrade the network currently in place which have either exceeded its
life expectancy or require replacement of major components in order to ensure future reliability to
consumers, safety of the system and personnel, sustainable revenues and optimum operations and
a            maintenance practices.
15.    In preparation for these investments, Azerishig is developing a business plan to establish
financial viability and sustainability of its operations, this includes a review of overall revenue
requirements, including efficiency improvements, tariff level, loss reduction implementation plan
and improving operations and maintenance practices. To support this large-scale modernization of
the distribution network and support GoA has sought support from the World Bank and Asian
Development Bank (ADB). The Bank project is proposed to be carried out in five (5) rayons,
namely Sabirabad, Salyan, Beylagan, Agjabadi and Gazakh. The activities supported by ADB
will be in different rayons; however, given that the scope of support, specifically on the
infrastructure works will be similar, both international financial institutions (IFIs) will seek to
collaborate on common aspects of the project such as safeguards, technical design, etc.
16.    The proposed project will finance the following components:
i)     Distribution Infrastructure: rehabilitation of selected distribution substations, distribution
Page 5 of 9


﻿lines and associated infrastructure of 110 kilovolt (kV) and 35 kV (and probably other voltage
levels); this component will provide for project implementation support through the provision of
an owner's engineer and/or other consulting services.
0
ii)    Financial sustainability: setup and enhancement of the commercial and billing system of
Azerishig including integration of the current system into a single platform.
iii)   Institutional Development: improvement of institutional, staffing and operations &
maintenance practices of Azerishig.
17.    Physical inspection of the current state of a sample of these substations revealed aging
and outdated equipment, and in some cases, facilities that are unsafe for future operation, hence,
completely new substations (s/s) will have to be built. Service disruption affects areas outside
Baku the most. The components of the s/s proposed to be financed will include transformers,
switchgears, busbars, feeder connections, low/medium voltage distribution lines and protection
measures and other required equipment for the full-functioning of the s/s. In some instances, new
control rooms and staff facilities may also need to be constructed. The proposed project will
support modernization and reconstruction of a number of sites for which detailed design is not
available yet; some sites will have sufficient area within the existing premises to construct the
new s/s, while others may need to be located in an adjacent area.
18.    Currently, there is a lack of uniformity in the commercial systems (integration of
metering, billing, collections, and transferring information to accounting) used by the different
distribution companies which now form Azerishig. The process of introducing a unified system
within the organization is currently underway. Part of this exercise will include the development
of International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) system of accounts, incorporating the
regional distribution centers into this discipline.
19.    Furthermore, Azerishig is going through a process of consolidation and restructuring of
its operations, which in part is reflected in an enhanced, and uniform, commercial and billing
system. Institutionally, this will require the development, and adoption, of new operational and
maintenance practices, development of consumer service centers in the different regional centers
and citizens' feedback in terms of quality of service. The project will support the institutional
development plan by construction of facilitates that serve these purposes.
20.    The proposed project will be gender-informed and ensures citizen engagement. The
proposed project will facilitate gender-sensitive consultations, including on the Environmental
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Environmental and Social Management Plan
(ESMP). Consultations will be held at various stages of the design and implementation process to
capture beneficiary feedback, which will inform any necessary refinements of design and
implementation of the works. Citizen feedback about the quality of the completed works will be
collected and an indicator will be included in the results framework to reflect beneficiary
satisfaction.
II. SAFEGUARDS
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
21.    The project is proposed to be carried out in five rayons: Sabirabad, Salyan, Beylagan,
Page 6 of 9


﻿Agjabadi and Gazakh. The project will support rehabilitation or reconstruction of the existing sub-
stations and related infrastructure, mainly within the current footprint. New locations might be
suggested during the project implementation, which will be subject to individual consideration of
environmental and social aspects.
B. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
21.    The project will be implemented by Azerishig, a newly formed entity responsible for the
electricity distribution in Azerbaijan. The day-to-day project implementation will be led by an
experienced project management unit (PMU) which staff have worked on other infrastructure
projects in Azerbaijan, financed by IFIs including the World Bank, and so therefore have
considerable experience in the Bank's procedures and requirements. However, there is currently no
designated staff in the PMU to monitor environmental and social compliance of the proposed project,
and there is no designated unit within Azerishig to ensure environmental and social management on a
corporate level. In order to address this gap, the project will support hiring by the PMU of a full time
environmental specialist and possibly a part-time social specialist. In the long term, the project will
assist Azerishig with its efforts in establishing procedures and staffing for handling the
environmental and social aspects of electricity distribution at the national level.
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (GENDR)
Jennifer Shkabatur (GSU03)
D. POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         This policy is triggered due to the need to address
OP/BP 4.01                               environmental risks which might be caused by
rehabilitation or reconstruction of selected sub-
stations and related infrastructure. The risks are
Q)                                                mainly those associated with dismantling, treatment
and disposal of old equipment and spare parts,
including old transformers, circuit breakers, cables,
metal scrap, crashed concrete, asbestos, etc. The
other type of impacts are associated with
construction of new sub-station facilities.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
Pest Management OP 4.09     No
Physical Cultural Resources  No
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  TBD       It is envisaged that the project will be implemented
BP 4.12                                 within the footprint of existing facilities. If
Page 7 of 9


﻿resettlement and/or land acquisition is required
during project preparation, a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) will be prepared to provide
guidance and criteria for the development of site-
specific resettlement action plans prior to
construction. Consultations on the RPF will be
carried out in all affected communities, and it will be
disclosed in-country and on InfoShop prior to
Appraisal.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No
Projects on International   No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan
1. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS
01-Sep-2015
2. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage
ISDS.
Due to the fact that detailed design for already identified sites will not be available by Appraisal,
and new sites might be proposed during the project implementation, an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) with sample Environmental and Social Management Plan, instead
of an Environmental Impact Assessment and Management Plan, will be prepared and disclosed prior
to Appraisal. An RPF will also be prepared if land acquisition and/or resettlement will be required.
0
III. Contact point
World Bank
Contact: Arturo S. Rivera
Title:   Lead Energy Specialist
Contact: Sadig Aliyev
Title:   Infrastructure Specialist
Borrower/Client/Recipient
Name:    Republic of Azerbaijan
Contact: Ilgar Fatizade
Title:   First Deputy Minister of Finance
Email:   info@maliyye.gov.az
Implementing Agencies
Name:    Azerishig Open Joint Stock Company
Contact: Baba Rzayev
Title:   Chairman
Email:   office@azerishig.org
Page 8 of 9


﻿IV. For more information contact:
The InfoShop
The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 458-4500
Fax: (202) 522-1500
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/infoshop
V. Approval
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Arturo S. Rivera,Sadig Aliyev
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                     Date: 31-Jul-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Ranjit J. Lamech (PMGR)                Date: 03-Aug-2015
Manager:
Country Director:       Name: Larisa Leshchenko (CD)                 Date: 27-Aug-2015
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at
the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to
potentially affected persons.
P
Page 9 of 9


