COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)
CONCEPTSTAGE
U                                               Report No.: PIDISDSC14168
Date Prepared/Updated:    27-Sep-2015
O
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Africa                    Project ID:  P155876
Parent
Project ID
(if any):
Project Name: West Africa Regional Communications Infrastructure Project - SOP3 (P 155876)
Region:         AFRICA
Estimated       25-Feb-2016               Estimated     17-May-2016
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Practice Area   Transport & ICT           Lending      Investment Project Financing
(Lead):                                   Instrument:
Sector(s):      General information and communications sector (30%), Telecommunications
(70%)
Theme(s):       Regulation and competition policy (40%), Regional integration (40%),
Infrastructure services for private sector development (20%)
Borrower(s):    Government of Guinea Bissau
Implementing    Ministry of Transport, Communication and ICT
O
U        Agency:
Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                               38.00
Total Project Cost                                                        38.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Concept         Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue
Review
Decision:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
Other Decision
(as needed):
Page 1 of 12


﻿B. Introduction and Context
Country Context
Guinea-Bissau is one of the poorest countries in the world. In 2013, Gross National Income per
capita was USD 520 per capita. 70 percent of the population live under USD 2 a day (in terms of
purchasing power parity (PPP) and about 33 percent of the population live in extreme poverty.
Broader human development outcomes are generally weak in Guinea-Bissau: out of 187
countries, Guinea-Bissau was ranked 177th in the 2014 Human Development Report, maintaining
its rank of the previous year. It is unlikely that Guinea-Bissau reaches any of the Millennium
Development Goals by 2015 given weak outcomes, or even deteriorations, with respect to
poverty, nutrition, primary education, gender equality, health, and access to basic services.
Malnutrition is a concern and food insecurity rose as a consequence of the 2012 coup. The high
levels of poverty translate into poor nutrition. Rice is the main staple and many Bissau-Guinean
families struggle to complement their diet with other and more nutritious foods.
Guinea-Bissau is also one of the most fragile countries in the world. The economy is
undiversified and the governance environment has been frequently interrupted by military coups.
The latest coup occurred in 2012. Political fragility in Guinea-Bissau has hampered private
sector-led growth and poverty reduction. Guinea-Bissau is a rural economy, almost entirely
dependent on a single cash crop: cashew. Cashew nuts are also the main export, accounting for 85
to 99 percent of the country's total exports. Growth over the past ten years has been low, at an
average 2.6 percent. This is about half the growth performance of Sub-Saharan Africa, at an
average 5 percent. Most segments of the economy are informal. Of the remaining 20 percent of
the labor force not engaged in agriculture, the majority is employed in services, mostly in small,
informal micro-enterprises or self-employed, in commerce and transport. Cashew is currently the
single most important growth sector in Guinea-Bissau. About 80 percent of the labor force are
employed in the sector, most of them poor, and raw cashew is the country's single most important
export.
Guinea-Bissau lacks the enabling environment conducive for private sector-led growth due to
poor infrastructure, low levels of human capital and poor public services, which reinforce each
other. This situation is compounded by elite competition for rents and a weak public
administration. Jointly, they stifle private economic activity. The investment climate in Guinea-
Bissau is currently not conducive to doing business and firms and households struggle to obtain
access to finance. Guinea-Bissau has undertaken some notable reforms to improve the business
climate over the past years. However, it still ranks 180th in the World Bank's Doing Business
rankings. Only 9 countries in the world are ranked below. Lack of access to electricity is among
the most pressing concerns, as 60 to 80 percent of Bissau-Guineans do not have access to power
and entrepreneurship and private sector-led growth is severely due to insufficient or unreliable
access to power. Inadequate road and port infrastructure, an underdeveloped ICT sector, a
restrictive regulatory environment, a largely unskilled workforce, and a shallow financial sector
limit the effectiveness of goods, labor, and capital markets. Improving telecommunications
system in Guinea-Bissau is considered as vital for growth since telecommunications can connect
market participants-even where physical connectivity is limited by poor infrastructure -,
improve the productivity of businesses, and they can channel financial resources, including
remittances or cash transfers, to recipients even in the most remote areas
Sectoral and Institutional Context
In a little over a decade, Africa has become the world's second most connected continent by
Page 2 of 12


﻿mobile subscriptions, next to Asia-Pacific, and is expected to hit 1 billion by 2016. According to
GSMA, an industry association, the mobile ecosystem contributed (directly and indirectly) to 5.4
percent of the GDP of Sub-Saharan Africa in 2013. The experience of the member countries of
the ECOWAS region has not been any different. As a sub-region, the ECOWAS community saw
mobile penetration increase significantly with an average of 79.7 percent in 2013 and seven (out
of 15) countries reaching 100 percent or more. This has paved the way for the takeoff of mobile
applications for service delivery; such as mobile money through which payments can be made via
text messages or top ups of pre-paid cards.
Out of the 15 member states of the ECOWAS region, 11 have built landing stations on their
coasts linking themselves to the undersea or submarine fiber optic cables running from Europe to
South Africa. Five of the countries - Benin, The Gambia, Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone -
have been supported through the Bank's West Africa Regional Communications Infrastructure
Program (WARCIP) Series of Projects (SOP) program to connect to the African Coast to Europe
(ACE) submarine cable. Guinea Bissau was included in the program as approved by the Board in
2011. However, the development in the political situation leading to a de facto Government
prevented the operation from going forward at the same time as the other coastal countries
supported under WARCIP. Prior to the operationalization of the cable, people and businesses in
these countries were largely reliant on costly satellite service to make international calls and to
have access to the Internet. The price of service continues to drop. For example in The Gambia,
since the operationalization of the ACE cable in 2012, the average monthly price of wholesale
international El capacity link from capital city to Europe dropped from USD 5,000 to USD 500 in
2014.
Despite lacking international connectivity, the telecommunications sector in Guinea-Bissau is one
of the most dynamic sector in the country which is attributable to the government's efforts to
open the mobile phone market to competition and private sector participation. After having
privatized the fixed-line State-owned operator, Guinee-Telecom in 1989 (with a 40% stake taken
by Portugal Telecom, the remaining 60% held by the Government), the Government created
Guinetel, a mobile operator subsidiary, and awarded a GSM license to the company which then
launched its services in 2004. The Government then liberalized the mobile phone market by
awarding two additional licenses to international operators: MTN in 2003 and Orange-Bissau
(subsidiary of Sonatel) in 2007. The fixed-line services remained under the monopoly of Guinee-
Telecom. An independent regulatory authority (Institute of Communications of Guinea-Bissau -
ICGB) was set up in 1999, and then replaced by the Autoridade Reguladora Nacional das
Tecnologias de Informacao e Comunicacao (ARN) following the adoption of the new telecom
Law 5/2010 (and Decree no. 03-99). As a result of the liberalization process, and despite a decade
of political instability, the mobile telephony market grew significantly to reach 1.18 million
subscribers at the end of 2013, or a 74% penetration rate which is almost in line with the regional
average of ECOWAS (79% in 2013).
However, the bankruptcy of Guinee-Telecom/Guinetel in 2014 (whose situation deteriorated after
Portugal Telecom's withdrawal in 2010) has reduced the level of competition and dynamism of
the mobile phone market, and become a major challenge for the Government. The mobile
telephony market now comprises two operators (MTN and Orange-Bissau) with roughly similar
market shares. In addition, the fixed-line market - in-line with global trends - has come to a
stand-still and the penetration rate of fixed-lines was 0.3% in 2013 compared to 1.1% of the
regional average of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU). A decree
Page 3 of 12


﻿authorizing the privatization of Guinee-Telecom/Guinetel was adopted in early May 2014, and the
restructuring process is ongoing to improve prospects for privatization. The last inventory
provided by the management of Guinee-Telecom (and Guinetel) in May 2014 indicates
overstaffing (170 employees), a net loss registered for 6 years, and Government arrears estimated
at C 33 million accumulated since 1997.
O
Going beyond mobile phones and developing the Internet market is another major challenge faced
by Guinea-Bissau which is the only country on the West African coast not connected to a
submarine cable. As a result, the broadband market, concentrated in the capital, is nascent with a
penetration rate of around 0.1% of the population (compared to the ECOWAS average of 7% and
1.5% in Gambia) and a usage rate of 3% (compared to the ECOWAS average of 9% and 14% in
Gambia in 2013). Orange-Bissau enjoys a virtual monopoly since 2011 despite the presence of
MTN and Eguitel (a local ISP licensed in 2003 relying solely on satellite connectivity). Orange-
Bissau owes its lead in the broadband market to its connection to the terrestrial optical fiber
networks owned by the Orange's other subsidiaries in Guinea (via Conakry) and Senegal (via
Ziguinchor). Despite MTN's presence in Guinea, terrestrial connections are not as developed as
those of Orange and rely on less reliable and more expensive micro-wave networks compared to
Orange's optical fiber networks. MTN is also partly relying on expensive satellite connectivity.
Without improved access to international (via submarine cable) and national terrestrial
connectivity by every operators (i.e. under open access principle), Guinea-Bissau cannot expect
substantial improvement in the coverage, quality, and price of broadband services. For
households, the price of a monthly subscription for mobile broadband service ranges between
USD 60-80 (excluding installation costs of USD 185) or 142% of monthly GNI per capita.
To address some of the challenges facing the telecommunications sector, the Government has
recently adopted a national strategy for 2015-2020 which places great emphasis on improving the
broader information and communication technology (ICT) sector. Through the national strategy,
the Government has committed to engage in a series of important telecommunications reforms,
including: i) strengthening the institutional capacity of the Ministry of Transport,
Communications and ICT; ii) development of a Master Plan for the ICT sector; iii) rehabilitation,
restructuring and privatization of Guinee-Telecom and Guinetel; iv) rehabilitation, restructuring
and privatization of the Post Office in Guinea-Bissau; v) installation of submarine optical fiber
cable; vi) expansion of the national optical fiber backbone; vii) transition from analogue to digital
*           technologies; viii) transition to 3G and 4G mobile broadband services; and ix) development of
ICT services, applications and local content. The general objective of the Government is to
improve access and usage of ICT services (especially for broadband services) to spur the
development of a digital economy that would modernize and transform the country. Building
upon this strategic vision, the Government has recently created (by decree 08-2014, November 13
2014) a new government structure named the Nficleo de Inovaqdo Tecnologias e Governaqdo
Electr6nica (NITGOV), under the umbrella of the Ministry of Presidency. A World Bank
Technical Assistance supported some of the reforms initiated by the Government since its
reengagement in the country in 2014.
At the regional level, while the region has had major achievements by establishing a regime for
free trade of goods and services, and for some countries, establishing a common currency, the
telecommunications markets remain fragmented and the price of ICT services exorbitant. The
high price of communicating within the ECOWAS region is likely to be hampering both
economic and social exchanges between the 15 member states. A regional approach to improving
Page 4 of 12


﻿cross-border communication is particularly necessary for West Africa so it can leverage
economies of scale and meet the critical mass that is required for the Internet and emerging digital
economy to take-off in a sustainable way. In light of this, the ECOWAS Commission, in 2014,
upgraded its telecommunications team to a Telecommunications and IT Department headed by a
Commissioner. The Commission's mandate is to develop regional policies and regulations, and
work with the West African Telecommunications Regulatory Assembly (WATRA) that provides
a forum to discuss regional policies to transition to a single telecommunications market. There is
however a need to increase the capacity and therefore the authority of these bodies to better
coordinate and address remaining gaps in regional policies and legislation. Further capacity
building is required by national regulators to translate the regional directives coming out of the
Commission into national legislation and regulations.
In light of this, and to build on the momentum gained through the preceding WARCIP projects,
the proposed project would support (i) Guinea-Bissau fmd an optimal way to access the global
fiber network and address key sector reform challenges; and (ii) provide capacity building support
to regional organizations such as the ECOWAS Commission, and WATRA to further the agenda
for regional connectivity. There is also opportunity to support other key regional institutions such
as the West Africa Power Pool (WAPP) Secretariat in order to leverage the unused fiber over
power transmission lines in the ECOWAS countries.
The regional grant to ECOWAS is an integral part of the WARCIP program (P116273) approved
by the Board on January 20th, 2011. The WARCIP program included US$ 5 million to be
allocated to support regional agencies including the ECOWAS Commission, WATRA and WAPP
due to their important role in addressing communications infrastructure gaps across borders. The
three main areas mentioned in the program PAD remain valid. These include: (i) regional
institutions' capacity building for oversight of the development of the ICT sector; (ii)
development of regional frameworks for regulating the submarine cables and providing guidance
on national and international jurisdiction issues; and (iii) developing regional guidelines to
regulate excess fiber capacity over power transmission lines. The regional grant is designed to
benefit all WARCIP participating countries regardless of the phase in which they participate in
WARCIP.
O
Relationship to CAS/CPS/CPF
The proposed project is fully aligned with the World Bank's Country Engagement Note (CEN)
FYI 5-FYI 6 produced for Guinea Bissau and that was designed to provide immediate short-term
support to the country fragile environment, in order to consolidate the transitionand restore basic
services while assisting the government to design a more sustainable strategy for long term
poverty reduction and greater shared prosperity. Arguing that boosting shared growth is possible,
even in a fragile environment, and in accordance with the Strategic and Operational Plan
2015-2020 "Terra Ranka", prepared by the Government in 2015, the CEN is positioning the
WBG's engagement in two key areas: (i) Building institutions and strengthening public sector
capacity, to enable the Government to provide a sound macro-fiscal environment and the
infrastructure and legal and regulatory framework necessary to promote shared growth and attract
investment; (ii) Strengthening the provision of basic services to the poor with a view toward
providing people with the services, resources, and skills they need to create and take advantage of
economic opportunities. The WBG's engagement in these key areas is complemented by a
program to support economic recovery through support for key infrastructure and productive
sectors. Under Strategic Theme Two "Strengthening the provision of basic services to the poor",
the CEN includes the regional connectivity project WARCIP3 which - in line with the
Page 5 of 12


﻿Government's national Plan - will contribute to build a modem and competitive national
telecommunications infrastructure network in order to enable widespread use of information and
communication technologies. The project is designed with a strong emphasis on the role of ICT to
support Guinea Bissau to address fragility constraints in line with commitment under IDA 17.
The proposed project is also in line with the World Bank Africa Strategy, Africa's Future and the
World Bank's Support to it (2011) and with the Bank ICT Strategy (2012). By facilitating cheaper
access to the Internet and supporting the expansion of national and regional communications
infrastructure, WARCIP SOP3 will promote sustainable employment (Pillar 1 competitiveness
and employment) and will create a critical building block for ICT applications (governance and
public sector capacity). WARCIP SOP3 is also fully aligned with the Connectivity pillar of the
new World Bank Group ICT strategy, which aims at scaling up affordable access to broadband
Internet by supporting policy and institutional reforms for private investment in broadband as well
as by a selective support of PPPs.
The proposed focus on regional connectivity is in line with the World Bank's Regional
Integration Assistance Strategy for Sub-Saharan Africa (developed in 2008, approved by the
Board in 2010). Pillar I of the Strategy calls for "stronger and better-connected infrastructure
platforms" that can help unlock economies of scale and sharpen competitiveness in Africa,
including for landlocked countries such as Burkina Faso, Mali and Niger. The pillar mentions
specifically, consideration for Bank assistance in "improving telecommunication connectivity"
and includes as one of the Strategy's cross-cutting theme, "capacity development of selected
Regional Economic Community (RECs) and subsidiary regional bodies, and strengthened
connection between regional policy commitments and national planning."
The proposed project will contribute to the World Bank's twin goals. Ending extreme poverty and
promoting shared prosperity require sustaining high rates of economic growth across the
developing world, as well as translating growth more effectively into poverty reduction and
inclusion in each developing country. Being at the forefront of disruptive technologies and
innovative solutions, the digital economy is providing major opportunities to improve
competiveness, attract investments, create jobs and grow markets, as well as encouraging
inclusion and alleviating poverty by fostering more efficient, equitable and better quality health
services. Improved access to mobile phone services (voice, text, mobile money and banking,
internet) benefits households in multiple ways. Mobile phones can improve access to and use of
information, thereby reducing search costs, improving coordination between different parties, and
increasing market efficiency. This is the most obvious benefit of mobile phones. As mobile
phones have greatly reduced communication costs, they allow individuals and firms to send and
to obtain information quickly and cheaply on a variety of economic, social, and political topics.
An emerging body of research shows that the reduction in communication costs associated with
mobile phones has tangible economic benefits including improving agricultural and labor market
efficiency and producer and consumer welfare. Another benefit of mobile phones is that
increased communication should improve productive efficiency by allowing firms and service
providers to better manage their supply chains and delivery of services. Mobile phones create new
jobs to address demand for mobile-related services. This is a third benefit of mobile phones.
These can be services directly related to mobile phones, such as the sale of airtime or services to
repair a phone or to charge a phone's battery. But they can also be indirect services such as
motor-taxi services, which can be requested by people living remotely simply 'beeping' the
driver. Such services can be life-saving, for instance when someone urgently needs to be taken to
Page 6 of 12


﻿a health facility. Mobile phones facilitate communication among social networks and geographic
areas in response to shocks. Covariate shocks such as floods or drought, but also violence and
epidemics routine affect households clustered in certain localities. By offering the ability to solicit
assistance from relatives or friends living in areas not affected by the shock, mobile phones help
to cope with households' exposure to risk. For instance, ICT platforms recently played a central
role in improving the effectiveness of healthcare institutions and emergency coordination centers
fighting Ebola in contaminated countries, by improving information flows and electronic
payments for emergency response teams as well as the public.
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
25.    The program development objective of WARCIP is to contribute to increasing the
geographical reach of broadband networks and reducing costs of communications services in
West Africa. Under WARCIP SOP3, the objectives of the project, thus, are to contribute to
increasing the geographical reach of broadband networks and reducing costs of communication
services in the territory of Guinea Bissau as well as between Guinea Bissau and ECOWAS
countries. In order to reach this objective, the project proposes an integrated approach focusing on
improving connectivity in Guinea Bissau and creating an enabling environment and institutional
strengthening in Guinea Bissau, and at regional level to remove existing bottlenecks for cross-
border and regional infrastructure and applications development.
26.    WARCIP SOP3 will benefit the entire population of Guinea Bissau. All over Africa,
businesses, governments, teachers, doctors, farmers, and fishermen are using ICTs to
communicate, share information, improve productivity and service delivery, find better prices,
improve access to markets, and increase their bargaining power. The proposed project will
therefore benefit the entire population of Guinea Bissau and the ECOWAS region including
telecommunications operators, telecommunications users, universities, schools, hospitals, banks,
corporate users, and ministries and departments. Direct beneficiaries of the project include people
who are connected to the communications network in Guinea Bissau (including
telecommunication services and internet users, schools, hospitals, banks, corporations,
government and public administrations), to be measured as the number of active fixed and mobile
subscribers and internet users. Indirect beneficiaries potentially include all of the Guinea-Bissau's
population, since increased communications capabilities at affordable rates for some of the
population may eventually have externalities for all in terms of an improved business
environment. Because ICTs are enabling tools for economic development and social change, they
are particularly valuable resource for women in developing countries who often suffer from
limited availability of time, social isolation, and lack of access to knowledge and productive
resources. For the purpose of M&E, Direct Project Beneficiaries will be defined in a more
restrictive way and a citizen engagement (CE) mechanism will be implemented to monitor and
report results to project beneficiaries.
27.    WARCIP SOP3, through the regional entities of the ECOWAS Commission, WATRA,
and WAPP Secretariat will also benefit directly the ICT policy makers and regulatory authorities
who are tasked with developing and implementing harmonized policies and regulations to
promote the transition to a single telecommunications market and reducing the price of cross-
border communications services in ECOWAS, supporting and consolidating results achieved in
previous WARCIP phases and anticipated in the final phases of the program.
Key Results (From PCN)
Achievement of the development objective of the proposed project will be assessed through the
Page 7 of 12


﻿key monitoring and evaluation indicators summarized below [To be discussed and confirmed by
appraisal]. The team will adjust the results framework during project preparation to make the
difference between results directly attributable to the intervention and those resulting from the
U            leveraging effect of the intervention, learning from earlier phases of the Program.
The indicator to be monitored for Guinea-Bissau would include:
*      Core indicator: Access to telephone services (fixed mainlines plus cellular phones per 100
a           people)
*      Core indicator: Access to Internet (number of subscribers per 100 people);
*      Core indicator: Number of direct project beneficiaries, including percentage of women;
*      Core indicator: Beneficiaries that feel project investments reflected their needs (%);
*      Custom indicator: Volume of international traffic (K/bits per person);
*      Custom indicator: Average monthly price of wholesale international E 1 capacity link
from capital city to Europe.
The indicator to be monitored under the ECOWAS Commission and WATRA sub-component
will include:
*      Non-core: Number of policies, guidelines and directives that will advance the expansion
of regional communications infrastructure.
Key monitoring and evaluation indicators will be complemented with Intermediate Results
indicators with base line values and targets that will facilitate assessment of project achievements
and effectiveness in relation to each of the components [To be discussed and confirmed by
appraisal], such as those suggested below. The team will adjust the results framework during
project preparation to facilitate comparison with results frameworks of existing comparable
projects.
D. Concept Description
O
U            Component 1 - Supporting Connectivity (USD 29.75 million - estimated)
This component would include the following activities on the basis of an open access and Public-
Private Partnership (PPP) structure so as to leverage private sector investment: (i) support to
provide Guinea-Bissau connectivity to international submarine cable connectivity (i.e. physical
point of landing or real entry point). The cost of connecting Guinea Bissau to the ACE cable is
twofold and covers both: i) the participation of Guinea Bissau in the ACE consortium owning the
ACE submarine cable; and ii) the construction of a domestic landing station (in Suro, 23 km away
from Bissau). For fiscal and economic efficiency reasons, and in line with other WARCIP
experiences, the Government of Guinea Bissau is committed to establish a Public Private
Partnership (PPP) with Telecom operators so as to share the cost of the investment in international
connectivity and to ensure an efficient management of the landing station. The PPP design will
likely be similar to the one put in place in Guinea, The Gambia, Sao Tome and Principe, and
Liberia where a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) has been created to own and manage the
infrastructure assets (ii) establishing a national Internet Exchange Point (IXP) in a neutral carrier
hotel building (built by the project) in Guinea Bissau that would also host white rooms for a
datacenter (not covered by the project) devoted to e-government servers. With the support of the
European Commission (PAMSP PALOP-TL project), the Government of Guinea Bissau, through
NITGOV, is promoting the modernization of the public administration with a particular focus on
Page 8 of 12


﻿the Civil Registry's automation. As a result, e-government data volume is expected to grow
exponentially, calling for a datacenter that will also be made available for the needs of the private
sector (banking sector, etc.) (iii) build 2 fiber optic missing links in Guinea Bissau for a total of
40km (23km from Suro to Bissau and 16km within the city of Bissau) to provide connectivity to
public administration in Bissau (national IDA) and redundancy connectivity through
interconnection of Bissau with the WAPP power transmission network offering cross-border links
toward ECOWAS - namely the Gambia, Guinea and Senegal.
Component 2 - Creating an enabling environment for connectivity (USD 5.25 million -
estimated)
The first sub-component on Guinea-Bissau will focus on i) the transaction design and operating
model for the ownership and management of the international, regional and national infrastructure
(financed under component 1; ii) improving the legal and regulatory framework that needs to be
updated and further developed, especially on issues pertaining to infrastructure sharing, cross-
sector synergies, and regulation of new entrants in the broadband market (infrastructure operators,
facility-based ISPs) so as to enhance competition and promote infrastructure deployment, (iii)
Financing a study to identify options for the strategic repositioning of Guinetelecom/Guinetel
with the goal of transforming it into a world-class operator (opening of Guinetelecom/Guinetel's
capital to a private investor), (iv) Supporting institutional capacity strengthening of the regulator
and relevant Ministry in Guinea Bissau in order to improve the public governance of the ICT
sector (both the regulator and the government lack adequate resources and technical capacities to
implement their mandates) and to contribute to the preparation and endorsement of an ICT Plan
through a constructive consensus and (v) Capacity building and training support will be provided
to the ICT Department within the ECOWAS Commission.
Component 3 - Project Implementation (USD 3.0 million - estimated)
This sub-component will provide support needed to strengthen the capacity of the Government of
Guinea Bissau to implement the Component 1 and Sub Component 2. This includes setting up
Project Implementation Unit (PIU) located with the Ministry of Transport, Communication and
ICT and covering office equipment, operating costs, trainings. The component will also cover the
cost audits, communications, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) including citizen engagement,
and environmental and social studies, including their implementation and/or the monitoring of
their implementation. This component finally provides project implementation contingencies.
Alternatives options of using PIUs of other ongoing projects in Guinea Bissau have been
examined in details but are not feasible. This sub-component will also support the ECOWAS
Commission would cover the cost for the external audits, communications and monitoring and
evaluation (M&E).
II. SAFEGUARDS
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Connecting Guinea Bissau to the ACE submarine landing cable is likely to be made via the
construction of a domestic landing station in Suro (23 km away from Bissau). In addition 2 terrestrial
fiber optic missing links will be built in Guinea Bissau for a total of 40km (23km from Suro to
Bissau and 16km within the city of Bissau). Finally a neutral carrier hotel building will be built in
Guinea Bissau. However the exact path of the terrestrial fibers as well as the locations of the
domestic landing station in Suro and of the neutral carrier hotel building are not yet known.
Page 9 of 12


﻿B. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The institutional responsibilities for preparing the various safeguards instruments would lie with the
implementing agency. The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) for the proposed operation (Guinea-
Bissau) is likely to be located within the sector ministry (Secr6tariat d'Etat aux Transports et aux
Communications), or alternatively at the Noyau de l'Innovation, de la Technologie et de la
Gouvernance 6lectronique (NITGOV).Both the Ministry and NITGOV have limited capacity for
safeguards. However, given that a lot more will be required for ensuring compliance from safeguards
instrument preparation and reviews to implementation, there will be the need for capacity building.
Any specific required action for some of the Civil Works will be taken into account during project
implementation. Institutional responsibilities for preparing the safeguard assessment strategy will be
defined closely with the Safeguards Team.
In addition, capacity building on safeguards issues will be provided to the PIU to implement the
ESMF, ESIA/EMP, RPF and RAP.
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Emmanuel Ngollo (GEN05)
Upulee Iresha Dasanayake (CAFWO)
D. POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         While impact is expected to be limited, the project
OP/BP 4.01                              includes physical investments such as submarine
cable, terrestrial fiber optic links and technical
building investments. Because the exact nature and
location of investments may not be determined up
front, the Borrower will prepare an Environment and
Social Management Framework (ESMF).
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  TBD        The ESMF will provide more information on
whether this policy might be triggered.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          TBD         The ESMF will provide more information on
whether this policy might be triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09     TBD         The ESMF will provide more information on
whether this policy might be triggered.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes        While not damaging cultural property, subproject
OP/BP 4.11                              preparation may later identify and include assistance
for preservation of historical or archeological sites. If
these opportunities occur, cultural property
management plans would be prepared for those
subprojects. The ESMF will analyze the potential
project zones and measures to be followed once these
properties are discovered during project
implementation.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    TBD         The ESMF will provide more information on
4.10                                    whether this policy might be triggered.
Page 10 of 12


﻿Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        Some project activities may include land acquisition/
BP 4.12                                 involuntary resettlement. Because the exact nature
and location of investments cannot be determined up
o                                                 front, the Borrower will prepare a Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF).
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No
*         Projects on International   No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ TBD      The ESMF will provide more information on
BP 7.60                                 whether this policy might be triggered.
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan
1. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS
08-Oct-2015
2. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage
ISDS.
Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would
be prepared: October 26, 2015.
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
The Government of Guinea Bissau has not yet selected the exact locations for the future landing
station in Suro and for the neutral carrier hotel building as well as the exact path for the 2 terrestrial
fiber optic missing links for a total of 40km (23km from Suro to Bissau and 16km within
III. Contact point
World Bank
Contact: Isabelle Huynh
Title:   Senior Operations Officer
Borrower/Client/Recipient
Name:    Government of Guinea Bissau
Contact:
Title:
Email:
Implementing Agencies
Name:    Ministry of Transport, Communication and ICT
Contact: Joao Bernardo Vieira
Title:   Secretary of State for Transport and Communications
Email:   t.ministerio@yahoo.com.br
Page 11 of 12


﻿IV. For more information contact:
The InfoShop
The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 458-4500
Fax: (202) 522-1500
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/infoshop
V. Approval
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Isabelle Huynh
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Glenn S. Morgan (SA)                   Date: 26-Aug-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Boutheina Guermazi (PMGR)              Date: 09-Sep-2015
Manager:
Country Director:       Name: Louise J. Cord (CD)                    Date: 28-Sep-2015
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at
the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to
potentially affected persons.
P
Page 12 of 12


