                               COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED
                                          SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)
                                                  CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: PIDISDSC14926
                         Date Prepared/Updated:       22-Sep-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION

                            A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Pakistan                          Project ID:   P155350
                                                                                Parent
                                                                                Project ID
                                                                                (if any):
                            Project Name:     Disaster and Climate Resilience Enhancement Program (P155350)
                            Region:           SOUTH ASIA
                            Estimated         18-Feb-2016                       Estimated   26-May-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Practice Area     Social, Urban, Rural and          Lending     Investment Project Financing
                            (Lead):           Resilience Global Practice        Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Flood protection (70%), Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood
                                              protection (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Natural disaster management (100%)
                            Borrower(s):    Economic Affairs Division
                            Implementing Sindh Irriigation Department, Provincial Disaster Management Authority, Sindh
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Agency:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                             250.00
                              Total Project Cost                                                                      250.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Concept        Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue
                            Review
                            Decision:
                            Is this a      No
                            Repeater
                            project?
                            Other Decision
                            (as needed):



                                                                      Page 1 of 9
                         B. Introduction and Context
                           Country Context
Public Disclosure Copy




                           1. Pakistan is exposed to a number of adverse natural events and has experienced a wide range of
                           disasters over the past 40 years, including floods, earthquakes, droughts, cyclones and tsunamis.
                           Exposure and vulnerability to hazards is further exacerbated by a rapid population growth,
                           growing urbanization, environmental degradation and shifting climatic patterns that can result in
                           the occurrence of increasingly severe natural disasters. Over the past decade, damages and losses
                           resulting from natural disasters in Pakistan have exceeded USD 18 billion; as the population and
                           asset base of Pakistan increases, so does its economic exposure to natural disasters.
                           2. Pakistan faces a major financing challenge arising from natural catastrophes, with flooding
                           causing an estimated annual economic impact of between 3 and 4 percent of the Federal Budget.
                           On average, approximately 3 million people are affected by natural catastrophes each year in
                           Pakistan, which equates to approximately 1.6 percent of the total population. The annual
                           economic impact of flooding is estimated between USD 1.2 billion and USD 1.8 billion,
                           equivalent to between 0.5 percent and 0.8 percent of national GDP; however simulations show
                           that a major flood event (occurring, on average, once every 100 years) could cause losses in
                           excess of USD 15.5 billion, which equates to around 7 percent of national GDP, equivalent to
                           almost 40 percent of the Federal Budget.
                           3. The geographic location and climatic conditions of the Province of Sindh render it vulnerable
                           to various natural disaster events. These include floods (urban, riverine and flash floods),
                           cyclones, earthquakes, droughts, wind storms, tsunamis and sea intrusion. In addition, the
                           geography, topography, nature of economy, rapid urbanization and high population levels
                           exacerbate Sindh’s vulnerability to natural disasters.
                           4. Sindh experienced major floods in 1992, 1994, 1995, 2003, 2005, 2007, 2010, 2011, 2012 and
                           2013. Besides riverine floods, primarily involving the River Indus, torrential flash floods have
                           also severely impacted parts of Sindh. Floods in 2010 and 2011 were amongst the most
                           devastating in the history of the region. Floods in 2010 displaced 7.2 million people and affected
                           11,992 villages. The impact on the economy of Sindh was estimated at PKR. 372 billion (USD
Public Disclosure Copy




                           4.4 billion), with agriculture, livestock and housing contributing to major losses. The floods in
                           2011 inundated 38,347 villages, displacing 9.3 million people and human loss stood at 497 lives.
                           The 2011 flood-affected districts constitute 86 percent of geographical area and house 54% of the
                           total population of the province.
                           5.Besides floods, Sindh province faces drought in northern and eastern region on recurring basis.
                           The drought from 1998 – 2002 affected 1.4 million people, 5.6 million cattle head and 12.5
                           million acres cropped area, triggering spread of malnutrition-based diseases in the population and
                           food scarcity in the province due to poor overall crop output. Also, Sindh province faces the risk
                           of cyclone and wind storms due to vast coastal line. Cyclone Yemin in 2007 affected three other
                           districts along the coastline of the province, affecting 0.4 million people and 40,204 cattle heads,
                           and damaged 34,418 houses and 114,825 acres cropped area. Sindh also lies on a major seismic
                           fault line and faces a real threat of high intensity earthquakes. In particular, Karachi, the most
                           populous city of the country, is exposed to major seismic activity due to a triple junction beneath
                           the Arabian Sea, about 20 to 30 kilometers from the city, where the boundaries of Arabian,
                           Indian, Eurasian plates meet. Sindh has experienced several earthquakes in recent past, including
                           a 7.3 magnitude earthquake originating in Balochistan in January 2011, a 5.6 magnitude
                           earthquake in December 2013 and a 5.0 magnitude earthquake near Nawabshah town in May
                           2014.
                           Sectoral and Institutional Context


                                                                     Page 2 of 9
                           6.Since the devastating impact of the 2005 earthquake, Pakistan has worked to change how the
                           country addresses natural disasters - from an ex-post disaster response perspective to an ex-ante
                           risk management approach. The promulgation of the National Disaster Management Ordinance
Public Disclosure Copy




                           (NDMO) of 2006, which established the National Disaster Risk Management Framework
                           (NDRMF), reflects this more pro-active approach towards disaster risk management (DRM).
                           7.The National Disaster Management (NDM) Act was passed in 2010 and builds on the 2006
                           NDMO. This Act established the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) as the lead
                           agency at the federal level to coordinate disaster response. A National Disaster Management
                           Commission (NDMC), chaired by the Prime Minister, was created by the Act to serve as the main
                           policy-making institution for DRM. Passage of the 18th Amendment devolved some powers to
                           the provinces, including greater responsibility to prepare for and respond to disaster.
                           8.The NDM Act of 2010 established not only a national level disaster management authority, but
                           also, mandated the replication of the NDMA structure at more decentralized levels. The Chief
                           Minister chairs a Provincial Disaster Management Commission (PDMC) and serves as the
                           executive arm of the PDMC in most provinces and regions. The NDM Act of 2010 also provides
                           for the establishment of District Disaster Management Authorities (DDMAs), which have been
                           implemented in a small number of districts.
                           9.Five years after its enactment, the NDM Act 2010 is not yet fully implemented, and rules of
                           business are yet to be formulated. At the Federal level, while the necessary legal, institutional and
                           policy measures have been taken by the Government of Pakistan for DRM, there are a number of
                           entities working on DRM with overlapping mandates in addition to NDMA. These include the
                           Earthquake Reconstruction & Rehabilitation Authority (ERRA), the Emergency Relief Cell
                           (ERC), and the Federal Flood Commission (FFC), amongst others. At the provincial level, the
                           multiplicity of institutions is also present, which include, PDMAs, the Provincial Irrigation
                           Departments (PIDs), and the Civil Defence and Rescue Services. PDMAs also have differing
                           capacities across provinces and administrative regions; similarly, DDMAs have only been
                           established in selected districts and their operational capacity varies significantly. There is a need
                           to advance the implementation of the NDM Act 2010, through greater clarity in functional
Public Disclosure Copy




                           mandates, strengthening capacities of disaster management institutions, and operationalization of
                           disaster management funds at the federal, provincial and district levels.
                           Relationship to CAS/CPS/CPF
                           10. The project is consistent with the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) 2015-19 for the Islamic
                           Republic of Pakistan, which is committed to increasing resilience to disasters in targeted regions
                           within the country. The CPS seeks to increase the number of provinces with disaster risk
                           management plans, improved management, and early warning systems.
                           11. The project also supports the CPS Cross-cutting theme of climate change. The third cross-
                           cutting theme - climate change adaptation and mitigation in public and private sectors - is
                           addressed in that climate adaptation and disaster resilience are core themes in reducing
                           vulnerability and improving preparedness towards disaster and climate related emergencies. In
                           addition, the second theme - deepening engagement at the province level, while further clarifying
                           the roles between provinces and the local governments – is being addressed with the support to
                           the Provincial entities of Punjab and relevant disaster management entity for the State and their
                           links in terms of disaster resilience at the district level.
                         C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
                           Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
                           16.    The project development objective is to strengthen systems for managing disaster risk and


                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                           to improve resilience of people and economic assets to floods and droughts in Sindh.
                           Key Results (From PCN)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
                           13. Program Results: The key results contributing to the achievement of the overarching program
                           development objective include: a) Number of provinces with strengthened DRM systems; b)
                           Number of people and land area better protected from selected disasters; c) Improved government
                           capacity to manage climate risks.
                           14. Project Results: Progress towards achieving the development objectives of the Project will be
                           measured through the following key performance indicators: (a) Improved institutional capacity
                           for disaster risk management; (b) Number of people at risk receiving early warning notifications
                           for disasters; (c) number of people better protected from floods and droughts; and (d) land area
                           protected from floods.

                         D. Concept Description
                           15. In response to the government’s priority, the Bank is designing the Disaster and Climate
                           Resilience Enhancement Program (DACREP). The proposed program is being developed under
                           OP/BP 10.00 which enables the World Bank to support a time series of independent investment
                           operations for a single or multiple sub-national borrowers using a Series of Projects (SOP)
                           approach. The envisaged series of independent projects under DACREP will share a common
                           design template to address issues common to all participating provincial/ regional governments
                           and DRM entities. The value added of adopting the programmatic approach under SOP is to
                           holistically address long-term DRM issues and resilience needs across the country, as required by
                           the Government of Pakistan, outlined in the National Disaster Management Plan (NDMP). The
                           program would be anchored at the national level for overall coordination and monitoring
                           implementation. A dedicated Program Steering Committee (PSC), comprising senior
                           representatives from concerned federal and provincial departments would be established as the
                           apex forum. The PSC secretariat would be housed at the NDMA. As the secretariat, the NDMA
Public Disclosure Copy




                           will facilitate program coordination, monitoring of outcomes, and greater cohesion between
                           interventions among individual projects. The engagement under the proposed program would
                           have a duration of 12 – 15 years, and would include investments at the federal and provincial /
                           territory levels.

                           16. The Government of Pakistan has requested the Bank to provide support towards improving
                           resilience to natural disasters in Sindh. The proposed operation for Sindh will be prepared as the
                           first project under the programmatic engagement. Disaster and Climate Resilience Enhancement
                           Program Phase I (DACREP-I) for Sindh will focus on improving systems at the provincial
                           government and key agencies for managing disaster risk. In addition, the Project will further
                           contribute towards enhancing resilience to hydro-meteorological disasters including floods and
                           drought through physical infrastructure investments. The dialogue with Government of Sindh has
                           established floods and droughts as the highest priority areas owing to high frequency and impact.
                           The dialogue has further identified critical needs in these areas, along with an estimate of
                           resources needed to address these priorities amounting to USD 250 million. This “needs estimate”
                           provides the indicative resource envelope for DACREP-I.

                           DACREP-I will be implemented in 5 years and have the following components:

                           Component 1: Strengthening Institutions and Systems for Disaster Risk Management


                                                                    Page 4 of 9
                         17. The Component will focus on two key institutions in terms of strengthening operational
                         systems and capacities, including the Provincial Disaster Management Agency (PDMA) Sindh
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and the Sindh Irrigation Department.

                         18.Support to PDMA Sindh: Systems and response capabilities would be strengthened through:
                         •       Enhancement of operational facilities such as Emergency Operations Centers (EOCs) at
                         provincial and district levels
                         •       Integrating DRM planning and emergency response at the Provincial and district level
                         (emergency response agencies, fire services personnel, and District governments)
                         •       Enhancing rescue and response facilities in the Province
                         •       Generation of risk and exposure information through an overall risk assessment for the
                         province and detailed assessments for identified hotspots
                         •       Development of Disaster Management Information System (DMIS) as a repository of
                         hazard and risk information
                         •       Increasing the capacity of disaster management authorities to disseminate early warning
                         information such as flood forecasts and evacuation instructions as well as training communities /
                         building awareness
                         •       Support policy review and recommend improvements to existing building codes and its
                         enforcement

                         19.Support to Sindh Irrigation Department: This subcomponent would support the improvement
                         and upgrading modeling facilities at the Irrigation Research Institute, river morphology studies,
                         floodplain mapping, and ground water assessment studies in drought prone areas. Risk data
                         generated through various studies under this sub-component would form critical inputs for
                         improving the decision support system linked to early warnings.

                         20. In addition to the above, The Project would also support the Government of Sindh towards
Public Disclosure Copy




                         enhancing preparedness for post-disaster recovery (planning, coordination, procurement,
                         financing, etc.) under Component 1. Similarly, the Project will extend support to relevant
                         provincial departments for using disaster management information for influencing decisions about
                         development planning and budgeting.

                         Component 2: Structural Investments

                         21. Flood Protection Works: The component will support structural investments including
                         infrastructure up-gradation and new works to increase resilience to flooding events in Sindh. This
                         will help plug gaps in existing lines of defense through upgrading of dykes / bunds to protect
                         communities and economically productive areas along the Indus River, as well as river training
                         works to ensure preservation and continued operation of existing flood protection works at key
                         sites. The Sindh Irrigation Department has identified a list of high risk sites and corresponding
                         flood mitigation investments. The Component will focus on these high risk sites to facilitate
                         clustering of investments and maximizing impact.

                         22. Construction of small dams to address drought risks: The project will support physical
                         investments for rainwater harvesting through the construction of small dams in the Kohistan and
                         Nangarparkar regions that will contribute significantly to the provision of water to communities
                         during dry periods and the recharging of underground aquifers in adjacent drought prone areas.


                                                                   Page 5 of 9
                              The Sindh Irrigation Department is sufficiently advanced with preparatory activities, and has
                              already prepared feasibility studies for most of the prospective physical investments under
                              consideration.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Component 3: Fiscal Resilience

                              23. The fiscal resilience component would seek to inform the government on strengthening its
                              institutional and financial response capacity in the aftermath of a disaster and reduce the
                              economic and fiscal burdens of such events. This would involve a Fiscal Disaster Risk
                              Assessment (FDRA) for Sindh which would support the Government of Sindh to develop a
                              disaster risk financing strategy. The strategy will formalize objectives and scope, evaluate various
                              instruments to finance contingent liability to natural disasters, and recommend implementation of
                              instruments.

                              Component 4: Technical Assistance for Studies and Support to Project Implementation

                              24. This component would support the Government in implementing the Project and would
                              include: support for the operation of the Project Implementation Units (PIUs) at the implementing
                              agencies, and financing of overall project management, as well as technical assistance in such
                              areas as detailed design / feasibility, contract administration and construction supervision,
                              procurement, financial management, as well as management of social and environmental issues.

                              Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response Component

                              25. Following an adverse natural event that causes a major natural disaster, the government may
                              request the Bank to reallocate project funds to support response and reconstruction. This
                              component would allow the government to request the Bank to reallocate financing from other
                              project components to partially cover emergency response and recovery costs. This component
Public Disclosure Copy




                              could also be used to channel additional funds should they become available for such an
                              emergency.

                         II. SAFEGUARDS
                           A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           26. The Province of Sindh is the third largest province of Pakistan in terms of land mass, and is
                           bounded by the Thar Desert to the east, the Kirthar Mountains to the west, Punjab province in the
                           north and the Arabian Sea in the south. In the center is a fertile plain around the Indus River.
                           27. Sindh consists of the Lower Indus Plain, which is very flat, generally sloping to the south with an
                           average gradient of about 95 mm per kilometer. A large part of Sindh lies in the deltaic plain of the
                           Lower Indus Valley. Most of this region consists of plains overlain by alluvium, trenched with river
                           channels in some places and overridden by raised terraces in others. Except for a small hilly tract
                           (Nagarparkar), in the southeast corner of the Tharparkar District, western Sindh is the only region
                           which is mountainous and includes the hill ranges of Kirthar, Pab, Laki, and Kohistan. There is little
                           vegetation on these ranges due to scanty rainfall.
                           28. The total cultivated area in Sindh is 5.88 million hectares and the net area sown is 2.39 million
                           hectares. Agriculture, followed by forestry, is the main land use in most parts of Sindh. Although
                           more than 50 percent of the total geographical area of the Province is cultivable, only 26 percent of it
                           is actually located in the central plain.

                                                                         Page 6 of 9
                         29. Sindh is entirely dependent on the River Indus for its survival and development. About 95
                         percent of the farmland in Sindh obtains its water from the irrigation system, while the rest is
                         cultivated with the help of tube wells. Rainfall is only in the range of 100 to 200 mm per annum,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         while the evaporation rate is about 1,000 to 2,000 mm, depending on climatic conditions. Thus the
                         whole of Sindh is arid, with the River Indus being the primary freshwater source that gives life to the
                         province. With population growth, the average amount of renewable freshwater available to each
                         person has been declining.
                         30.      Being the lowest riparian, Sindh experiences recurring floods and droughts. Major floods
                         received in the recent past were in 1992, 1994, 1995, 2003, 2005, 2007, 2010, 2011, 2012 and 2013.
                         Besides riverine floods, primarily involving the River Indus, torrential flash floods have also severely
                         impacted parts of Sindh. Floods in 2010 and 2011 were amongst the most devastating in the history
                         of the region. Besides floods, Sindh province faced drought 1998 – 2002 affected 1.4 million people,
                         5.6 million cattle head and 12.5 million acres cropped area.
                         B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         33. The Sindh Irrigation Department through Sindh Irrigation and Drainage Authority (SIDA) has
                         been implementing WB-financed projects, Sindh Water Sector Improvement Project being a recent
                         one, in addition to the recently approved Guddu Barrage Rehabilitation Project. Hence the
                         Department is broadly aware of the safeguard requirements and has some experience in
                         implementing the safeguard plans (eg, environmental and social management plans). There is
                         nonetheless room and need for additional capacity building.
                         C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         Salma Omar (GSURR)

                         D. POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                         Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment          Yes             The structural investments under the Component 2
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.01                                        will include construction of new and rehabilitation of
                                                                           existing flood protection and river training structures.
                                                                           These activities are likely to cause negative
                                                                           environmental and social impacts of varying degree
                                                                           of intensity, significance, spatial as well as temporal
                                                                           extent, reversibility, and importance. Category of the
                                                                           project in accordance with the OP 4.01 is likely to be
                                                                           A based upon the safeguard screening. The task team
                                                                           is in the process of f
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       TBD             Some interventions are likely to be carried out within
                                                                           or near important habitats such as the Indus River
                                                                           stretch between Guddu and Sukkur barrages – area
                                                                           known for the presence of Indus Dolphin.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                TBD             Some interventions may be located within or near
                                                                           riverine forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No              The interventions are not likely to cause an increase
                                                                           in the use of agro-chemicals.
                         Physical Cultural Resources       TBD             The proposed interventions particularly the new



                                                                       Page 7 of 9
                            OP/BP 4.11                                       structures may impact the known PCRs
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP         TBD             Although there are no known indigenous people as
                            4.10                                             defined in the OP in Sindh, the SIA would confirm
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             the presence or absence of IPs in the project area.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/     Yes             Some of the proposed interventions may cause
                            BP 4.12                                          involuntary resettlement resulting in relocation or
                                                                             adverse impact on livelihood and/or sources of
                                                                             livelihood.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        TBD             Some of the proposed interventions may fall under
                                                                             the definition of dams as specified in the OP. Dam
                                                                             safety specialists would be consulted as part of due
                                                                             diligence in order to determine the applicability of
                                                                             the OP.
                            Projects on International        Yes             Some of the proposed interventions will be carried
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                             out in/along Indus River which is an international
                                                                             waterway as defined in the OP.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                No disputed areas exist in the Sindh Province.
                            BP 7.60

                            E. Safeguard Preparation Plan
                             1. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS
                             31-Dec-2015
                             2. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
                             needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage
                             ISDS.
                             Initiation of safeguard studies: 15 August 2015; finalization of safeguard studies: 1 December 2015.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III.Contact point
                             World Bank
                             Contact: Haris Khan
                             Title:   Senior Disaster Risk Managemen

                             Borrower/Client/Recipient
                             Name: Economic Affairs Division
                             Contact: Mr. Muhammad Saleem Sethi
                             Title:   Secretary
                             Email: secretary@ead.gov.pk

                             Implementing Agencies
                             Name: Sindh Irriigation Department
                             Contact: Syed Zaheer Haider Shah
                             Title:   Secretary
                             Email: ajmemon119@yahoo.com
                             Name: Provincial Disaster Management Authority, Sindh
                             Contact: Commander (R) Syed Salman Shah
                             Title:   Director General



                                                                         Page 8 of 9
                            Email:      dg@pdma.gos.pk

                         IV. For more information contact:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The InfoShop
                            The World Bank
                            1818 H Street, NW
                            Washington, D.C. 20433
                            Telephone: (202) 458-4500
                            Fax: (202) 522-1500
                            Web: http://www.worldbank.org/infoshop

                         V. Approval
                            Task Team Leader(s):           Name: Haris Khan
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor:            Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                             Date: 22-Sep-2015
                            Practice Manager/              Name: Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst (PMGR)                     Date: 22-Sep-2015
                            Manager:
                            Country Director:              Name: Rachid Benmessaoud (CD)                              Date: 29-Sep-2015


                            1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at
                            the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to
                            potentially affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 Page 9 of 9
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
