Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1809 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/22/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Congo, Democratic Republic of 
Project ID: P096305 
Project Name: CD-Emergency Multi Sectoral Rehab & Recovery ERL Suplemental 
(FY06) 
Task Team Leader: Abdelmoula M. Ghzala 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: November 15, 2005 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (40%);Power (20%);General water, sanitation and 
flood protection sector (20%);Health (15%);Other social services (5%) 
Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (P);Access to urban services 
and housing (P);Nutrition and food security (P);Other communicable diseases (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
120.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
18.60
18.60 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall purpose of the Emergency Multisector Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Program is 
to initiate the long-term process of reconstruction and economic rehabilitation.  The specific 
objectives of the proposed additional financing for the IDA-financed project that supports it are 
to assist the DRC to (a) start rebuilding agricultural production and enhance food security, (b) 
reconstruct and rehabilitate critical infrastructure, (c) restore essential social services and build 
community infrastructure, and (d) strengthen capacity of government to formulate, implement, 
and manage medium and long-term development programs.  These are the development 
objectives of the original project.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Description.  The project was among the first IDA-financed projects to be prepared for the DRC 
once conditions in the country permitted IDA to reengage.  It was approved by the Board on 
August 6, 2002.  Although the project became effective in November 2002, work on to 
rehabilitate infrastructure started only in November 2003.  As a result, the closing date of the 
Page  2
project was extended by one year to June 30, 2006 from the original closing date of June 30, 
2005.  
 
Components.  The program and project comprised four components: (a) rehabilitation and 
reconstruction of critical infrastructure (transport, water supply, electricity, and urban 
infrastructure); (b) agriculture, delivery of social services (education, health, social protection) 
and community development; (c) development of sector strategies for the medium and long 
terms, and strengthening of human and institutional capacities; and (d) management, monitoring, 
and evaluation of the implementation of the program and the IDA-supported project.  
 
Activities.  Most of the proposed additional financing will be used to finance activities 
identified in the Memorandum of the President of the EMRRP for which alternative sources of 
finance have not been found.  A portion will also be used to implement activities in provinces 
that are now accessible as a result of successful efforts to establish and maintain peace.  Details 
of the allocation of funds to sectors that presented in the table below.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be countrywide, with IDA-financed activities restricted only where the local 
security situation would make supervising the activities difficult.  The level, nature, and 
modalities of development assistance will be adapted to the specific situation of each province 
(adjusted as the situation evolves) to reflect needs and capacity to implement, operate, and 
maintain projects.  
 
The project will assist in rehabilitating and reconstructing infrastructure (including deteriorated 
roads, bridges, quays and other transport infrastructure, electricity installations, water supply 
systems, urban streets, drainage canals and community infrastructure).  The project will also 
support activities to promote the recovery of agriculture and create small-scale community 
infrastructure.Because the focus is on rehabilitating and reconstructing existing infrastructure, 
environment impacts of activities are expected to be relatively minor.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
D.1 Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.  Identify 
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.  
 
Safeguard issues associated with the project include environmental impacts arising from the 
rehabilitation and reconstruction of infrastructure, and the inappropriate use of pesticides to 
activities aimed at revitalizing agriculture.  The impacts are not expected to be large scale, 
significant, or irreversible.  Potential impacts can be mitigated with the mechanisms established 
for the project.  
 
D.2 Describe any potential indirect and/or long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area.  
 
The improvements in transportation infrastructure due to the project will allow people to move 
more easily and at lower cost than has been the case for many years.  This may in the medium 
and long term result in people establishing homes, farms, or businesses in the vicinity of the 
Page  3
road.  This could lead to habitat destruction, air and water pollution, deforestation, and other 
environmental impacts associated with human settlement.  
 
D.3. Describe the treatment of alternatives (if relevant)  
 
Not applicable.  
 
D.4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.  
 
To compensate for weak local capacity for environmental and social management, an 
international environmental consulting firm has been engaged to manage and oversee the 
environmental and social management process, while providing institutional strengthening and 
on-the-job training services throughout the project period.  This firm is working closely with the 
project implementation entities, the Bank, and the ministries and agencies concerned to ensure 
that subprojects comply with World Bank Safeguard Policies. Compliance with all safeguards 
under the ongoing project has been satisfactory.  
 
The activities being supported under the component B (agriculture, delivery of social services 
and community development) are not known in detail until selected by communities.  Therefore, 
a
programmatic process or a strategic approach for environmental and social assessment 
(including screening and categorization, preparation, public consultation, disclosure, review, 
approval and monitoring) has been established.  Given uncertainties regarding the location of 
many subprojects, and the complexity of DRCs environmental and social situation, this approach 
is designed to ensure that the selection, design and implementation of all subprojects comply 
with World Bank Safeguard Policies.  
 
D.5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.  
 
Key stakeholders, including churches, secular civil society organizations, community based 
organizations, and the private sector, have been involved in selecting activities to be 
implemented under the original project.  They will continue to be involved in selecting and 
designing activities to be supported with the additional financing.  During implementation, 
workshops will be held periodically with relevant stakeholders for purposes of training, 
knowledge sharing, and institution building.  Assessments of the subprojects with potentially 
significant negative impacts on the environment, communities, or households are being disclosed 
in country.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTS1) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The supplemental financing will support the rehabilitation and reconstruction of 
infrastructure, including roads, and other transport infrastructure; electricity installations; water 
supply systems; and community infrastructure.  An environment and social impact management 
framework has been developed to mitigate potential impacts.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The upgrading of the A1 national road may result in impacts on natural habitats.  Measures 
will be put into place to limit and mitigate potential impacts.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The project includes assistance to revitalize agriculture, which may encourage farmers to 
increase their use of pesticides while intensifying cultivation.  A pesticide management plan is 
being prepared to mitigate the risks and will be disclosed as soon as it is finalized.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The upgrading of the A1 national road may require the acquisition of land and resettlement 
of its inhabitants.  A resettlement action plan has been prepared, which will serve as a template 
for involuntary resettlement should this be needed.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  10/14/2005 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The supplemental financing is for an emergency operation processed under OP 8.50.  The 
Environment and Social impact Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) for the original project will be applied to this additional financing. Any 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
adjustments needed based on experience in the original operation will be carried out and 
disclosed during the first year of implementation.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Abdelmoula M. Ghzala 
09/22/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
09/22/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
09/22/2005 
Comments:   
