Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1475 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/30/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Congo, Democratic Republic of 
Project ID: P092537 
Project Name: DRC Multi-modal Transport 
Task Team Leader: Pierre A. Pozzo di Borgo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 8, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: October 16, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector (100%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed multimodal transport project (MTP) was developed in support of the Government's 
transport strategy. It pursues two objectives: 1) the rehabilitation of the three main national 
transport and trade corridors and 2) the reduction, by a least half, of port, railways and airport 
transport costs along these corridors.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project's scope will be organized in phases using an APL approach in order to facilitate 
implementation, diminish risk exposure and adjust to available IDA allocation. The current 
estimated IDA allocation for the MTP initial phase (APL Phase I) will be a maximum of 200 
million USD in FY07, excluding labor retrenchment costs that will be covered, to the extent 
possible, by two ongoing and planned PSD projects.  
 
In its first phase, the project will focus on:  
 
-
Re-establishing an adequate road maintenance systems (including institutional and financial 
arrangements)  
 
-
Rail track rehabilitation for the rail lines between Matadi and Kinshasa as well as the SNCC 
rail network in the Katanga region;  
Page  2
-
Airport terminal rehabilitation for Kinshasa international airport;  
 
-
Technical assistance in the concessioning and/or management contracting of the port of 
Matadi stevedoring activities   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project's footprint will cover all of Congo. However, excluding road maintenance activities 
which will entail only upkeep work on existing roads, the project will primarily affect local 
population living alongside rail network of the SNCC (i.e., south and south-east Congo) and the 
CFMK (i.e., corridor between Matadi and Kinshasa).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
At this stage of project preparation, the Borrower does not have the institutional capacity to 
enforce safeguard policies activated by the project. Accordingly, during project preparation 
necessary capacity building measures will be identified in order to allow the Borrower to meet 
project safeguard requirements. These measures will be disclosed in the country and the 
InfoShop before the appraisal mission takes place. This approach will ensure transparency and 
fairness.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Robert A. Robelus (AFTS1) 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTS3) 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Because of the geographic and sectoral scope of the project, a Sectoral EA will be prepared.  
Uncertainties will exist until project implementation on the exact location of the rehabilitation 
and maintenance works that will take place for airports, railways and roads, and an 
Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF) will therefore be developed in 
conjunction with the Sectoral EA. This ESMF will include a screening mechanism that will 
make identification of specific safeguards issues possible and will guide the preparation of 
appropriate impact management instruments for the specific subprojects, including 
Environmental Assessments (EAs), Environmental Management Plans (EMPs), and 
Environmental Audits   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The Sectoral EA will include an overview of habitats that could be affected by the project 
and will identify potential "hot spots" that would require special consideration in subproject 
planning, design and implementation.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
While the project does not support forest clearing activities, improvements in the Congo 
transport network could facilitate timber trade along some corridors, including illegal logging 
trade. Accordingly, the Sectoral EA will include an assessment of this potential problem in order 
to assess what preventive measures, if any, would need to be adopted.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 
X
-
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Railway track as well as airport terminal rehabilitation and road maintenance will likely 
involve resettlement of local population which has, over the years, infringed upon track and 
runway safety perimeters and along roads and corridors.Evaluation of the extent and location of 
possible resettlement issues and needs will be accurately identified during project 
implementation when the location and scope of sub-projects become known. During 
implementation, for each sub-project entailing land acquisition or/and involuntary resettlement, a 
Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared, published and implemented in accordance with the 
requirements and procedures of OP/BP 4.12.  A Resettlement Policy Framework incorporating 
the principles and procedures for RAP preparation will be prepared, cleared by the Bank and 
disclosed before appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/19/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Safeguard related studies need to be launch by the fourth quarter of 2005 and completed by 
the second quarter of 2006.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pierre A. Pozzo di Borgo 
06/27/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
06/30/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
06/28/2005 
Comments:   
