                         mtEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                               ADDITIONAL FmANCING
                                      APPRAISAL       STAGE

                                                                         Report No.: ISDSC6044
Date ISDS PreparediUpdated:         17-June 2016
I. BASIC mFORMATION
 A. Basic Project Data
 Country:                     Costa Rica           1 Project ID:             P123702
 Project Name:                Costa Rica REDD+ READINESS PREPARATION SUPPORT
                              PROJECT ADDITIONAL FINANCING
 Parent Project Name:         Costa Rica FCPF REDD Readiness (P123702)
 Task Team Leader(s):         Erick C.M. Fernandes
 Estimated Board Date:        N/A
 Managing Unit:               GENDR
 Sector(s):                   Forestry (100%)
 Theme(s):                    Climate change (100%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00              No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
 Financing (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:       5.58                      Total Bank Financing:    10.00
 Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                      Amount
     Borrower                                                                                 0.00
     Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility                                 5.58
     Total                                                                                    0.00
 Environmental Category       B-Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred        No
 project?

 B. Project Objectives
 The objective of the Additional Funding grant is to assist the Recipient in carrying out the
 Additional Readiness preparation Activities.
 The proposed additional grant does not change the Project's Development Objective. Rather, it
 helps finance the costs associated with reinforcing and complementing activities planned under
the original project, aimed at: (i) supporting REDD+ Management Arrangements; (ii)
strengthening ongoing participatory processes; (iii) developing technical elements of the
national REDD+ Strategy and its implementation framework; (iv) expanding the scope of the
Forest Reference Level to include sustainable forest management; and (v) establishing a robust
National Forest Monitoring System.

The Environmental Assessment (EA) Category remains B in the case of this additional finance
project. The proposed additional grant will be implemented over a period of three years. The
project closing date will be extended accordingly.


c. Project Description

The Additional Funding will reinforce ongoing processes initiated under the original grant,
contributing to the consolidation of the National REDD+ Readiness process beyond the R-
Package presentation and therefore ensuring a solid foundation for the implementation of the
ER Program and the National REDD+ Strategy.
Components, costs and activities. The activities of the additional preparation grant will focus
on all components of the original project, as illustrated below:

       •     Component 1. Organization, Consultation, and Grievance Redress (US$
             1,621,000). Additional Finance activities will focus on strengthening FONAFIFO's
             capacity to establish a robust National REDD+ Strategy; and continuing the ongoing
             dialogue and coordination with key stakeholder groups, within and outside
             government, necessary to achieve a successful outcome for REDD+.
       •     Component 2. Development of the REDD+ Strategy (US$ 1,659,000). Additional
             Finance activities will focus on increasing private and public sector participation in
             the REDD+ strategy under a sound implementation framework linked to the carbon
             neutrality goal.
       •     Component 3. Development of a Reference Level (US$ 790,000). Additional Finance
             Activities will focus on developing a strategic framework and Reference Level for
             Sustainable Forest Management and Forest Degradation, in collaboration with the
             private sector.
       •     Component 4. Design of a Monitoring and Verification System (US$ 1,510,000).
             Additional Finance activities will focus on strengthening the forest monitoring
             capacities of key institutions to measure and report REDD+ results.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)

The FCPF Readiness additional finance preparation Grant would be national in coverage and
does not entail physical investments or pilot projects on the ground. As a continuation of the
original project; the Additional Funding from the safeguards point of view will reinforce
ongoing processes initiated under the original grant, contributing to the consolidation of the
safeguards frameworks. The additional finance grant will continue to finance a number of
  analytical and diagnostic studies as well as a series of consultation meetings and workshops
  with relevant stakeholders contributing to the consolidation of the National REDD+ Readiness
  process beyond the R-Package presentation and therefore ensuring a solid foundation for the
  implementation of the ER Program and the National REDD+ Strategy.



  E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

  Under the original preparation grant, Costa Rica has made substantial efforts in establishing
  solid institutional arrangements for managing the national REDD+ Readiness process,
  including safeguards arrangements for ensuring the ample and informed participation of a
  variety of stakeholders and sectors through the establishment of REDD+ specific platforms.
  These include an Inter-institutional Committee, with more than 18 state agencies participating
  from several ministries; and an Executive Committee created by Decree and functioning as a
  consultative body with representation of all relevant stakeholders selected through a democratic
  process. In addition, a REDD+ Secretariat was established to strengthen FONAFIFO's capacity
  as the REDD+ Focal Point in planning and implementing the grant activities, with specific
  technical, safeguards and administrative staff recruited for this purpose (currently amounting to
  12 people, including two FONAFIFO staff). These arrangements are now functional, with the
  Inter-institutional and Executive Committees meeting regularly once a month.

  Many of the activities to be supported under this additional finance Grant are continuation
  and/or expansion of support currently being provided by original grant. Relevant safeguards
  instruments such as the SESA, ESMF; IPPF, etc., had been prepared by the National REDD+
  Secretariat managed by FONAFIFO under the Ministry of Environment and Energy (MINAE).
  The REDD+ Secretariat includes social and environmental team with relevant social and
  environmental professionals responsible for preparing the safeguards documents, to provide
  review and guidance on the treatment of environmental and social issues associated with the
  readiness phase. There is no reason to assume that the capacity for implementation under this
  AF would be different than that experienced from the on-going support.



  F. Environmental    and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

  Juan Martinez (Sr. Social Scientist, GURDR)
  Raul Tolmos (Environmental Specialist, GENDR)



II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
The FCPF Readiness Preparation additional finance grant must comply with World Bank
safeguard policies addressing the management of environmental and social impacts and risks.
As in the case of the original project, activities performed under the additional finance grant are
considered as technical assistance. The original project is classified as category B for
environmental assessment and the safeguard policies on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP
4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) and Forests (OP/BP 4.36) have been triggered. The
safeguard policies on Pest Management (OP 4.09) and Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.l1)
were left as "to be determined" (TBD) in the original project. The World Bank social safeguards
policies that are considered relevant during the grant implementation process include the
following: Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.l0); and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.l2). For
this additional finance grant, it was determined that the safeguards policies mentioned in the table
below may be triggered in the REDD+ Readiness process. After a screening of the proposed
interventions under the additional finance grant, it was considered necessary to trigger the
safeguard policies on Pest Management (OP 4.09) and Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.l1).

  Safeguard Policies                    Triggered      Explanation (Optional)
  Environmental Assessment OPIBP        YES            A Strategic Environmental and Social
  4.01                                                 Assessment (SESA) process has been
                                                       completed. Several workshops were carried out
                                                       to receive feedback on the preparation of the
                                                       REDD+ Strategy as part of the SESA and
                                                       ESMF process, and it is expected to conclude
                                                       with resources from the original grant. The
                                                       SESA process has been conducted in a manner
                                                       consistent with the applicable World Bank
                                                       operational    environmental      and      social
                                                       (safeguards) policies. Since the explicit goal of
                                                       the REDD+ strategy IS to promote the
                                                       reduction III rates of deforestation and
                                                       degradation by rewarding measures to protect
                                                       and conserve forests, the environmental
                                                       impacts of the strategy are expected to be
                                                       mostly positive.

                                                       As forest cover improves so too will the
                                                       associated benefits associated with forests.
                                                       Not only as a sink for carbon but also for the
                                                       many environmental services forests provide
                                                       such as watershed protection, provision of
                                                       important habitats, sustainable source ofNTFP
                                                       and other forest based livelihoods. The
                                                       REDD+ strategy itself will not finance the
                                                       harvesting or conversion of forests so there is
                                                       little to no direct adverse impact associated
                                                       with activities planned as part of the strategic
                                                       options. The principal risk from REDD+ would
                                                       arise in the event that the strategies fail to
                                                       achieve their objectives thereby creating
                                                       unexpected indirect adverse impacts through
                                                       the unintended creation of incentives to clear
                                                       forests for other purposes. This could occur, for
                                                       example, if PES schemes failed to provide
                                                       sufficient monetary incentive to retain areas
                                          under forest cover. Similar risks could occur
                                          for example iflack ofland tenure security were
                                          to undermine commitment to maintain land
                                          under forest cover for long time periods
Natural Habitats OPIBP 4.04         YES   Given that the REDD+ strategy will likely
                                          work both within existing protected areas as
                                          well as other forest habitats of varying
                                          significance, OP 4.04 will apply. If the
                                          REDD+ strategies are successful, the impacts
                                          on critical forest habitats are expected to be
                                          positive, nevertheless the SESA participatory
                                          and analytical process did not highlighted any
                                          potential risks - associated with strategic
                                          options - on forest habitats within PA as well
                                          as other sensitive forest habitats under private
                                          or communal control. However, during the
                                          formulation of the REDD+ strategy and
                                          throughout its implementation consultations
                                          will be carried out with key stakeholders to
                                          identify potential issues of concern. Also,
                                          during the implementation phase monitoring
                                          activities will be established to ensure that
                                          critical natural habitats are not adversely
                                          affected.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                  YES    Due to the obvious importance of REDD+ as
                                           part of Costa Rica's long term forest and
                                           environmental management programs and due
                                           to the importance forests play in the livelihoods
                                           of many communities, this policy will apply.
                                           The REDD+ Strategy itself will build largely
                                           on the experience of FONAFIFO with the
                                           Payment for Environmental Services program.
                                           During the preparation phase, these and other
                                           forestry and rural development initiatives will
                                           be evaluated in order to ensure lessons are
                                           incorporated early in the design and key social
                                           and environmental risks and potential impacts
                                           associated with REDD+ are considered in the
                                           ESMF.
Pest Management OP 4.09             YES   . It is conceivable that some forest management
                                            practices used at plantations could utilize silvi-
                                            cultural practices involving pesticides.
                                            Impacts and risks of any potential use of
                                            chemicals in forest management, if needed,
                                            will be analyzed and mitigated through actions
                                            contained in forest management plans.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP   YES    This policy was triggered on a preventive basis
4.11                                       since some forests areas where this project
                                           activities will be implemented might be
                                            considered   by some groups ill society as
                                            important cultural, spiritual and historical
                                            places. This policy is triggered despite that
                                            forest areas in Costa Rica are not considered
                                            physical cultural resources by the Government
                                            of Costa Rica.
Indigenous Peoples OPIBP 4.10         YES   With the outcomes from SESA, the
                                            Environmental and Social Management
                                            framework (ESMF) have been prepared and
                                            submitted to the Bank and will serve as an
                                            instrument to provide a framework for guiding
                                            the implementation of the REDD+ strategy and
                                            the future investments ill demonstration
                                            activities on the ground. The ESMF includes
                                            the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework
                                            (IPPF) that has been prepared in a culturally
                                            appropriate way in compliance with the
                                            Indigenous Peoples policy (OP 4.10) for
                                            addressing   Issues   arising   from'   specific
                                            investments during the implementation of the
                                            national REDD+ strategy. The IPPF will
                                            serve a guidance for preparing site-specific
                                            Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs) during
                                            REDD+ strategy implementation free, prior
                                            and informed consultation will be applied
Involuntary Resettlement OPIBP 4.12   YES   As part of the ESMF; a Process Framework
                                            (PF) has been prepared for managing the
                                            potential restriction of access of local
                                            communities        to     natural     resources.
                                            Additionally,      a     Resettlement     Policy
                                            Framework (RPF) has been prepared to address
                                            potential resettlement of private land owners
                                            that are currently living in the protected areas
                                            and the possible resettling and compensation of
                                            these private land owners from indigenous
                                            people's territories.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37             No    The REDD+ will not finance the construction
                                            or rehabilitation of dams nor will any REDD
                                            initiatives rely the on the performance or
                                            existing dams so the policy is not triggered.
Projects on International Waterways   No    The REDD+ strategy is not likely to undertake
OP/BP 7.50                                  activities which will affect the quantity or
                                            quality of international waterways so the policy
                                            is not triggered at this time.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP      No    The REDD+ strategy will not finance activities
7.60                                        in disputed areas as defmed under the policy
                                            and therefore the policy is not triggered at this
                                            time.
III. SAFEGUARD      PREPARATION         PLAN

A.   Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS:


B.   Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
     The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.

     As part of the ongoing REDD+ readiness preparation grant, and in preparation for additional
     funding of the proposed grant support, FONAFIFO (through the REDD+ Secretariat) has
     undertaken a systematic Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) to integrate
     key environmental and social considerations into the REDD+ Strategy by combining
     analytical and participatory approaches based on international good practice standards.
     Additionally, with the outcomes from SESA, the Environmental and Social Management
     framework (ESMF) have been prepared and submitted to the Bank and will serve as an
     instrument to provide a framework for guiding the implementation of the REDD+ strategy
     and the future investments in demonstration activities on the ground. A series of self-
     assessment workshops with multi-stakeholders was conducted from June 5-29, 2015;
     including the preparation of the report of the multi-stakeholders self-assessment which is
     included in the R-Package. With specific inputs from SESA work and the REDD+ Strategy
     investment activities, the final draft of the ESMF has been produced and will be consulted
     together with the National REDD+ Strategy. The ESMF will establish the modalities and
     procedures to address potential substantial environmental and social risks from the
     implementation of the REDD+ Strategy activities as well associated mitigation measures
     through employing best practices. The ESMF will incorporate procedures for (i) ongoing
     consultation with relevant stakeholder groups; (ii) appropriate capacity building measures;
     and (iii) environmental and social impact screening criteria, assessment and institutional
     responsibili ties.

     SESA Progress and update (Social). Significant progress with regards to social aspects and.
     indigenous people's consultation plan of the national REDD+ process has been achieved on
     several areas, including the following: (1) Participatory Approach; (2) Analytical Studies;
     (3) Indigenous Peoples Consultation Plan; (4) Communication Strategy and Grievance
     Redress Mechanism; and (5) Preparation of the ESMF.

     Environment. The SESA is being carried out in a manner consistent with the applicable
     World Bank operational and safeguards policies related to the environment. Since the
     explicit goal of the REDD+ strategy is to promote the reduction in rates of deforestation and
     forest degradation by rewarding measures to protect and conserve forests, the environmental
     impacts of the REDD+ strategy are expected to be mostly positive or neutral. The ESMF
     will contain a description of applicable environmental and natural resources national
     legislation, environmental agencies involved and environmental impact screening criteria,
     assessment, environmental risks and impacts mitigation measures and instruments and
     institutional responsibilities.


IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s):                  Name: Erick C.M. Fernandes
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:                   Name: Agi Kiss
Practice ManagerlManager:




 1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.
