Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1862 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/08/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Croatia 
Project ID: P095389 
Project Name: DISTRICT HEATING PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Sudipto Sarkar 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: April 27, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: District heating and energy efficiency services (100%) 
Theme: Other urban development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
32.40 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
9.28
9.28 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project objective is to make the District Heating (DH)sector commercially oriented 
and competitive with other forms of heating.  
 
This objective will be met through addressing the issues mentioned above: rehabilitation of the 
networks for the Hrvatska Elektroprivreda (HEP) companies which represent a large portion of 
the sector, introduce a tariff methodology to be used by all companies through the support 
provided to the energy regulator (HERA), introduce cost recovery tariff levels, and promote 
Demand Side Management (DSM) and public awareness on DH.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
A. 
HEP Infrastructure Development: The investments include the following - (i) Zagreb: 
network rehabilitation; and (ii) Osijek: network and sub-station rehabilitation.  
 
B.   
Technical Assistance to HEP: The investments include the following - (i) preparation of 
bidding documents; (ii) construction supervision; (iii) public awareness campaigns on the need to 
conserve energy and the benefits of DSM; and (iv) completion of annual audits of the financial 
statements of the project as per international standards.  
Page  2
C.   
Technical Assistance to Ministry of Economy Labor and Entrepreneurship (MoELE).  
This component will include the following - (i) preparation of a District Heating Strategy for the 
non-HEP companies to  determine the viability of some of the smaller DH companies; (ii) 
support the development of DSM schemes so that apartment level heat consumption declines; 
(iii) support the development of secondary legislation under the DH Law to establish a tariff 
methodology, promote energy audits, and issue energy certificates for large buildings in line with 
EU directives; (iv) support the strengthening of HERA , the newly formed energy regulator that 
has the mandate to regulate DH services; and (v) promote public awareness on the benefits of 
using DH services and the DSM.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The proposed project location sites are in Zagreb and Osijek.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
HEP is currently implementing a Bank project and is familiar with the procedures of the Bank.  
Institutional capacity exists in HEP, which is a national power company, to address safeguard 
issues related to the project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (ECSSD) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
A
safeguard consultation meeting was held on October 20, 2005.  In this meeting, the project 
was assigned an environmental category 'B (partial assessment)' since it will only include 
rehabilitation of existing district heating pipes, with at most, the eventual installation of some 
new sub-stations for delivery of district heat.  At the moment, it is not clear what may be 
included in the project, but the team suggested that it would inform ECSSD within the next two 
months if there would be a change in the project concept, which may affect the rating.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Rehabilitation of existing heat distribution systems will not require permanent acquisition of 
land unless new sub-stations are built, but may require acquisition of rights-of-way for buried 
pipes, to be placed in streets or alongside streets.  Some use restrictions may be imposed on the 
right-of-way space where the pipe networks are laid underground.  The applicability of OP/BP 4. 
12 would be examined during further project preparation.  If triggered, the appropriate 
resettlement instruments would need to be prepared as required under the safeguard policies, 
ensuring that project affected people will be duly compensated.  No resettlement of people will 
be needed for the project.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  12/09/2005 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An EMP has been prepared and will be disclosed before December 12, 2005.  For social 
safeguards, a Land Acquisition Policy Framework has been prepared.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Sudipto Sarkar 
11/09/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
12/02/2005 
Comments:  The ISDS is cleared and it is delegated to project sector manager for future clearances at 
appraisal and negotiation stages,if there is any change in project scope please come back to us for 
guidance. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
12/08/2005 
Comments:  Approved.  Please edit according to comments already provided to you by Henk. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
