Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/09/2005 
Report No.:  AC1659
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Croatia 
Project ID:  P091715 
Project Name:  Agricultural Acquis Cohesion Project 
Task Team Leader:  Aleksandar Nacev 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: October 27, 2005 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Rural policies and institutions (P);Trade facilitation and market access (S);Rural 
services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
10.00
10.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the proposed project is to develop sustainable systems and capacities 
within the MAFWM to ensure timely compliance with EU acquis conditions in the rural 
sector.  The overarching objective is to enable Croatia's agricultural sector to capture 
benefits accruing from accession to the European Union.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project has five components to be implemented over four years.  
 
Component 1: Strengthen Capacity for Absorbing EU Financial Assistance in 
Agriculture (estimated total cost: EUR15.92 million)  
 
This component would support the establishment of a SAPARD program implementing 
three of the SAPARD rural development measures and a limited and carefully targeted 
number of sub-measures. This would be achieved by (a) establishing a SAPARD 
Managing Authority; (b) establishing a Payment Agency and IACS; and (c) establishing a 
SAPARD Receivable-Backed Note Purchase Facility.  
 
(a) 
SAPARD Managing Authority. The project would finance the establishment of a 
SAPARD Managing Authority within the MAFWM Department for Sustainable 
Page  2
Development of Rural Areas (DSDRA). It would also establish and empower a SAPARD 
Monitoring Committee as well as train private and public sector SAPARD facilitators in 
financial evaluation and management, community organization, good agricultural 
practice, environment management and other SAPARD related grant preparation 
requirements. This sub-component would also include the development and 
implementation of communication strategies to inform potential public and private sector 
SAPARD beneficiaries and engage key agriculture stakeholders in the EU accession 
process.  
 
(b) 
SAPARD Payment Agency and IACS.  A comprehensive MAFWM Payment 
Agency (PA) would be established, including an accredited SAPARD Payment Agency, 
with the necessary control, implementation, payment, accounting, internal audit, 
monitoring and information technology systems and capacities to rapidly and effectively 
implement the MAFWM Pecuniary Incentives System and SAPARD program. The sub-
component would also establish a comprehensive IACS that would build off an improved 
farm registry.  
 
(c) 
SAPARD Partial Risk Guarantee Facility.  The Government of Croatia will 
establish a SAPARD Partial Risk Guarantee Facility. The Facility will issue a partial risk 
guarantee, which will guarantee the principal repayment of a short-term loan borrowed 
by the municipal beneficiary from the local commercial banks. By covering the risk that 
the borrower/beneficiary fails to meet necessary conditions for the disbursement of 
SAPARD grant and fails to receive the grant and repay the loan, the Facility would help 
redress the pre-financing problems of communities where investments are most needed, 
by improving their access to private bank loans.  
 
Component 2. Empowerment of MAFWM Administration and Management (estimated 
total cost: EUR6.43 million)  
 
This component would aim to establish an organized, cohesive and well-informed 
MAFWM management and administration team, with improved overall capacity to 
address the challenges of EU accession. Investments under this component would address 
gaps in MAFWM management and administration capacity, information technology, and 
institutional structures that are necessary for the effective functioning of the MAFWM 
and conditional to EU accession. Project activities would determine the capacity profiles 
for key MAFWM management and administration staff and provide relevant training 
programs.  This component would also strengthen the policy analysis capacity of the 
MAFWM Policy Analysis Unit. The project would also establish a management 
information system for MAFWM that addresses the needs of the IACS and MAFWM's 
financial and administrative management information system (MIS) requirements. The 
project would also upgrade MAFWM's information technology (IT) and establish a video 
conferencing capability between major MAFWM centers and agencies.  
 
Component 3. Ensuring Safe Food and Sanitary and Phytosanitary Conditions. 
(estimated total cost: EUR16.51 million)  
 
This component would support the development of the Croatia Food Agency (CFA) and 
create the necessary conditions for Croatian compliance with EU sanitary and 
Page  3
phytosanitary requirements. The output would be safe, internationally-marketable 
agriculture and livestock products, overseen by a cost-effective, stakeholder-responsive 
inspection system. The key sub-components to be developed under this component would 
include: (a) development of the Croatia Food Agency; (b) strengthened Veterinary and 
Plant Health services.  
 
Component 4. Project Preparation Facility. (estimated total cost: EUR1.52 million)  
 
A
Project Preparation Facility (PPF) would assist with the preparation of the above 
components. PPF investments would meet the initial needs of the PA, specify the design 
of the IACS, raise awareness of the SAPARD program amongst key stakeholders, train 
SAPARD facilitators, design a SAPARD communications strategy and conduct selected 
policy studies. The PPF would also support the establishment of the CFA through 
technical assistance, staff training and database design; prepare detailed specifications 
and tender documents for the construction of the veterinary and plant health laboratories 
and strengthen the MAFWM veterinary and plant health departments with qualified 
national consultants. The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) would also be established 
and partially equipped through the PPF.  
 
Component 5: Project Management (estimated total cost: EUR 0.77 million)  
 
A
small PIU within the MAFWM Department for Policy, EU and International 
Relations (DPEUIR) would manage the project. The PIU would include a Project 
Manager, Financial Controller, Procurement Officer and an administration/secretarial 
support person. Project impact monitoring would be contracted out. The PIU would be 
responsible for all aspects of project administration, including overall project oversight, 
TA, goods and materials procurement, and financial control. To ensure sustainable 
outcomes, day-to-day management of project activities would be the responsibility of the 
relevant MAFWM Department or Institute Head. The PIU would, in time, use the 
MAFWM SAP software for project accounts. A Project Steering Committee (PSC) 
composed of key Associate Ministers within MAFWE would provide project oversight 
and ensure national program integration. The SAARD Monitoring Committee and the 
CFA Board would ensure public participation in project program implementation. A 
Project Working Group made up of senior technical staff from the participating MAFWM 
departments would provide technical guidance to the PIU. The project would finance 
technical assistance, training and study tours, civil works, office, IT and laboratory 
equipment, vehicles, consultant fees, auditing and other operating expenses related to the 
project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will be implemented at the national level.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Karin Shepardson (ECSSD) 
Ms Paula F. Lytle (ECSSD) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No potential large-scale, significant or irreversible environmental impacts are envisaged 
as a result of implementation of project activities.  
 
An environmental review was prepared for the project which screened possible loan 
financed investments where environmental issues can be identified up-front in the design, 
construction, and operation stages.  The potential environmental issues that trigger the 
Environment Assessment safeguard policy comprise the reconstruction or construction of 
the new buildings and laboratories. More specifically, these relate to:  
 
-
temporary resettlement of offices (Croatia Food Agency and Payment Agency)  
 
-
land acquisition of social capital for new laboratory (Plant Protection Institute),  
 
-
construction of new laboratory and accompanying offices (Veterinary Institute, 
Plant Protection Institute, GMO testing laboratory)  
 
-
construction of office buildings (Payment Agency, and possibly 5 veterinary and 
phytosanitary regional centers)  
 
-
adaptation of existing object marked as cultural monument (Croatian Food 
Agency)  
 
The immediate impact on the environment especially related to reconstruction activities 
would be minimal. According to Croatian Laws, for the construction of proposed type of 
facilities, the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) is not necessary, which indicates 
that the impacts on the environment by this type of projects are limited.  
 
Possible environmental issues can be clearly separated in two categories, one related to 
construction and other related to operation. The main types of environmental issues that 
may result from actions during construction / reconstruction are following:  
 
-
Dust and noise due to the demolition and construction  
Page  5
-
Disposal of construction waste  
 
The activities related to ongoing project implementation include:  
 
-
Risk associated with handling wastes during operation (municipal, hazardous, 
etc.)  
 
-
Risks associated with the maintaining necessary environmental conditions in the 
laboratories  
 
All these risks can be effectively dealt with, since they are recognized through the 
prepared EMP in pre-design phase.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The environmental review recommends that an up-front team comprised of 
representatives of MAFWM, and building and laboratory designers be established to 
ensure that the EMP measures related to the environment are included in the design stage 
of all facilities financed.  A special supervision or monitoring of the construction phase 
was not expected to be needed as long as the contractors are provided with a copy of the 
EMP and its implementation becomes a binding part of their contract.  A mid-term 
review of the loan can serve as an ex-post review of the inclusion of these aspects in 
construction contracts.  Training in operations of the laboratories would be ensured 
through the needed for continual updating of certification, and thus up-front integration 
of environmental aspects into the certification process is recommended in the review as 
the best way to ensure adherence to the EMP.  
 
Some specific mitigating measures to address the potential environmental issues 
outlined above include:  
 
During the design phase, expert advice on laboratory design according Good Laboratory 
Practices, ISO standards and ISTA rules will be sought and used.  Environmentally sound 
materials will be used, including non toxic grouts, non-toxic paints, zinc and copper pipes 
for plumbing, high-efficiency filters for indoor air, etc.  
 
During the construction phase, some measures detailed in the Environment Mitigation 
Plan (on file) are as follows:  to limit noise pollution, construction will be restricted to 5 
days a week and only dayshift (7 am to 5 pm).  Dust from demolition and transportation 
of construction material and waste will be minimized by use of water and enclosement of 
cargo.  If demolition presents high source of dust, the site will be enclosed.  For 
hazardous waste (paints, oils, etc.) contractor will follow procedures for hazardous waste 
management (this implies collection, handing over the waste to authorized company for 
Page  6
hazardous waste management and filling accompanying documentation).  All recyclable 
fractions will be separated from non recyclable waste and taken to appropriate collection 
points with accompanying documentation.  Non recyclable waste will be taken to 
approved landfills. Any asbestos and other not environmental friendly materials defined 
as hazardous will be replaced and sent to an authorized company for hazard waste 
management.  Septic tanks will be constructed as necessary for disposal of waste water.  
 
During operation, fire protection measures will be implemented for the heating system 
and storage tanks for crude oil or gas; for municipal waste management, actions will 
include organized solid waste separation, collection of recyclables, organized collection 
of non recyclable solid waste, introduction of measures for minimization of waste 
production, and coordination with local waste management plan. For hazardous waste, an 
annual plan for waste management will be developed, there will be collection and 
separation of waste within the facility, waste will be transported to an authorized 
company for hazardous waste management, the contractor will follow binding reporting 
procedure on hazardous waste.  Animal residues waste and contaminated material waste 
will be handled in accordance to the Rule book on Handling Animal Carcass  and Waste 
of Animal Origin and its Destruction.  All hazardous waste will be stored according to 
Material Safety Data Sheets.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The EA and EMP were prepared after extensive discussions and interviews with the 
representatives of MAFWM, Payment Agency, Croatian Food Agency, Veterinary 
Institute, Institute for Seeds and Seedlings and Plant Protection Department. ISO 17025 
norm was examined at the Croatian State Department for Norms and Measurements.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/15/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/20/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/28/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  7
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Aleksandar Nacev 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Karin Shepardson 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Paula F. Lytle 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Benoit Paul Blarel 
 
Comments:   
