Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/17/2005 
Report No.:  33912
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Djibouti 
Project ID:  P086994 
Project Name:  Second School Access and Improvement 
Task Team Leader:  Ousmane Diagana 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 7, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: November 1, 2005 
Managing Unit:  MNSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Secondary education (40%);Primary education (40%);Central government 
administration (20%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P);Gender (P);Rural services and infrastructure 
(P);Participation and civic engagement (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00
1.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project supports the Government's long-term education sector development strategy 
as defined in the Ten-Year Perspective Plan. The objective of the second phase of the 
Schools Access Improvement Project is to increase access to basic education equitably, 
improve the quality of education and increase the efficiency of the education system.   
 
3. Project Description 
This is the second phase of the Adaptable Program Lending (APL). The project will 
continue to support classroom expansion, with greater attention paid to middle schools, to 
take into account the number of places needed for the new nine-year compulsory 
education and the increased flow of students from primary to middle schools, as a result 
of the decision to replace the competitive examination at the end of the primary cycle by 
a
non-competitive assessment.  Improving the quality of schooling will remain a priority 
of the second phase. The proposed project will comprise three main components:  
 
(i) Increase access to and equity of basic education: the objective is to increase student 
enrollment and retention.  Special attention will be paid to access for girls and children 
with special needs and adequate facilities for them to complete primary education.  This 
component will finance the construction and rehabilitation of schools in the five Districts 
Page  2
of the Country: Djibouti, Arta, Tadjourah, Ali Sabieh and Obock. Schools will be 
provided with equipment and school furniture.  
 
(ii) Improve quality: The objective is to improve the quality of education.  The 
component will support a learning environment conducive to quality learning and 
teaching by (a) assisting the National Education Research and Information Production 
Center to finalize the reform of the basic education curriculum, (b) implementing the 
recently designed textbook strategy, (c) assisting the Personnel Training Center for 
National Education in its training activities, and (d) strengthening the education 
information systems.  
 
(iii) Improve efficiency and capacity building:  the objective is to build and strengthen 
the capacity within the MNHE and improve sector management.  The component will 
finance a technical audit of the MNHE and the actitivies/tools recommended to 
strenghthen the MNHE's capacity.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be executed by the Ministry of National Education and Higher Education 
(MNEHE) in Djibouti-Ville. The project will be implemented in Djibouti-Ville as well as 
in the five districts of Djibouti: Arta, Ali-Sabieh, Dikhil, Adjourah, and Obock. Certain 
outlying towns and villages are difficult  
 
of
access. Djibouti has a strong French and American military presence that coordinate 
amongst the infrastructure ministries in repairing roads and building access to isolated 
towns. They also coordinate with the Ministry of Education in providing rehabilitation 
services to schools (school enclosures, latrines, small works, etc.)   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Concepcion Esperanza Del Castillo (MNSRE) 
Mr El Houcine Haichour (MNSHD) 
Ms Stefanie U.S. Brackmann (MNSRE) 
Mr Hany Shalaby (MNSRE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will primarily construct and rehabilitate primary and middle schools. There 
are little if no issues regarding construction material or construction waste as these were 
covered under the first phase of the project's EMP. However, sustained effort needs to be 
made to ensure that the most appropriate construction material is used. Sound 
construction measures need to be implemented and supervised. In this light, increased 
supervision of works will be carried out during this second phase of the project. The 
project will also improve the condition of sanitation blocks with water connection, and 
training of school personnel in maintenance issues with community involvement.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
NA   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
NA   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower will initiate awareness campaigns through community associations and 
parent-teacher associations. School management and maintenance issues will be dealt 
with through training of school headmasters and inspectors. Supervision of works will 
intensify to improve the quality of construction and  
 
proper disposal of construction waste. Information regarding the implementation of 
activities under the EMP will be reported in a semi-annual project progress report.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The project supports the efforts made by the Government to have an incluse education 
sytem to extend learning opportunities to girls, children with disabilities, orphans, street 
and working children. Consequently, the project does not present any particular social 
safeguard issues.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/13/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/13/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/14/2004 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
 
 
Page  4
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ousmane Diagana 
10/17/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Hany Shalaby 
10/17/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Regina Maria Bendokat 
10/17/2005 
Comments:   
