Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2019 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/08/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Dominican Republic 
Project ID: P094888 
Project Name: DO Institutional Development TA 
Task Team Leader: Alberto Leyton 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 28, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 4, 2006 
Managing Unit: LCSPS 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: General public administration sector (100%) 
Theme: Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P);Export 
development and competitiveness (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The ISTAL’s development objectives are: (i) to enhance Government effectivenessin delivering 
public goods and services by strengthening the institutional capacity of key agencies and by 
implementing public sector management instruments geared at promoting efficiency, 
accountability and transparency in the public sector; and (ii) to facilitate Dominican 
competitiveness and productivity through more efficient port operations and an efficient, market-
driven, and viable national quality system.  
 
More specifically, the proposed ISTAL would focus its attention in completing the 
development and supporting the implementation of modern management systems to foster 
administrative reform in the areas of public financial management, procurement, human 
resources and transparency, as well as the implementation of a new institutional set-up to govern 
the planning, fiscal and financial management roles to be carried by the new Ministry of Finance 
and the new Ministry of Planning. The project would also provide technical assistance in the 
areas of competitiveness and trade by reducing trade transactions costs through strengthening the 
institutional and operational frameworks of APORDOM and the customs administration, and 
increasing the capacity of the public agency responsible for the national quality system, 
Page  2
DIGENOR, including support for developing and implementing a system of standards, testing, 
quality management, and certification. The ISTAL would complement existing efforts supported 
by other multilateral and donor agencies like the IDB, the EU and USAID in both areas of 
administrative reform and competitiveness.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed ISTAL would comprise two components and five sub-components to be 
coordinated by the Technical Secretariat of the Presidency (STP) through the National Planning 
Office (ONAPLAN) and implemented by various concerned agencies.  
 
Component 1: Implementation of public sector management reforms to promote efficiency, 
accountability and transparency in public agencies  
 
This component is geared toward completing the development of key public sector management 
systems and supporting their implementation by increasing the demand for a better and more 
accountable public sector; and by enhancing capacities at the agency level for key agencies and 
providing them with adequate incentives for reform.  Specifically, this component aims to: a) 
complete the development and promote the implementation of reforms in the areas of public 
procurement and asset management; b) implement the Access to Public Information Act; and c) 
support the implementation of pilot institutional modernization projects at the agency level.  
 
Component 2: Strengthening of public services to enhance competitiveness and productivity  
 
This component would provide support to the Government in enhancing overall 
competitiveness and productivity frameworks by strengthening institutional capacities in critical 
public services associated with the implementation of free trade agreements. Several donors are 
providing support to the Government in this area.  The proposed loan would focus on two areas 
not yet supported by other donors that have been identified as critical for the Dominican 
Republic to take advantage of DR-CAFTA. These are: a) strengthening the National Directorate 
for Norms and Quality (DIGENOR); and b) supporting institutional reforms and strengthening of 
regulatory functions in the ports sector.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The activities supported by the proposed ISTAL involve several agencies and entities across 
various Ministries; its implementation will therefore require effective implementing 
arrangements to ensure coordination among project sub-components as well as other donor-
supported activities.  Discussions would be conducted with the technical Secretariat of the 
Presidency to determine the most appropriate project implementing arrangements. Initially the 
office of the National Commission for Sate Modernization CONARE and the project 
implementing unit of the PAFI II (an IDB sponsored project in the Ministry of Finance) were 
identified as potential implementing agencies. Both agencies have experience in the 
implementation of IBRD projects and will be advised on safeguard policies to be observed.   
 
Page  3
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/24/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/18/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No safeguard-related studies are needed   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alberto Leyton 
12/08/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ronald E. Myers 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
