                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                         CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.:


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/05/2017

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Dominica                              Project ID: P162149
                                               Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Dominica Geothermal Risk Mitigation Project
Task Team Leader: Elvira Morella
Estimated Appraisal Date: 10/09/2017           Estimated Board Date: February 15, 2018
Managing Unit: GEE04                           Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                               Financing
Sector: Energy & Extractives
Theme: Energy
IDA Amount (US$m.): 9.5
CTF Amount (US$m.): 10.0
DFID Amount (US$m.): 7.0
SIDS DOCK Amount (US$m.): 2.0
Other financing amounts by source: 15.0
Environmental Category: A
Simplified Processing              Simple [ ]             Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project        Yes [ ]               No [X ]

B. Project Objectives:

The objective of the proposed project is to help: a) diversify the domestic power generation mix in
Dominica by integrating clean, renewable geothermal energy; and b) assess the viability of exporting
geothermal-based electricity to regional islands.

The project has truly transformation potential. The diversification of the energy mix using more cost-
efficient indigenous geothermal energy resources will allow Dominica to reduce and stabilize the long-
term costs of electricity generation in the country, making Dominica’s businesses and firms more
competitive and relieving hardship for electricity consumers. In addition, by assessing the viability of a
potential larger operation for regional electricity trade, the proposed Project will help explore new
growth opportunities for Dominica, which would enhance the long-term development prospects for the
country.

Key Results

The primary results arising upon completion of the proposed Project are expected to be:
(a) Generation capacity of geothermal energy constructed under the Project (MW);
(b) Increased share of renewable energy capacity in the domestic generation mix (percentage);
(c) Preliminary feasibility ascertained regarding the prospects for regional electricity trade through
    exports of geothermal power; and
(d) Estimated GHG emissions reduction compared to a business-as-usual baseline (tCO2e).

C. Project Description:

The proposed Project is designed to build on efforts by the Government of the Commonwealth of
Dominica (GoCD) to date to advance geothermal development in the Wotten Waven-Laudat field in the
Roseau Valley, and help reduce risks and ease key barriers to a level that would attract a qualified
private developer to partner with and undertake further expansion of the field. The Project will first
develop a Small Geothermal Power Plant (SGGP) with an estimated capacity of 5-7 MW to serve
domestic baseload needs, displacing an equivalent amount of costly diesel-based generation capacity.
This alone has transformational potential as it will critically contribute to stabilize electricity costs in the
country. Its operation will also help confirm operating conditions of the reservoir and its ability to
support electricity production over an extended period. A contingent finance facility will be established
to provide insurance against potential residual resource risks that may arise in a first-time, green-field
operation of a reservoir. Once SGPP is fully functioning, the green-field will become a less risky brown-
field operation, one that is better positioned for further expansion and development of a Large
Geothermal Power Plant (LGPP) that would produce electricity for exports to neighbor islands. A
comprehensive assessment will be needed to evaluate the viability of LGPP and develop a roadmap to
move forward. The improved knowledge about the geothermal field, the proven operational capability
of the reservoir, and the identification of a clear roadmap will altogether provide what is necessary make
an informed decision about the approach to proceeding with LGPP. In addition, the GoCD will be in a
better position to evaluate market conditions and structure a transaction that may secure the right
private partner.

The project will be developed by the Dominica Geothermal Development Company (DGDC), which has
been established by the GoCD under corporate law with the sole mandate to develop and operate the
Wotten Waven-Laudat field.
The proposed project will comprise of three strategic components:
Component 1: Development of Domestic Geothermal Power Generation Capacity (Estimated costs
US$34 million) – This component will entail construction of a 5-7 MW power plant and associated steam
above-ground systems (SAGS), based on the existing well inventory that has been drilled by the GoCD,
plus the transmission interconnection to the nearest sub-station at Laudat1 for dispatching electricity
into the grid operated by DOMLEC (the national utility). Existing wells will be used for reinjection,
which, together with the use of the existing transmission easement, will significantly reduce the
environmental and social impacts associated with the Project.

Component 2: Contingent Drilling to Insure against Resource Risk (Estimated costs US$9 million) – This
component is meant to further mitigate resource risks that may affect the operation of SGPP and raise
concerns over the capability of the geothermal field. Specifically, funds will be set aside to finance the

1
  The transmission interconnection to Laudat will include the construction of a new transmission line to the existing hydro
power station, covering a distance of about 300 meters. If there are other transmission upgrades required for integrating SGPP
into the domestic power system, these will be identified during project preparation.
drilling of additional (make-up) production and/or reinjection wells if the productivity of the existing
production well declines below an acceptable level and/or the injectivity of the reinjection well does not
adequately support power production. The contingent drilling would help restore the steam field’s
operational capacity; it would also provide additional knowledge about the field characteristics that
would inform the scope and design of LGPP.

Component 3: Technical Assistance for Advancing LGPP to Development Status and Soliciting Private
Sector Investment (Estimated costs US$2.5 million) – This component will finance a comprehensive set
of analysis that will help make an informed decision on expanding the geothermal field and identify a
clear roadmap for developing LGPP. Specifically, the following key activities will be carried out: (i)
additional geological surveys and scientific studies to better identify the likely boundaries of the larger
geothermal resource at Wotten Waven-Laudat; (ii) preliminary assessment of the feasibility of the
transmission infrastructure (the transmission lines and undersea cables) that would be likely needed to
transfer electricity to neighbor islands (Guadeloupe and/or Martinique); (iii) feasibility study to confirm
the viability of LGPP including defining its potential scope, need for additional delineation drilling, and its
“bankability?; (iv) based on results of studies in (iii), preparation of an Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIA) that meets international standards; and (v) development of an investor prospectus
and market outreach to solicit private sector interest to invest in LGPP. With these studies in hand and
investor interest peaked, the GoCD would be able to fully engage the market and identify and select a
qualified private partner with the expertise needed to take on the next, larger, and more complex
investments in the Wotten Waven-Laudat field, and unlock its potential for further transformational
impact.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the analysis of environmental and
social risks and impacts (if known):

The Wotten Waven geothermal field is located in the southwestern part of the Caribbean island of
Dominica, in the Roseau Valley about 5 to 6 km east of the capital Roseau. The valley lies inland from the
coast and is mainly covered by forest with rich vegetation. Mountains surround the valley on three sides
and the entrance to the valley is marked by narrow cliffs. The mountains located farthest to the West
belong to the Mornes Trois Pitons National Park (MTPNP), which was established in 1975 under the
National Parks and Protected Areas Act. In 1997, MTPNP was also declared UNESCO World Heritage Site,
inscribed on the World Heritage List under natural criteria viii (“To be outstanding examples
representing major stages of the earth’s history, including the record of life, significant on-going
geological processes in the development of landforms or significant geomorphic or physiographic
features?) and criteria x (“To contain the most important and significant natural habitats for in-situ
conservation of biological diversity, including those containing threatened species of outstanding
universal value from the point of view of science or conservation?). MTPNP is a main tourist attraction
and is close to the Wotten Waven-Laudat field. Other touristic attractions in or close to the Roseau
Valley include: the hot springs at Wotten Waven; the Trafalgar Falls; the Boiling Lake; the Titou Gorge;
the Valley of Desolation; and the Freshwater Lake.

The assessment of the geothermal resource of the Wotten Waven field has been based on the results of
geoscientific investigations carried out during 1997-2008 and the exploration drilling program
conducted by the Government. Three boreholes (slim holes) were drilled from three separate well pads
in 2011 and 2012 (WW-01 located along the Trafalgar-Wotten Waven link road; WW-02 and WW-03
located in the Laudat area). In 2013/14, a production well (WW-P1) was drilled in the same pad as WW-
03; and a reinjection well (WW-R1) was drilled in the south-western boundary of the resource.
About 1,800 people live in the Roseau Valley, with nearly 1,000 in Trafalgar and Shawford, and the
remaining in the hamlets of Wotten Waven/Casseau, Copthall, and Laudat. A fairly robust process of
stakeholder consultations and dialogue was carried out primarily in 2013. The consultations documented
community concerns with regard to potential risks associated with the geothermal plant; the potential
impacts (which can be both positive and negative) on ecotourism that is a key economic activity in the
valley; and the prospects for job creation, among others. These social impacts and risks as well as
mitigation strategies when necessary will be the focus of the Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIA) that will be carried out during project preparation. The ESIA will conduct further
consultations as well as formulate a Stakeholder Engagement Strategy.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Effective ESMS:

The proposed project will be implemented by the Dominica Geothermal Development Company (DGDC),
which has been specifically established to develop and operate the Wotten Waven geothermal field.
DGDC is founded under the Companies Act (1994) and is a private entity in all respects. As such, it is
intended to serve as a special purpose vehicle to attract a private partner. Given its nature, the
company meets the criteria envisaged under Operational Policy 4.03 Performance Standards for Private
Activities for application of the Performance Standards. DGDC will be responsible for the proposed
project investments, including construction, testing, commissioning, operation and ownership of all
infrastructure financed under the project. It will operate autonomously on a commercial basis, with the
day-to-day management entrusted to a management team within the company. The nascent nature of
DGDC and the limited geothermal development expertise available in Dominica to undertake the
proposed project make it necessary to strengthen the capacity of DGDC. The company has a clear and
dedicated mandate to develop the proposed project and its strategy calls for significantly augmenting its
capacity through internationally reputable consultancies with extensive experience in designing and
overseeing geothermal investments, as well as through local/regional specialists. With support from the
Government of New Zealand (GoNZ), DGDC has acquired the services of Jacobs Engineering Group, who
will assist the company throughout preparation and implementation of the project. Jacobs is a global
consultancy firm with international experience in geothermal development and familiar with the
application of performance standards. The GoNZ will also fund the position of a Project Manager/Chief
Operating Officer recruited internationally, who will have in-depth, applied experience related to all
aspects of geothermal development, including safeguards compliance. DGDC will be staffed with at
least one Safeguard Officer. The GoNZ is closely coordinating its support with the World Bank, in order
to ensure compliance with good industry practices and the requirements under the Performance
Standards.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Ximena Herbas Ramirez, Senior Environmental Specialist
Judith Lisansky, Senior Social Specialist Consultant
II. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS THAT MIGHT APPLY

Performance Standards (please explain why)                              Yes           No           TBD
PS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and                     X
Social Risks and Impacts
The project is proposed for risk category A on the basis of the screening criteria envisaged under World
Bank’s Operational Policy 4.03. Geothermal development is usually environmentally beneficial since
often displaces more harmful, fossil-based alternatives for base-load power generation, improving the
local environment as well as contributing to reduce global GHG emissions. In addition, a small
geothermal power plant as the one that will be constructed under the proposed project has a limited
environmental footprint. This includes potential drilling activities that may be required under
Component 2. Nonetheless, the A categorization is recommended given the fact that the reinjection
lines and the power plant are located on the periphery of Mornes Trois Pitons National Park (MTPNP)
(an area with internationally designated legal protections). In addition, the project’s direct area of
influence could be located in high value biodiversity areas (KBAs and IBAs as designated by international
conservation organizations). This will be further assessed during project preparation, and if confirmed,
action will be taken accordingly.

Environmental and Social Assessment. The GoCD previously developed two Environmental Impact
Assessments (EIAs) related to the drilling of exploration (slim hole), production and injection wells. The
scope of the EIAs were:
     Phase 1: EIA for the Exploration Drilling Process – prepared by Caraibes Environment
       Development (2011). Three slim hole wells were drilled (WW1, WW2 and WW3);
     Phase 2: EIA of Geothermal Production and (Re) Injection Drilling Wells in Dominica –prepared
       by Caraibes Environmental Development (2013). Two full diameter wells were drilled – WW-P1
       (production well) and WW-R1 (injection well).

The EIAs were approved by the Physical Planning Department of Dominica’s Ministry of Agriculture and
Environmental Protection.

An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) will be prepared for the proposed project as
part of project preparation, encompassing the activities described in Component 1 and Component 2:

Activities under Component 1 entail construction of: (i) 5-7 MW small geothermal power plant (SGPP);
(ii) associated steam above-ground system (SAGS), consisting of roughly 4 km of cross-field pipelines to
reinject hot brine back into wells; (iii) transmission line of approximately 300m from the power plant to
the nearest sub-station at Laudat (the interconnection to DOMLEC grid may require additional work on
the substation); and (iii) supporting infrastructure for primary and ancillary equipment, cooling system,
road transport and water/waste water supply. Remedial works will have to be performed on the well
pads for site improvement, slope stabilization, drainage, fencing, and lighting. Additional transmission
upgrades that are required specifically due to the project (associated or linked project), if any, will be
determined during project preparation based on a technical assessment conducted in coordination with
DOMLEC, and will be included in the ESIA.

Activities under Component 2 entail drilling of one or more make-up production wells in case the
productivity of the existing well declines below an acceptable level. If such additional drilling is deemed
to be necessary, the well(s) would be drilled from the existing well pads, but targeted in a different
Performance Standards (please explain why)                              Yes          No           TBD
subterraneous direction to access a new productive volume within the reservoir. If required, while the
rig is mobilized, work-overs could be carried out on existing wells.

The key environmental, health and safety (EHS) impacts and risks associated with the project’s
construction and potential drilling activities are: (a) potential contamination of surface and ground
water and soils from drilling water, geothermal fluids, muds, and cuttings, if more wells are drilled as
part of Component 2; (b) increased water consumption due to drilling, well testing, and construction
activities; (c) potential air emissions, noise, and solid and hazardous waste generated from construction
activities and/or accidental spills; (d) increased hazards associated with transportation of heavy
equipment and machinery; (e) potential health risks to construction workers due to working under
extremely hot conditions and handling and operating heavy equipment and machinery; and (f)
incremental impacts associated with the easement and construction of the associated transmission line.
Once SGPP is in operation, the key environmental, social, health and safety (ESHS) impacts and risks
associated with the project are: (g) potential soil and water contamination from the re-injected water
and drilling wastes (muds, cuttings); (h) increased emissions of potentially hazardous (and malodorous)
air pollutants such as hydrogen sulfide (H2S) and mercury; (i) community and worker exposure to
explosions, well blowouts, pipeline failures, induced seismicity and/or ground subsidence; (j) increased
water consumption associated with power generation activities (primarily for operation of cooling
systems); and (k) hazardous working conditions for plant personnel (e.g. increased risks of exposure to
toxic gases; working in confined spaces or heights; exposure to heat, high pressure gases, and noise).
These impacts and risks can be managed with existing pollution prevention and control technologies and
with standard environmental management practices, such as those described in the World Bank’s EHS
Guidelines: http://www.ifc.org/ehsguidelines and the EHS guidelines for Geothermal Power Generation
http://goo.gl/W3hvY6.

Due to the proximity of the production well and likely of SGPP (although the exact location of the power
plant remains to be determined) to MTPNP, the ESIA will include considerations of biodiversity aspects
at and around the sites, including assessment of direct, indirect and cumulative impacts on biodiversity
values and development of mitigation actions as it may be required.

The ESIA will be developed so as to comply with Dominica’s laws and regulations, World Bank’s
Performance Standards and the applicable and relevant World Bank Group (WBG) environmental, health
and safety guidelines and the guidelines for Geothermal Power Generation. The ESIA will be consulted
and disclosed in line with the requirements prescribed for Category A projects.

Activities under Component 3 entail technical assistance (TA) to evaluate the viability of LGPP, including
the potentially associated inter-island transmission line(s) for evacuating electricity to Guadeloupe
and/or Martinique. The TA will also include assessment of the potential environmental and social
impacts of LGPP and associated infrastructure, and the design of an adequate management framework.

While the TA activities themselves do not have direct adverse impacts, the outcomes of the TA could
involve investments with significant environmental and social implications depending on scope, site
locations, and required follow-on actions. Accordingly, each of the identified infrastructure investments
will be screened for potential social and environmental impacts. These assessments would identify
which performance standards would be triggered, and in turn, the category of the Environmental Impact
Assessment and consultation and disclosure required for a potential future LGPP operation.
Performance Standards (please explain why)                               Yes           No           TBD
Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS): Given that DGDC has been established only
recently, it does not have an ESMS. The company will have to develop and maintain throughout project
implementation an ESMS adequate to address the level of environmental and social risks and impacts
associated with the project. Key elements of the ESMS include: (i) policy; (ii) identification of risks and
impacts; (iii) management programs; (iv) organizational capacity and competency; (v) emergency
preparedness and response; (vi) stakeholder engagement; and (vii) monitoring and review. Some of the
environmental and social management plans and procedures that need to be developed as part of the
ESMS are: Stakeholder Engagement Plan including a Grievance Mechanism; Local Hiring and Training
Plan; Security Management Plan; Community Health Management Plan, Cultural Heritage Management
Plan; and Biodiversity Management Plan. DGDC should also prepare plans and procedures to address
environmental accidents and health and safety emergency situations, as well as to mitigate the
associated adverse environmental, health, safety and social impacts. The ESMS should include a clear
allocation of responsibilities and a sound process and actions for dealing with emergencies. The ESMS
will be part of the ESIA.

Organizational Capacity and Competency: Given the nascent nature of DGDC and the limited
geothermal development expertise available in Dominica to undertake the proposed project,
strengthening DGDC’s capacity is paramount. The company has a clear and dedicated mandate to
develop the proposed project and it will be staffed with at least one Safeguard Officer. In addition, the
company has enlisted an array of internationally reputable consultancies to gain support throughout
project preparation and implementation. Among these there is Jacobs, a world leader in the field of
geothermal engineering and development, which is also very familiar with the application of
performance standards. This support is being funded by the Government of New Zealand in
coordination with the GoCD and the World Bank.

The project’s socioeconomic baseline has benefited from previous EIAs (2009 and 2011); a Gap Analysis
carried out by the World Bank in early 2013; and a subsequent ESIA social, physical and biological
baseline survey (ESIA Baseline Study) carried out between 2013 and 2015. This addressed some of the
gaps identified on the previous work; it carried out a stakeholder analysis and collected baseline socio-
economic information. The baseline survey also included 3 public meetings in Laudat, Trafalgar and
Wotten Waven in the Roseau Valley, as well as 25 stakeholder interviews in December 2013. About
1,800 people live in the Roseau Valley, of which nearly 1000 in Trafalgar and Shawford, and the
remaining in the hamlets of Wotten Waven/Casseau, Copthall, and Laudat. Many livelihoods in the
Valley depend on tourism, as this is one of the main tourist sites in the country, primarily for hot springs
and nature activities; on small-scale agriculture; as well as jobs in the capital. The 2013 consultations
documented community concerns for the potential risks associated with a geothermal plant; potential
impacts (which can be both positive and negative) on ecotourism – a key economic activity in the valley;
and potential for job creation, among others. The ESIA to be conducted for the proposed project will
build upon previous studies and complete any remaining gaps, primarily concerning community
engagement; community health risks; land acquisition and potential involuntary resettlement; livelihood
issues; and cultural heritage. A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), including a grievance mechanism, is
being prepared. An Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) will be prepared and include
action plans as needed, and the ESMS developed as highlighted above. The Bank team has reviewed the
draft TORs for the ESIA and the SEP.
PS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                         X
The more detailed description of the proposed civil works, the operation of SGPP and of the steamfield,
Performance Standards (please explain why)                              Yes           No           TBD
as well as the related labor requirements and working conditions will be further documented in the
ESIA.

Human Resources (HR) Policies and Procedures. DGDC will need to draft and implement human
resources regulations following Dominica’s Labor legislation and the requirements of PS2, specifically
articulating the workers’ rights to form and join workers’ organizations, and procedures for workers to
express their grievances and protect their rights without retaliation or discrimination.

Occupational Health and Safety. A comprehensive set of plans, standards, procedures and work
instructions should be prepared and adopted by DGDC to cover all aspects of occupational health and
safety. Risks to the occupational health and welfare of personnel involved in the project implementation
should be assessed and mitigated following a risk management process in accordance with DGDC’s
adopted requirements. Contractors will be required to comply with the occupational health and safety
procedures.

A Security Management Plan will be developed to safeguard project, workers and property and to
ensure that safeguarding activities are carried out in a legitimate manner that avoids or minimizes risks
to the community’s safety and security, as per PS2 and PS4.

The WBG team will review the specific HR processes and practices for the project to ensure compliance
with the requirements of the PSs, including contracts for third party employers, the provisions for a
grievance mechanism and occupational health and safety practices.
PS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention                      X
As part of the ESIA preparation, DGDC will need to develop project-specific pollution prevention and
control and waste management procedures both for the construction and operation phases of SGPP , in
consistency with international industry practice and following the requirements of PS3 (i.e. minimize or
reduce adverse impacts on human health and the environment).

Impacts on air quality require particular attention, especially with regards to the emission of hydrogen
sulfide (H2S) during power plant operations. H2S emissions already occur naturally in geothermal areas
and the cumulative effects of the natural emissions and the power plant need to be considered in terms
of both actual impacts and the existing baseline. Use of surface water and/or ground water for the
project activities and impacts to the resource require careful analysis. In addition, due to the importance
of tourism in Dominica, it is important to assess visual and noise generated impacts on adjoining
communities, tourist areas and cultural heritage sites.

DGDC should ensure that resource conservation and energy efficiency is implemented in the project.
The company will need to examine the different phases of the project (construction and operation), and
monitor the mitigation measures for resource conservation and energy efficiency and set indicators to
benchmark the performance of the project on these aspects following best practices for the industry.
PS 4: Community Health, Safety, and Security                            X
The ESIA should evaluate the potential impacts and risks of the project to the nearby communities
(Laudat, Trafalgar, Wotten Woven). Potential risks include: fire; seismic activity (natural and induced);
subsidence (induced); flooding; exposure to escaping H2S from hot water or steam; transportation-
related accidents and contamination of drinking water supplies. The ESIA should address these risks and
emphasize the need for coordinating emergency response with local and central government
Performance Standards (please explain why)                              Yes          No           TBD
authorities.

DGDC’s ESMS should include: a Health Management Plan to address matters regarding the health and
wellbeing of construction workers, project staff and nearby communities; a Transport/Road Safety and
Logistics Management Plan with measures to ensure safety of road users during construction; an
appropriate Emergency Response Plan that include procedures to respond to accidental leaks, spills,
emissions, fires, and other unforeseen impacts (including natural disaster events such as landslides,
unstable terrain, seismic activities, volcanic eruptions and floods). Issues pertaining to management of
security personnel should also be appropriately specified in line with the related PS.
PS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement                        X
For Component 1 (construction of the 5-7 MW SGPP supplying domestic demand) the project will
require primarily the acquisition of small amounts of land for the power plant and the reinjection
system.      The locations for these are not yet determined, but will be identified during project
preparation. There is also a small possibility that the project activities will require involuntary
resettlement/relocation and cause adverse livelihood impacts. For the activities under Component 3,
which entail preparation of a potential larger geothermal operation (LGPP) to be implemented in the
future (after this project), the anticipated activities are mostly studies (including another ESIA for the
potential larger operation) and planning. Lastly, three plots of land were already acquired prior to the
project where the existing slim holes and production wells are installed. It is also pertinent that the
Roseau Valley is relatively sparsely populated and that the Government has already carried out
numerous consultations and outreach there at various points over the past six years, as is documented
in the previous two EIAs (2009 and 2011), a Gap Analysis (2013) and the ESIA Baseline Study (2013-
2015). The ESIA to be carried out for the proposed project will complement these previous studies and
complete any remaining gaps. In addition, a Stakeholder Engagement Plan is being prepared. The DGDC
team informed the Bank that the objective is to avoid physical relocation and adverse livelihood effects
for potentially affected persons as much as possible. It was agreed that prior to appraisal DGDC will: (i)
carry out and publicly disclose an Audit of the previous land acquisition to ensure compliance with
World Bank Performance Standard 5; (2) if new site locations are decided beforehand, prepare and
publicly disclose a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and/or Livelihood Restoration Plan (LRP) for any
known locations of civil works anticipated under the project prior to appraisal; and (3) prepare and
publicly disclose a Resettlement and/or Livelihood Restoration Framework for sites that will be
determined during project implementation.
PS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management                 X
of Living Natural Resources
Due to the proximity of the production well and likely of SGPP to the Mourne Trois Pitons Natural Park,
and the fact that the project will be implemented in the direct area of influence of high value
biodiversity areas (KBAs and IBAs as designated by international conservation organizations), the ESIA
should include a proper biodiversity assessment at and around the sites including assessment of impacts
on biodiversity values and development of mitigation actions to address any impacts including direct,
indirect and cumulative effects. Consultations would include international and local specialists in
ecology and biodiversity to provide expert input into the design and location of the pilot investments.
PS 7: Indigenous Peoples                                                                X
A screening (including information from the 2013-2015 ESIA Baseline Study) concluded that project
activities in the Roseau Valley, which is located in the southwest of Dominica, will not affect indigenous
communities, which are located in the northeast of the island. In Dominica there are approximately
3,000 Kalinago indigenous peoples who live in a collectively owned 3,700 acre territory spread out over
Performance Standards (please explain why)                                                Yes              No              TBD
eight hamlets on the northeastern coast of the island. Together these eight villages are known as the
Kalinago Territory (please see http://kalinagoterritory.com). Formerly known as the Carib Territory, the
peoples’ and territory’s name were officially changed on February 20, 2015.
PS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                  X
The ESIA should have a robust cultural baseline to assess whether any of the project activities are
located in areas with cultural or architectural significance (tangible features). It should also include a
consultation process with local people so that the potential impact on unique natural features or
intangible forms of culture are identified and understood. The ESMP should include a chance finds
procedure, and depending on the findings of the baseline assessment, more project specific mitigation
measures in impacted areas may be necessary. UNESCO will be consulted to ensure that there is no
potential impact to the designation of the nearby World Heritage Site (the Mornes Trois Pitons
National Park) nor inconsistency with any existing or planned management plans for the core area and
surroundings.

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the ESRS would be disclosed
   and the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared: July, 2017

B. For Category C or Category FI projects that do not require an ESRS, the target date for preparing the
   PAD-stage ISDS:

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing2 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: May to September
2017

IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT:
http://projects.worldbank.org

V. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:                                                                                      Date
    Task Team Leader:                             Elvira Morella                                                May 4, 2017
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:              Noreen Beg                                                    May 8, 2017
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                               Antonio Barbalho                                            May 9, 2017
      Comments:




2   Reminder: The Bank's Access to Information Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i)
at the InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.
