Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/09/2005 
Report No.:  AC1643
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  East Asia and Pacific 
Project ID:  P079610 
Project Name:  Livestock Waste Management in East Asia Project 
Task Team Leader:  Weiguo Zhou 
GEF Focal Area: International waters 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 1, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2005 
Managing Unit:  EASRD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Animal production (90%);Sewerage (10%) 
Theme:  Environmental policies and institutions (P);Rural policies and institutions (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
16.51 
 
FOREIGN MULTILATERAL INSTITUTIONS (UNIDENTIFIED) 
0.50
17.01 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project?s development objective is to reduce the major negative environmental and 
health impacts of rapidly increasing concentrated livestock production on the open waters 
of and thus on the people of East Asia. Its global environment objective is to reduce 
livestock induced, land-based pollution and environmental degradation of the South 
China Sea and Gulf of Thailand.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Project takes a comprehensive approach to integrate technological 
solutions, regulatory enforcement, capacity building, and regional synergy for 
achievement of the Project objectives. The Project would be integrated into the 
Governments? mainstream programs and based on existing institutional mechanisms. The 
project will support activities under the following four project components to be 
implemented over a period of five years.  
 
Component 1: Livestock Waste Management Technology Demonstration  
 
This component would finance consultant services, training, goods and civil works 
related to the development and construction of cost-effective and replicable livestock 
waste management systems and facilities and the implementation of effective waste 
Page  2
management approaches in areas with a high concentration of intensive pig farms. Its 
goal is to demonstrate technically, geographically, economically and institutionally 
workable solutions to reduce regionally-critical livestock waste pollution caused by 
industrial livestock production under the different political and social situations of the 
participating countries. The livestock waste management strategies promoted under this 
component will focus on reducing excess nutrients (nitrates and phosphates in particular) 
and human health risks. The methods to be used would include (a) reducing, through 
better feeding practices, the volume of nutrients emission; (b) getting the nutrients back 
into the crop cycle; (c) processing and packaging the nutrients for export to other areas 
for crop use; (d) converting the nutrients to plant-available forms; (e) destroying the 
nutrients; and (f) taking measures to minimize potential transmission of pathogens, 
antibiotics and their resistance strains from livestock to human being. Specific activities 
of the component would include: selection of demonstration farms and villages, technical 
design, and implementation.  
 
The demonstration activities would be supported by training and extension to provide 
(a) farmers with the essential skills and technical support needed to improve their on-
farm manure management practices and (b) capacity building. Activities would be 
specified in the detailed master capacity building development plan to be prepared by 
each participating country. This component would comprise two subcomponents i.e. 
Technology Demonstration, and Training and Extension.  
 
Component 2: Policy and Regulatory Development  
 
This component would finance consultant services, training and goods to support setting 
up a policy and regulatory framework for environmentally sustainable development of 
livestock production in each country that will induce further policy reforms and 
encourage farmers to adopt improved manure management practices. This will be 
achieved through: (a) the development of a replication strategy; (b) the review and 
revision of existing regulations; (c) the commitment to master planning of livestock 
production (at national and provincial levels) to direct the geographic focus of future 
intensive livestock production; (d) the development and introduction of codes of practice 
or best waste management practices; and (e) the development and introduction of 
livestock waste recycling and discharge standards. Specific policy packages will be tested 
in sub-national jurisdictions and testing experience will feed back into the policy and 
regulatory development subcomponent. Code of Practices or Best Management Practices 
will be tested in synergy with Livestock Waste Management Technology Demonstration 
component, which will promote cost-effective and replicable technical options. This 
component will also support awareness raising activities, focusing on policy measures 
and environment and public health issues associated with inadequate manure 
management. This will focus the attention of national and local governments on livestock 
waste policy and regulatory enforcement and facilitate further assistance with this 
challenge from the World Bank and other donors. This component would comprise three 
subcomponents i.e. Policy and Regulatory Development, Policy Testing, and Awareness 
Raising.  
 
Component 3: Project Management and Monitoring  
 
This component would finance consultant services, training, office equipment and 
incremental operating costs to support efficient project management by supporting the 
establishment of a national Project Management Office (PMO) in each participating 
Page  3
country as the secretariat of and reporting directly to the respective National Steering 
Committee. The PMO, comprising a Project manager supported by competent staff, 
based on existing administrative structure and physically located within the main 
implementing agency of each participating country, would be responsible for day to day 
Project administration. Replication potential of alternative livestock waste management 
technologies as related to farm scale, affordability, operational capacity, material 
availability, and compatibility to the waste handling methods of the local farm 
communities would be assessed to achieve widespread replication of the tested manure 
management practices throughout the three participating countries  
 
The component would also support effective Project monitoring and evaluation of the 
social, economic, environmental, human health risks and other changes brought about by 
the Project, and the dissemination of Project outcomes within respective participating 
country. Monitoring on human health risks associated with the project will focus on 
measures taken to minimize potential transmission of pathogens, antibiotics and their 
resistance strains from livestock to human being. Specific activities would be detailed in 
Project monitoring and evaluation plans to be finalized at appraisal. This component 
would comprise two subcomponents i.  e. Project Management, Project Monitoring and 
Evaluation.  
 
Component 4: Regional Support Services  
 
This component would finance consultant services, training, workshop, office 
equipment and incremental operating costs to provide (a) capacity building support to 
strengthen the participating countries? institutional capacity in Project implementation 
and (b) regional coordination and facilitation support to ensure regional coordination and 
achieve cross-country synergies, and regional replication.  
 
This component would respond to the participating countries? need for an easily 
accessible source of support for capacity building including support for (a) decision tools 
development, (b) evaluation of Project activities and outcomes, and (c) development of 
training modules and packages. This component would focus on regional coordination, 
facilitation amongst the three participating countries and the dissemination of Project 
outcomes, decision support tools, technical guidelines and standards within the three 
participating countries and to other countries bordering the South China Sea. This 
component would comprise two subcomponents i.e. Capacity Building Support, and 
Coordination and Facilitation Support.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Component 1 will support demonstrations on selected farms/villages. The first group of 
demonstration farms/villages have been selected according to selection criteria agreed 
with the Bank, which would be updated periodically during project implementation as 
needed and included in the Project Implementation Plan (PIP) of each country. These 
farms/villages are located in Ha Tay and Dong Nai provinces in Vietnam, Ratchaburi and 
Chonburi provinces in Thailand and Boluo County in Guangdong province of China. The 
other farms/villages will be selected in accordance with the agreed criteria that they 
should (a) be large sized pig farms in China and Thailand or villages with large number 
of confined household-based pig farms in Vietnam; (b) be willing to participate with co-
financing commitment; (c) be located in an area where pig production is the dominant 
Page  4
cause of water pollution; (d) be located in an area where the trend is increasing or steady 
in pig production; (e) be located in an area ideally representing a single geographical 
catchment area or a micro watershed draining to a single surface stream; and (f) be 
located within the identified concentrated livestock production. Investments under 
Components 2, 3, and 4 of the proposed project would be made at national and local 
levels in each country and at the regional level to support consultant services, workshops, 
training, office and monitoring equipments etc.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Ms Chongwu Sun (EASEN) 
Mr Quang Ngoc Bui (EASSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The results of environmental impact assessment indicate that, in general, the proposed 
Project will have minimal negative environmental impact.  If successfully implemented, 
the Project would be conducive to the improvement of the environment. If the 
recommended mitigation and control measures, presented in respective national EA 
reports, are adopted, the potential short and long term impact of the Project on the 
environment should be highly positive.  However, if the Project locations are improperly 
selected, and/or if the proposed mitigation measures are not implemented, the Project 
could have potential negative impact on the natural and social environment, which might 
jeopardize sustainable development and effectiveness of the Project in ultimately 
reducing nutrient loading to the South China Sea through dissemination of Project 
findings within the region. The selected demonstration farms/villages do not involve any 
indigenous peoples or involuntary resettlement. Ethnic Minority Development plans and 
resettlement plans are required from respective countries in subsequent implementation 
years when situations change necessitating the process. No potential large scale, 
significant and irreversible impacts are foreseen. Some minor negative impacts on the 
environment during implementation/construction phase of the Project in all Project areas 
in the three countries would be temporal and of low magnitude with the exception of 
Page  5
permanent loss of some land, agricultural or ?wasteland?, for construction of large 
lagoons for aerobic/anaerobic ponds. These may include impact to vegetation due to 
temporary land occupation at the construction sites, pollution of waste of daily life at the 
construction site and noise and dust of the construction machinery. These negative 
impacts could be minimized if the mitigation measures proposed in the EA reports are 
implemented.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Several other social and environmental impacts were assessed including (a) gender-based 
differences among participating countries, (b) farmers interest in and constraints for 
adoption of manure management technologies, (c) outreach and responsiveness of service 
delivery, (d) community organizations, (e) potential transmission of pathogens, 
antibiotics and their resistance strains from animal to humans, (f) potential air pollution 
(toxic gases and odor) as well as greenhouse effect (CO2, CH4) as a result of improper 
working of biogas digester systems and composting of livestock manure. To address 
these impacts, specific actions were taken by all participating countries. Detailed 
monitoring and evaluation plans are under finalization.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Various project alternatives were considered as possible methods to help avoid or 
minimize adverse project impacts including (a) exclusively regulation-based approach, 
(b) exclusively technology-based approach, and (c) approach to involve all littoral 
countries bordering South China Sea. These alternatives were rejected due to 
considerable limits of each approach. Incorporated in the current project design, the 
following were agreed by all three participating countries as success indicators in 
minimizing adverse impacts: (a) higher net income from manure management practices 
(e.g. more efficient pig-fish integration, reduced loss of pigs due to better health), (b) cost 
savings related to manure management (e.g. reuse of treated water), (c) equal 
participation of women, (d) increased welfare (better health for farmers, workers and 
neighbors, including in particular children), (e) pollution reduction (water and air quality) 
and reduction in nutrition loads, (f) adoption and replication rates, and (g) technical 
functioning and durability of schemes. The following additional indicators were used by 
neighbors affected by pig production in Thailand: (a) lower frequency of complaints, (b) 
higher proportion of neighbors willing to accept pig farms in their neighborhood, (c) 
reduced loss of income caused by negative effects from pollution, and (d) more local 
workers hired by pig farms (as technologically advanced treatment systems require 
educated labor inputs that can not be provided by immigrant workers).   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Three safeguard policies were triggered i.e. (a) Environmental Assessment; (b) 
Involuntary Resettlement; and (c) Indigenous Peoples.  Specific measures have been 
taken by all three participating countries to address safeguard policy issues including 
preparation of Environmental Assessment report, Environmental Management Plan, 
Page  6
Resettlement Policy Framework, Strategy for Ethnic Minority Development plan, Social 
Assessment report and assessment of potential impact on human health risks. 
Endorsement/approval letters to endorse their respective EA. RPF, SEMD and commit 
the implementation of their EMP, RPF and SEMD are already or will shortly be sent to 
the Bank. The institutional capacity between the three participating countries differs 
considerably and project preparation and design have taken into consideration these 
differences. The agreed institutional arrangements under this project would ensure overall 
project institutional arrangement in place with specific project institutional and 
implementation arrangement structure, particularly below the national level, various from 
one country to another due to different country and local environment and conditions. 
The country?s general capacity does exist but requires strengthening. Specific actions 
will be taken to strengthen institutional capacity which would include development of a 
master capacity building plan in each country, training modules to be developed under 
the Regional Support Services component, targeted trainings offered by the Bank?s 
country offices etc.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The following key stakeholder groups were established (a) pig farm; (b) neighboring 
farms and urban businesses and nearby urban dwellers; (c) government agencies and have 
been involved in Project preparation. They will be continuously involved in project 
implementation. A draft stakeholder participation plan has been prepared by each 
participating country which specified the participation and consultation mechanisms 
tailored to facilitate the stakeholder involvement especially the private sector. 
Mechanisms for stakeholder-led M&E would allow representatives for various target 
groups to assess Project performance, effects, impacts, and appropriateness of 
implementation processes and benefit systems. The proposed Project has won strong 
support from individual livestock producers, farmer groups, NGOs, and government 
authorities at national, provincial and local levels with strong commitment in all 
participating Project countries. Two rounds of public consultation for the Project-affected 
people have been conducted during the EA work. The following approaches were taken 
for public consultation (a) consultation meetings with local residents, communities, local 
government representatives, and (b) questionnaire analysis of public opinion 
supplemented by interviews. Project related information and the translated safeguard 
documentation were disclosed during public consultation processes. The key safeguard 
documents including the chapters 7 and 8 of EIA report, PFR and SEMD of each country 
have been translated into respective national languages. Translated documents have been 
made available to the public at all levels including farm and village level in each 
participating country. These documents will also be disclosed at the respective World 
Bank Offices in Bangkok, Beijing and Hanoi.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/31/2004 
 
Page  7
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/23/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/09/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/31/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/23/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/09/2005 
 
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/31/2994 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/23/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/09/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OD 4.20 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in 
consultation with the Indigenous People? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review the plan? 
No 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit? 
No 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
Page  8
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Weiguo Zhou 
05/24/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Chongwu Sun 
05/23/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Quang Ngoc Bui 
05/23/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
05/24/2005 
Comments:  This is a delegated project. No Regional Safeguards Coordinator's approval is required. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Hoonae Kim 
05/24/2005 
Comments:  Issues listed in the safeguards clearance memo dated November 24, 2003 have been 
satisfactorily addressed. 
