INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA13631
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Aug-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Aug-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Ecuador                     Project ID:  P152096
Project Name: Supporting Education Reform in Targeted Circuits (P152096)
Task Team       Marcelo Becerra
Leader(s):
Estimated        10-Aug-2015                Estimated    30-Oct-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDO4                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General education sector (100%)
Theme(s):       Education for all (50%), Education for the knowledge economy (50%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     201.00             Total Bank Financing:   178.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
O
Borrower                                                                     23.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       178.00
Total                                                                       201.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve enrollment in early education
(Inicial II) and improve the persistence (survival) rate in lower secondary and upper secondary
education levels in the targeted circuits.
3. Project Description
Component 1. Improving school services in targeted circuits (Total: US$197 million, Bank: US$ 175
Page 1 of 11


﻿million).
The objective of this component is to improve the actual and perceived quality of education services,
accessed by students and families, which would lead to increases in enrollment and graduation from
O
early child to upper secondary education. Moreover, a more efficient allocation of existing resources,
both physical (e.g, infrastructure facilities, science labs) and in human resources, would produce
efficiency gains. The four pillars to improve the quality of education services to be financed by the
component are: (i) the reorganization of school supply, by consolidation of schools into "hubs",
upgrading the infrastructure and facilities; (ii) in-service and master level training of teachers and
master level training for principals; (iii) the implementation of CEL at school level and; (iv) the
enhancement of special education and programs for children with disabilities.
(a)    Sub-Component 1.1. Infrastructure, Equipment and Furniture for Schools Hubs (Bank: US$
160 million). This sub-component would finance the construction, equipment, and furniture for
around 32 schools "hubs" in the targeted circuits. The interventions would include new schools
(Unidades Educativos del Milenio - UEMs) and renovated and expanded schools
("Repotenciaciones"). School hubs would encompass MINEDUC's full standards for integrated
schools "hubs", including: infrastructure facilities to accommodate students throughout the "full
education cycle", encompassing from early education to upper secondary (bachillerato); physics and
chemistry labs, language classrooms, pedagogic ICT equipment, school cafeteria, a sports field and
facilities for school faculty and teachers. Transportation of students to "hubs" would be financed by
the GoE, when applicable, based on MINEDUC's criteria on distance and time of travelling. Is
expected that around 50% of the students belonging to the targeted circuits (and about 70% of upper
secondary students) would benefit from the new high quality facilities that foster retention by
improving children's daily experience at school and graduation by providing skills that are demanded
by the labor market. Moreover, efficiency gains would result from the reorganization of the school
supply into "hubs", through the reduction of small schools and better utilization of physical resources
(infrastructure, labs) and human resources, contributing also to increase enrollment.
(b)    Sub-Component 1.2. Professional Development for Teachers and Principals (Bank: US$8.5
million). This sub-component would finance: (i) in-service teacher training in the targeted circuits.
This training would consist of a 330 hours on both content and pedagogic, to be provided by selected
accredited higher education institutions. The training will be developed taken into account on
a        teachers and students assessments and the provision will be prioritized to weakest performers; (ii)
masters' degrees in selected programs for teachers belonging to the targeted circuits, provided by
select accredited institutions. Eligible subject would be: mathematics and physics, inclusive and
special education studies, and bilingual and intercultural education; (iv) masters' degrees in school
management programs for principals and other schools authorities belonging to the targeted circuits,
provided by select accredited institutions.
(c)    Sub-Component 1.3. Academic Management System at School Level- CEL - (Bank: US$5.5
million). This sub-component would finance the implementation of CEL in the targeted circuits,
including the provision of personal computers, internet connectivity, and training to all public
schools teachers.
(d)    Sub-Component 1.4. Services for Students with disabilities and Special Education (Bank: US
$ 1 million). This sub-component would finance: (i) the provision of technical, didactic, and
disability-specific materials at national wide scale; (ii) teacher training in areas that focus pedagogy
on educational needs that arise in the course of a student's individual development; (iii)
Page 2 of 11


﻿implementation of campaigns to raise awareness of the community to promote the enrollment of
children with disabilities.
O
U        Component 2. Strengthening Planning, Management and Evaluation Capacity at MINEDUC (Total
$4 million; Bank $3.0 million).
The objective of this component is to strengthening Planning, Management and Evaluation Capacity
at MINEDUC, including: (i) the development of key modules of the management information
system: (ii) enhancing PINIUECE and SECOB Project management capacity; (iii) carrying out two
key impact evaluation on Program's outcomes.
(a)    Sub-Component 2.1. Management and Information Systems (IBRD: $ 1.5 million). This sub-
component would partially support the completion and implementation of a fully integrated
Education Management Information System (EMIS). Specifically, would finance the development of
4 integrated modules: (i) Institutions and School Management; (ii) School Supply Management; (iii)
Project Management; (iv) Business Intelligence.
(b)    Sub-component 2.2. Management, Monitoring and Specific Studies / Impact Evaluation
(Bank: US$1.5 million). This sub-component would finance: (i) key staff in GUEM and SECOB to
strengthen Project's management capacity in financial management, procurement and monitoring
and evaluation; (ii) two specific studies/impact evaluations: a quasi-experimental evaluation of the
impact of the in-service training program for teachers on student learning; and the development of an
analytical model to measure the direct and indirect effects of the consolidation of schools on students
outcomes (dropout/retention/graduation; quality/learning assessments; equity; and efficiency gains
on allocation of resources) and potential spillover effects on neighboring schools. Both evaluations
would be led INEVAL, in coordination with MINEDUC.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Based on the Project's allocated budget, 22 targeted circuits have been selected, 17 circuits in Zone 5
and 5 circuits in Zone 2. These zones are among the most populated in the country and represent the
ones with the highest number of students. Within each of these circuits there is an average of one to
three proposed consolidated UEMs. It is estimated that up to six schools will either be consolidated
or will send excess populations to each UEM. The 22 targeted circuits belong to 4 Provinces and 9
school districts that correspond to 12 cantons with a diverse range of poverty levels. All the cantons
targeted by the project, with the exception of one, have levels of poverty higher than the national
average: the poverty headcount of targeted cantons ranges between 70% in Babahoyo, Guaranda,
Milagro, Montalvo, Pedro Moncayo, Quevedo, and Ventanas and over 90% in Baba, Mocache, Santa
Lucia, and Valencia.
Indigenous Peoples are present in the Project's four provinces as well as in almost all of the targeted
circuits with varying levels of alignment with the Bank's criteria for applying OP/BP 4.10 (collective
attachment, language, self-identification, and customary organizations).
Indigenous Population in Participating Provinces (2001 Census)
Pichincha:
Page 3 of 11


﻿95,552 (Total IP Population)
4.00% (IP Population as % of total Provincial Population)
50.30% (Percentage of IPs in Province that live in Urban Areas)
49.70% (Percentage of IPs in Province that live in Rural Areas)
Los Rios:
5,518 (Total IP Population)
0.08% (IP Population as % of total Provincial Population)
40.60% (Percentage of IPs in Province that live in Urban Areas)
56.40% (Percentage of IPs in Province that live in Rural Areas)
Bolivar:
40,094 (Total IP Population)
1.30% (IP Population as % of total Provincial Population)
5.00% (Percentage of IPs in Province that live in Urban Areas)
95.00% (Percentage of IPs in Province that live in Rural Areas)
Guayas:
42,377 (Total IP Population)
23.70% (IP Population as % of total Provincial Population)
86.00% (Percentage of IPs in Province that live in Urban Areas)
14.00% (Percentage of IPs in Province that live in Rural Areas)
The Project will finance civil works (school construction and expansion) for UEMs based on the
model of school consolidation that will imply the closure of several small community based schools
that cannot provide the same level of quality education that will be offered by the UEMs. The works
will include renovations and remodeling of existing schools, including the construction of additional
classrooms, laboratories, cafeterias, and recreational areas in targeted schools as well as the
construction of new schools. To manage the environmental impacts of civil works, OP/BP 4.01
(Environmental Assessment) is triggered. The primary social risk that the Project's safeguards
o        instruments will need to assess, avoid and mitigate is the closure of community based schools and the
impacts resulting from the new school distances and large multi-grade level populations of the
UEMs. At the same time the construction of new UEMs as well as the expansion of existing schools
to create UEMs may require land acquisition although impacts are expected to be minimal as in most
cases MINEDUC already owns and occupies the lands where UEMs are proposed. Whereas the
Circuits for Bank financing have been identified, the specific UEMs to be financed will not be
confirmed until the technical, social and environmental feasibility of each UEM is confirmed, that
will be inclusive of participatory processes with the educational communities (school directors,
teachers, parents, students, and community leaders) where schools will be closed or excess school
population will be drawn. The purpose of these consultation processes will be to inform the final
design of the UEM, its related transportation arrangements, and other services and governance for the
UEM. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Resettlement Policy
Framework and Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework have been prepared and disclosed prior to
appraisal. The social aspects of the ESMF, as well as the IPPF have been prepared based on the
results and lessons learned from pilot social assessment and participatory community level processes
that were carried out for three UEMs proposed for potential financing by the World Bank.
Page 4 of 11


﻿1. The selected circuits belongs to the four following provinces: (i) Province of Los Rios: District/
U         Canton of Mocache-Quevedo; District/Canton of Babahoyo-Montalvo District/Canton of Valencia
and District/Canton of Ventanas; (ii) Province of Bolivar: District/Canton of Guaranda; (iii) Province
of Guayas: District/Canton of Milagro, and District/Canton of Santa Lucia (Guayas Pronvince); (iv)
Province of Pichincha: District/Canton of Valencia and District/Canton of Moncayo.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Dianna M. Pizarro (GSURR)
Raul Tolmos (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The Project does not foresee significant and irreversible
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               environmental impacts and risks that could jeopardize the
natural environment in its direct and indirect influential
area. Civil works during construction of new schools and
renovations and remodeling of existing ones might only
generate typical focalized, reversible and manageable
impacts. Subcomponent 1.1 on reorganization of school
supply and expansion of school infrastructure both on
school renovation and construction of new buildings.
Given that list for all school and exact location of the
schools to be constructed and renovated are not known an
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) was prepared. Schools will be located in already
populated urban and rural areas in two Costa region
provinces (Los Rios and Guayas) and two Andean
provinces (Bolivar and Pichincha). A Social Management
Chapter will be included in the Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF), which will document
the key risks and impacts as well as opportunities that
should be explored with each community where school
closings will take place. It will outline the procedures
required to respond to the aspirations and concerns of the
affected communities.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          This policy should not be triggered because construction
4.04                                and renovation of schools will occur in built environments
(rural and urban centers and their peri-urban areas)
surrounded by productive landscapes (agriculture).
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          This policy should not be triggered because the project
does not consider any changes to forest management or
any works in forest areas in the zones designated for new
construction.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          This policy should not be triggered because the project
does not consider purchase, use or storage of pesticides.
Page 5 of 11


﻿Physical Cultural       Yes         This policy should be triggered as some of schools to be
Resources OP/BP 4.11                built may require minor excavations in Andean areas of
the Bolivar Province where chance finds could occur. The
ESMF or EMPs will include the relevant national
procedures in the case of chance-finds.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes         The Project has triggered OP/BP 4.10 as Indigenous
BP 4.10                             Peoples that meet the four criteria of this Policy are
present throughout the targeted circuits. Whereas issues
may vary for urban and rural Indigenous communities,
key risks related to the UEM process already identified
include the social and cultural impacts of community
school closures and the transport of children to the new
UEMs. For Indigenous Peoples there is a particular
concern that this will lead to loss of cultural and
community identity and parent's direct role and
connection and influence over teachers and the school
setting. An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework
(IPPF) has been prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal.
The IPPF was prepared based on a pilot social assessment
and consultation process with Indigenous communities
that are proposed to be consolidated into the Surupucyu
Intercultural Bilingual hub school in Guaranda. The
process resulted in the preparation of a social assessment
and Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) for Surpucyu that
holds the broad community support (as documented in the
IPP) of the affected/beneficiary communities to be
consolidated. This hub school will be one of the 14
proposed Guardians of Language schools that seek to
promote the cultural identity of each of the 14 Ecuadorian
Indigenous nationalities through the millennium hub
model.
The IPPF documents the key risks and impacts as well as
opportunities that should be explored with each
community where school closings will take place and the
procedures necessary to respond to the communities
aspirations and concerns through the preparation of
Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs). The project will only
support hub schools with Indigenous communities where
free, prior and informed consultation is carried out, per
the IPPF, and IPPs are achieved that document the
principle issues, priorities and measures agreed upon
between MINEDUC and the affected/beneficiary
communities. The IPPs must demonstrate evidence of the
broad community support of the affected/beneficiary
communities for the consolidation process. The IPPF
outlines the relevant legal framework, considerations for
Page 6 of 11


﻿consultation with Indigenous communities, procedures,
institutional arrangements, and resources for meaningful
consultation of Indigenous Peoples when they are
involved in a hub school.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         OP/BP 4.12 has been triggered as land acquisition could
OP/BP 4.12                           potentially be necessary for some hub schools. Since
specific sites are not known by appraisal, a Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared and disclosed
prior to appraisal. Based on prior experience, resettlement
impacts are foreseen to be minimal as the majority of the
lands proposed for new hub schools are already in the
legal possession of MINEDUC or other public actors such
as the Municipality. However, in order to plan for all
potential situations, including the need for land
acquisition from private parties, and/or the resettlement of
informal occupants, the RPF has established a clear
process for screening, identification and analysis of
impacts, and mitigation and/or compensation through the
preparation of Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs). The
RPF includes a detailed analysis of different types of
affected parties, impacts and potential compensation
measures.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           This policy should not be triggered given that the project
4.37                                 will not support the construction or rehabilitation of dams
nor will support other investments which rely on the
services of existing dams.
Projects on International  No        This policy should not be triggered because the project
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 will not affect international waterways as defined under
0
U                                  the policy.
Projects in Disputed    No           This policy should not be triggered because the proposed
Areas OP/BP 7.60                     project will not affect disputed areas as defined under the
policy.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The key issues that were raised during consultations were different among Indigenous rural
communities and peri-urban or urban non-Indigenous communities. In peri-urban and urban areas
the concerns were primarily focused on ensuring that the hub school would include measures to
provide safe conditions for children both within and around the school environment. In these cases
it was noted that in many cases parents are minimally involved in the education of their children
and that drugs, alcohol, gangs and violence are very much part of the children's realities. Some of
the primary areas of concern and requests included: (i) assurances that the hub school provide
adequate security both at the school facilities and in key transportation routes to access the school
(pedestrian and bus), (ii) that the hubs school provide psychological and extracurricular support
Page 7 of 11


﻿for children at risk or with learning disabilities, and (iii) that the hubs school implement measures
to ensure that smaller children would not be exposed to risk of harm or abuse from older students.
In the rural setting, Indigenous communities were primarily concerned with the new distances
children would have to travel to access school (up to three hours walking each way in some cases
O
Q)          if buses were not provided) as well as the loss of cultural identity and connection to their
communities. In these cases parents are very involved in their children's education and the school
environment- inclusive of the provision of healthy meals and mobilization of a range of health
services, and community activities within the schools.
*         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
For Indigenous Peoples the only long-term impact due to school consolidation is the potential loss
of cultural identity of Indigenous students if the hub school is not designed to fully incorporate the
cultural elements that currently are present in existing community schools. These elements could
range from the quality of the intercultural bilingual curriculum and the adoption of traditional
dress for uniforms, to the types of foods served, languages spoken and the predominant social and
cultural values promoted within the hub school environment.
In rural areas where UEMs imply important new distances for students, there is a potential for the
reduction of parental control over their children's activities and behaviors within the school
environment that could result in drug and alcohol abuse, teen-pregnancy, and other undesirable
behaviors.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The Project will only finance UEMs where social viability is achieved through the preparation of
social management plans that address the social risks and impacts highlighted by the affected/
beneficiary communities through the community level social assessment and consultation
processes. The Project will not finance UEMs that imply highly controversial school closures
where communities have raised concerns around the consolidation process that are based on the
physical and educational well-being of their students. However, some cases may present
controversy that is not based on the physical and education well-being of the students. In these
cases, the Bank will support the UEM, if it can be demonstrated that MINEDUC has carried out
meaningful consultation processes with the affected/beneficiary communities in good faith and in
accordance with the ESMF, and made every feasible attempt to address community concerns, and
that such concerns have no relation to the physical or educational well-being of the relevant
students.
UEMs affecting/benefiting Indigenous communities will only be supported if the Indigenous
Peoples Plan holds broad community support.
This Project will only finance UEMs that can guarantee safe and reliable transportation for
students that takes into account the ages and different levels of vulnerabilities of the beneficiaries.
The Project will finance a transportation audit, and specific transportation arrangements and
analysis of risk will be a key input into all consultation and social assessment processes.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
In regards to Social Management, the General Planning Coordination Unit (GPCU) that reports to
the Undersecretary of School Administration will manage and supervise the implementation of the
Page 8 of 11


﻿IPPF and Social Management chapter of the ESMF. This Unit will ensure that each hub school
carries out a stakeholder mapping, social assessment and consultation process with the key
stakeholders (parents, teachers, directors, students, community leaders) of each school that will be
closed or schools from which students will be transferred to the hub school. The social assessment
O
and consultation processes will be directly organized and managed by the District staff with the
support and supervision of the a national Social Development Specialist working within the
GPCU, and in the case of Indigenous schools, with the support of the Subsecretary for
Intercultural Bilingual Education (SEIB). District staff will undergo training to build their
understanding, ownership and capacity to implement the IPPF and ESMF.
The participatory processes outlined in the ESMF and IPPF are fully in line with the LOEI's
articles on citizen participation including Article 2 (paragraph 0) where it commits to citizen
participation in the organization, governance, functioning, decision making, planning,
management and accountability regarding the issues inherent to the educational environment and
its institutions and establishments. The Article also commits the government to promote and
strengthen citizen capacity for effective participation; as well as in Article 6 (paragraph N) where
it commits to guaranteeing the active participation of students, families and teachers in educational
processes.
In the three pilot social assessments and consultation processes, MINEDUC explored several
alternatives to respond to community concerns. These alternatives included the exclusion of
schools that did not want to be consolidated due to significant distances, proposals to work with
communities to ensure cultural identity and parent participation in the design and delivery of
services of the UEM, commitments to work with local governments and other public entities to
ensure safe access to UEMs, among other specific actions that are included in the Indigenous
Peoples and Social Action Plans for the UEMs Surupucyu, Natalia Jarrin, and UNASUR.
The Ministry of Education's National Directorate for Physical Infrastructure (DNI), in
collaboration with the Legal Department, will be charged with land acquisition and resettlement
procedures. This unit has experience in land acquisition for UEM development. During project
preparation the Bank team provided training to the relevant MINEDUC staff on the scope,
principles, impacts covered, and requirements of the Bank's Involuntary Resettlement Policy and
worked closely with this Unit in the preparation of the RPF. Land acquisition and resettlement are
foreseen to be minimal under the Project as the vast majority of the proposed hub school sites
(both new and expansion of existing infrastructure) are located on land already owned and under
use by the MINEDUC.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
From a social perspective the area of influence to be assessed for each UEM includes not only the
UEM site but all of the communities affected by school closures for the consolidation. A
stakeholder mapping will be carried out for each UEM proposed for Bank financing as the first
stage of the social assessment process. At the minimum, key stakeholders include the students,
parents, teachers, community leaders, and MINEDUC district and zone staff involved in the
UEMs to be supported by the Project. Other stakeholders include land owners or occupants
affected by land acquisition as well as the UEM surrounding communities that will be temporarily
affected by construction activities and permanently affected by student traffic. They also may see
an increase in their land values due to their location near the UEMs. The ESMF and IPPF include
a list of all potential stakeholders that should be taken into account during social assessment and
Page 9 of 11


﻿consultation processes.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              12-Aug-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           12-Aug-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Ecuador                                                  12-Aug-2015
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              12-Aug-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           12-Aug-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Ecuador                                                  12-Aug-2015
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              12-Aug-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           12-Aug-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Ecuador                                                  12-Aug-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
0
o0       C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
Page 10 of 1I


﻿OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Ifthe whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
a          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
O
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]   No[    ]  NA [
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
o          related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[       NA
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Marcelo Becerra
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Reema Nayar (PMGR)                   Date: 13-Aug-2015
Manager:
Page 11 of 11


