Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/30/2005 
Report No.:  31941
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Egypt, Arab Republic of 
Project ID:  P073977 
Project Name:  EGYPT-Integrated Irrigation Improvement and Management Project 
Task Team Leader:  Jose Simas 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 24, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: April 19, 2005 
Managing Unit:  MNSRE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (100%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Participation and civic engagement 
(P);Rural policies and institutions (S);Gender (S);Decentralization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
120.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
105.00 
 
GERMANY: KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU (KFW) 
53.00 
 
NETHERLANDS: MIN. OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS / MIN. OF DEV. COOP.
 25.00 
 
FOREIGN SOURCES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
183.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall project objective is to improve the management of irrigation and drainage for 
all farmers in two command areas in the Nile Delta.  This improved management is 
expected to have positive impacts on water distribution, quantity, quality, equity, and 
timing opportunity. This is to be effected through: (i) reduced and more rational use of 
irrigation water, at both off-farm and on-farm levels; (ii) greater and more effective 
participation by users and stakeholders in water management; and (iii) development and 
application of an integrated approach to planning, implementation and management of 
irrigation and drainage improvements.  The above objectives will be achieved if at the 
end of the project, water productivity enhancements have increased by 10-15%, 
measurable increase in on-farm and off-farm income, and employment generated for the 
300,000 farm families benefiting from the project (to be agreed with MWRI at appraisal), 
Page  2
and MWRI departmental integration at the district level starts getting mainstreamed 
throughout Egypt.  
 
Selected key indicators are: (i) water use volumes, system efficiencies and water 
distribution equities; (ii) crop yields and farmer incomes; (iii) Branch Canal WUAs 
established, with O&M responsibilities fully transferred; and (iv) all involved 
institutions/agencies actively coordinating and interacting for project planning, 
implementation and management. The detailed results framework and monitoring 
indicators are described in Annex 3.  
 
The project's objectives are to improve the management of irrigation and drainage for all 
farmers in two command areas in the Nile Delta, and thereby mainstream IWRM 
principles by: (i) empowering water users in decision making at both the investment and 
O&M levels for irrigation and drainage infrastructure, (ii) financing complementary 
irrigation and drainage renovations (iii) providing users with technical assistance for 
improving water productivity, and (iv) integrating the planning and development of 
irrigation and drainage service delivery through better integration of MWRI departments 
at the command area and district levels.   
 
3. Project Description 
The seven-year project comprises 5 components and has an estimated total cost of 
US$303 million including contingency allowances. The 5 components with their 
estimated baseline costs are as follows:  
 
(a) 
Improved and Integrated Water Management (US$224.9 million). This 
component will cover the implementation of irrigation and drainage rehabilitation, 
improvement and modernization works and programs at all levels of the selected 
command areas. Subcomponents include: (i) main canal system improvements; (ii) 
branch canal (secondary) and mesqa (tertiary) system improvements, including 
electrification for pumping stations wherever feasible; (iii) marwa (quaternary) and farm 
level irrigation system improvements; (iv) open and subsurface drainage network 
improvements; (v) main pumping station improvements; (vi) tube well irrigation and 
groundwater monitoring improvements; and (vii) studies, design, construction 
supervision and O&M programs.  
 
(b) 
Improved On-Farm Water and Crop Management (US$4.60 million).  Experience 
from the ongoing Irrigation Improvement Project (IIP) suggests that relatively minor 
incremental investments in on-farm water management improvements could result in 
substantial incremental benefits. This component will cover: (i) regional water and crop 
management adaptive research programs; (ii) extensive on-farm water control and 
cropping practice demonstrations; and (iii) irrigation advisory and agriculture extension 
services support.  
 
(c) 
Institutional Development and Capacity Building (US$14.3 million). A major 
focus of this component will be the proper establishment, expansion and scaling up of 
water user organization functions at the levels of tertiary and secondary system irrigation 
Page  3
and drainage hydraulic units throughout the selected command areas.  Defined 
subcomponents cover: (i) establishment of secondary system irrigation and drainage 
BCWBs, and ensuring their voice in water management decision making at district and 
command area levels through formation of federated water boards at these levels; (ii) 
formation and proper representation of mesqa WUAs within the BCWBs; and (iii) 
establishment and mainstreaming of Integrated Water Management Districts (IWMDs), 
together with establishment of suitable joint or integrated irrigation/drainage command 
area management systems.  
 
(d) 
Project Management, Coordination and Integration (US$11.0 million).  This 
component will support the management and coordination entities, functions and 
activities needed for effective planning, implementation and eventual commissioning of 
irrigation and drainage improvements on the basis of full command areas.  It will also 
promote and facilitate as appropriate the integration of the various functions and 
contributions, both within the MWRI and between MWRI and other involved and 
concerned ministries.  Subcomponents cover: (i) establishment and operational support 
for an integrated Project Management Unit (PMU), reporting to the Project Steering 
Committee (PSC) and located within the MWRI; (ii) establishment and operational 
support for Regional Coordination Units (RCUs) and project implementation teams to be 
attached to the PMU, one at each of the two project command area locations; (iii) set up 
and execution of monitoring and evaluation (M&E) arrangements and programs to assess 
project impacts and performance; and (iv) assistance with the formulation and facilitation 
as needed of liaisons and linkages at and between central and local levels that will 
advance the integration of improvement planning, implementation and management.  
 
(e) 
Environmental Mainstreaming (US$5.00 million). A project Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) will be implemented under this component to demonstrate how 
improvements in water quality can be achieved.  EMP activities will address the threats 
to water quality posed by domestic sewage discharges into the irrigation systems and the 
problems caused by improper disposal of municipal solid wastes.  Major infrastructure 
investments are not included, but "soft interventions" for rapid low-cost remedies and for 
providing bases for future successful project area investments are included.  These relate 
to: (i) public awareness and information disclosure campaigns; (ii) performance-based 
environmental monitoring; (iii) technical studies and management plans; (iv) institutional 
capacity building; and (v) provision of essential equipment and works.  The technical 
studies will include an assessment of Carbon Sequestration Fund finance opportunities, to 
be followed where feasible by design and implementation of corresponding activities.  In 
keeping with the project's integrated planning and implementation approach, there will be 
involvement by the key GOE agencies responsible for management and/or regulation of 
sewage disposal and solid waste management in rural areas.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project aims to address, in an integrated manner with user involvement, the key 
issues relating to irrigation and drainage management improvements for two full 
command areas (Mahmoudia and Meet Yazid).  These have gross areas of 285,000 
Page  4
feddan and 265,000 feddan (120,000 ha and 110,000 ha) respectively, and between them 
they cover a gross area of 550,000 feddan (230,000 ha) or about 10% of the Nile Delta 
irrigated area.   
 
5. Environment & Social Specialist's Team 
Mr Ahmed Shawky M. Abdel Ghany (MNSRE) 
Mr Hany Shalaby (MNSRE) 
Mr Knut Opsal (MNSRE) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Overall, the net project social and environmental impacts has been determined to be 
positive, by contributing to improved land and water management in the irrigated 
agricultural sector of Egypt. The rehabilitation of the irrigation and drainage 
infrastructure will help maintain the water table at a low level, prevent water logging and 
soil salinization, and increase overall water use efficiency. The on-farm irrigation 
component will lead to more efficient and thus reduced use of irrigation water, as well as 
to increased yields due to the introduction of on-demand ?continuous flow? irrigation at 
the mesqa and branch canal levels. The integration of water resources management 
within the MWRI and the consolidation of water boards (WBs) and water user 
associations (WUAs) at the district, branch canal and mesqa levels will strengthen overall 
water and land management at the local level.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
For purposes of O.P. 4.01 on Environmental Assessment, the IIIMP has been classified as 
Category B, given that no significant, irreversible or long-term adverse environmental 
impacts are anticipated and that any adverse impacts identified can be easily addressed.  
The most significant environmental issue for the IIIMP remains the management of water 
quality and quantity within the irrigation system, particularly with respect to impacts 
resulting from the reuse of drainage water for irrigation and from the "continuous flow" 
Page  5
of irrigation water to the mesqas. The latter was determined to be minimal (as the 
decrease in the drainage flows discharged into the northern lakes/sea will be as low as 3% 
which is within the official reuse plan of the government). In addition, certain external 
environmental impacts have been identified, on the irrigation system, namely the 
uncontrolled discharge of domestic pollution loads into irrigation and drainage systems, 
with their impacts on public health, and the improper disposal of solid wastes into 
irrigation and drainage canals, with the impacts on the operation of irrigation control 
structures.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The above-mentioned impacts and other environmental issues were examined during the 
environmental assessment (EA) and addressed in the environmental management plan 
(EMP). The EMP addresses the environmental impacts (Direct Physical, Social, and 
Induced human Pressure Impacts) identified by the EA through a combination of 
preventive actions and mitigation measures, including environmental 
monitoring/benchmarking and institutional capacity building, together with piloting of 
essential works/equipment for the collection and safe disposal of solid wastes.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The EA/EMP reviewed earlier environmental assessments undertaken by USAID and IIP, 
as well as results from on-going Bank and other donor operations to draw lessons 
learned. The IIIMP will strengthen the environmental assessment and management 
capacity of MWRI and its different relevant sectors; promote effective coordination and 
implementation mechanisms for water quality management, including monitoring, 
reporting and enforcement; support small-scale investments to address specific causes of 
water quality deterioration and may disseminate the lessons learned to benefit other areas 
with similar problems at the basin or regional levels. The EMP is envisaged to include 
clear mechanisms for performance-based monitoring of successful implementation with 
the full participation of all relevant stakeholders.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The MWRI (in cooperation with other pertinent Ministries, e.g., the Ministry of Local 
Development for the SWM activities under component 5) will be responsible for 
implementation of the EMP.  The EMP day-to-day management will be undertaken by 
the PMU and the WQMU of the MWRI.  
 
Since the project is IBRD financed and categorized as "B", one public consultation was 
undertaken four months prior to appraisal. In-country disclosure of the EA/EMP has been 
performed.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Page  6
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/12/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/20/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/23/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/12/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/20/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/23/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
Yes 
Page  7
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jose Simas 
03/28/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Ahmed Shawky M. Abdel Ghany 
03/28/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Concepcion Esperanza Del Castillo 
03/28/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
03/28/2005 
Comments:  Project has been transferred to the Task Team Leader on January 24, 2005. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Narasimham Vijay Jagannathan 
03/28/2005 
Comments:   
