                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET

Report No.: 126365


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: April 19, 2018

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Arab Republic of Egypt              Project ID: P166597
                                             Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Sustainable Rural Sanitation Services Program for Results
Task Team Leader: Osama Hamad
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 5, 2018        Estimated Board Date: June 28, 2018
Managing Unit: GWA05                         Lending Instrument: PforR with IPF TA
                                             component
Sector: Sub-National Government, Health, Sanitation
Theme: Human Development and Gender, Gender, Urban and Rural Development, Rural
Development, Environment and Natural Resource Management, Environmental Health
and Pollution Management, Water Resource Management, Rural Infrastructure and
service delivery, Air quality management, Water pollution, Soil Pollution, Water
Institutions, Policies and Reform
IBRD Amount (US$m.): US$ 300 million
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source: US$ 300 million (Asian Infrastructure Investment
Bank)
Environmental Category: B
Simplified Processing               Simple [X]                 Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project        Yes [X]                    No [ ]


B. Project Objectives:

Revised Program Development Objective: To strengthen institutions and policies for increasing
access and improving rural sanitation services in the selected governorates in the Arab Republic
of Egypt.


C. Project Description:

The Program is a part of the Borrower's National Rural Sanitation Program (NRSP) and consists
of the following three pillars: (i) improved sanitation access, (ii) improved operational systems
and practices of WSCs [Water and Sanitation Companies], and (iii) strengthened national sector
framework. Under the Program, in the Governorates of Dakahliya, Sharkiya, Beheira, Damietta,
Gharbiya, and Menoufiya, access to sanitation will be provided for about 1.71 million people
living in villages and satellite areas where the water ways are highly polluted. Performance-
based Capital Grants (PBCGs) will be made by MHUUC to the WSCs to carry out priority rural
sanitation investments in network expansion and wastewater treatment plant
construction/rehabilitation. Under the Program’s second pillar, the WSCs’ performance in
operational, financial, institutional and citizen engagement areas will be strengthened. For the
third pillar, activities will focus on capacity building for key institutions within the sector and
strengthening the enabling environment for efficient and accountable rural sanitation service
delivery, with a focus on (i) supporting the development of a financial model that will allow for
sustainable cost-recovery, (ii) developing a National Water and Sanitation Sector Strategy,
(iii) mainstreaming and updating the standard operating procedures for land acquisition for the
sector, and (iv) supporting the Egyptian Water Regulatory Authority (EWRA) to deliver its
mandate.

An additional loan to the parent SRSSP is proposed which would help finance the expenditures
associated with i) scaling up the Program to three additional governorates and their respective
Water and Sanitation Companies (WSCs) to help improve the WSC operational systems and
practices; ii) improved access to sanitation services by extending access to an additional 175,000
households; (iii) further strengthening the national sector framework, the sector's institutions,
especially EWRA, and policy framework; and iv) introducing an Investment Project Financing
(IPF) component for Technical Assistance on strategic sector issues (which is subject of this
ISDS). The AF will extend the restructured original Program closing date by 12 months to June
30, 2024. There is no change in the results area under the additional financing to the original
government program.

The IPF component will be in the form of US$25 million to provide support to MHUUD in
delivering the SRSSP in the following activities:

1.      Support to the PMU in carrying out Program management and oversight activities
(including revising necessary documents from the original program, such as the Program
Operations Manual), as well as capacity building activities like staff training; recruitment of
PMU staff/consultants and payment of salaries; supply of office equipment, HR & Operation
consultant firm, independent verification agency. Support will also be provided for undertaking
preliminary assessments for a possible next phase of activities under NRSP in Upper Egypt.

2.      Support to EWRA capacity building activities: (i) training, study tours, workshops &
events; (ii) improvement of the M&E capacity: hiring of consultants to identify the needs and
develop M&E system, staff training on M&E; (iii) institutional readjustment activities that may
include carrying out institutional development survey, development of the job TORs, and staff
training; and (iv) development of other EWRA capacities as per the EWRA Capacity Building
Action Plan.

3.      Support to MHUUC in (i) developing a financial model for calculating tariff structure
for sustainable cost recovery (financial/economic aspects) and affordability (social aspects) and
(ii) developing the National Water and Sanitation Sector Strategy (NWSSS), including support to
the preparation of relevant studies, policies, programs, plans, legal frameworks, etc., with the
support of local and international consultants (firm or individuals). The range of analytical work
to inform the NWSSS is expected to include:

           a. Legislation and regulation (economic, environmental and drinking water quality)

           b. Financing:

                   i. Capital financing, historic and projected needs

                  ii. Operation and maintenance financing, historic and projected, intra-
                      governorate comparisons, regional comparisons

                  iii. Sources of capital and their costs

                  iv. Tariff forecasts and affordability

                   v. National versus governorate level tariffs and transition arrangements

           c. Environmental/climate change impacts and options for adaptation and mitigation

           d. Social assessments, including poverty and social impact analysis (PSIA)

           e. Private sector participation, historic trends and options for future engagement

           f. Institutional arrangements, current arrangements (including SWOT analysis,
              institutional gaps/barriers, existing collaboration within the sector and with related
              sectors, political economy analysis and incentive assessments) and options going
              forward for increasing accountability, autonomy, efficiency and customer
              orientation; options going forward for increased collaboration within the sector
              and between related sectors

           g. Capacity building needs and program



D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):

Component 1 of the TA includes support of the PMU/PIUs capacity building, staffing, project
management, and support consultants (PMCF and ISCs) will cover the six SRSSP governorates:
the three governorates for the parent Program (Dakahlia, Sharkia and Beheira), and the three new
governorates of the AF (Damietta, Gharbia and Menofia). All those governorates are located in
the Nile Delta which is characterized by high population density, fertile agriculture lands that is
rapidly desertified due to rapid urbanization and salt water intrusion at the norther parts (partly
due to climate change and rising sea levels).
Components 2 and 3 of the TA, concerning capacity building of EWRA and preparation of
strategic studies and sector strategies will cover the whole country, but the sanitation
interventions are typically implemented in highly developed areas.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:

Through the implementation of the parent PforR the capacity of the client has been significantly
improved. Recent reviews of the PMU established for the PforR show that the ESIAs prepared
by the PMU, who is the beneficiary from this technical assistance, has highly improved in
quality in terms of meaningful consultation, adequate analysis of alternatives, capture of different
risks and impacts and providing adequate mitigation measures. The PMU/PIUs have also started
to initiate and frequently update the Environmental Registers of WWTPs to include waste
handling procedures OHS measures. This TA is expected to further improve the capacity of the
PMU and the six PIUs of the Program and will help integrating environmental and social
management as part of the reforms of the water supply and sanitation sector.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Amal Faltas – Senior Social Development Specialist
Mohammad Kandeel – Senior Environmental Specialist

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                    Yes         No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                 √
The TA will involve contracting consultants to carry out strategic studies on water supply and
sanitation including preparing the National Water Supply and Sanitation Strategy (NWSSS).
Such strategy could lead to some environmental and social impacts related to the approach in
providing water supply and sanitation services and the technologies that will be supported by the
strategy. Therefore, the preparation of the NWSSS will be informed by a Strategic
Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) which will be part of this TA. The TA is
classified as Category B, and the safeguards instrument that will be prepared will be a SESA and
a poverty and social impact analysis (PSIA). The ToRs for both instruments were prepared and
will be disclosed before appraisal.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                     √
Water supply and sanitation infrastructure is typically located in highly developed areas with no
natural habitats. However, this will be addressed more thoroughly in the SESA where the
potential of affecting aquatic natural habitats by water abstraction and discharge of treated
effluent will be investigated and analyzed.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                              √
No forests are likely to be affected by the TA. This will be also more thoroughly investigated in
the SESA, especially if abstracting groundwater would affect forest plantations or using treated
effluent in irrigating tree forests would require measures for sustainable management of those
forests.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                         √
TA will not include any activities related to procurement or utilization of pesticides
Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                 Yes          No        TBD
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                           √
There are no known effects to PCRs, but as the water supply and sewerage infrastructure include
extensive excavation in areas where many ancient civilizations took place, the SESA will include
an assessment of any risks on PCRs and recommendations for possible pre-excavations surveys.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                 √
The TA will not have any components/activities related to Indigenous peoples.

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                 √
The TA will entail the preparation of studies, plans and programs that may involve topics related
to land acquisition and associated issue. OP 4.12, thus, should be triggered and a Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF) is the instrument that should be prepared. The RPF, however, will take
the form of Standards Operations Procedures (SOP) for land acquisition. The SOPs were already
prepared by the Government of Egypt under the parent Program and have been reviewed by the
Bank team and are now being implemented in the three WSCs of the parent Program. Under the
AF, the SOP will be revised shortly, become part of a Program Action Plan and finalized in time
to input into the TA studies. The SOP revisions will align with OP 4.12 and function as an RPF
that will apply to the whole Program. The update of the SOP will be approved by the Bank The
draft SOP will be disclosed before appraisal.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                        √
TA will not include components related to development of new dams, existing dams nor dams
under construction, or infrastructure dependent on the performance of existing dams.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                      √
Although the TA will involve water and sanitation strategies that could result in plans for
abstracting water from the River Nile and discharging treated wastewater to the drainage system,
the TA fulfills the conditions for exemption from notification as it is limited to strategic studies
and it is related to the extreme downstream of the river without any possible effect on riparian
countries.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                            √
The TA will not involve any interventions in disputed areas
Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address                                     √
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-
Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)


III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared:
   N/A

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
   ISDS:
   May 5, 2018

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:

    The ToRs for the SESA and PSIA were prepared and will be disclosed before appraisal. The
draft land acquisition SOP will be also disclosed before appraisal.


IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Osama Hamad                                   5.19.2018
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Nina Chee                                     5.20.2018
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Carmen Nonay                                  5.21.2018
   Comments:
