                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET

Report No.: 128596


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: July 7, 2018

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Arab Republic of Egypt              Project ID: P166597
                                             Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Sustainable Rural Sanitation Services Program for Results
Task Team Leader: Osama Hamad
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 5, 2018        Estimated Board Date: June 28, 2018
Managing Unit: GWA05                         Lending Instrument: PforR with IPF TA
                                             component
Sector: Sub-National Government, Health, Sanitation
Theme: Human Development and Gender, Gender, Urban and Rural Development, Rural
Development, Environment and Natural Resource Management, Environmental Health
and Pollution Management, Water Resource Management, Rural Infrastructure and
service delivery, Air quality management, Water pollution, Soil Pollution, Water
Institutions, Policies and Reform
IBRD Amount (US$m.): US$ 300 million
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source: US$ 300 million (Asian Infrastructure Investment
Bank)
Environmental Category: C
Simplified Processing               Simple [X]                 Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project        Yes [X]                    No [ ]


B. Project Objectives:

Revised Program Development Objective: To strengthen institutions and policies for increasing
access and improving rural sanitation services in the selected governorates in the Arab Republic
of Egypt.


C. Project Description:

The Program is a part of the Borrower's National Rural Sanitation Program (NRSP) and consists
of the following three pillars: (i) improved sanitation access, (ii) improved operational systems
and practices of WSCs [Water and Sanitation Companies], and (iii) strengthened national sector
framework. Under the Program, in the Governorates of Dakahliya, Sharkiya, Beheira, Damietta,
Gharbiya, and Menoufiya, access to sanitation will be provided for about 1.71 million people
living in villages and satellite areas where the water ways are highly polluted. Performance-
based Capital Grants (PBCGs) will be made by MHUUC to the WSCs to carry out priority rural
sanitation investments in network expansion and wastewater treatment plant
construction/rehabilitation. Under the Program’s second pillar, the WSCs’ performance in
operational, financial, institutional and citizen engagement areas will be strengthened. For the
third pillar, activities will focus on capacity building for key institutions within the sector and
strengthening the enabling environment for efficient and accountable rural sanitation service
delivery, with a focus on (i) supporting the development of a financial model that will allow for
sustainable cost-recovery, (ii) developing a National Water and Sanitation Sector Strategy,
(iii) mainstreaming and updating the standard operating procedures for land acquisition for the
sector, and (iv) supporting the Egyptian Water Regulatory Authority (EWRA) to deliver its
mandate.

An additional loan to the parent SRSSP is proposed which would help finance the expenditures
associated with i) scaling up the Program to three additional governorates and their respective
Water and Sanitation Companies (WSCs) to help improve the WSC operational systems and
practices; ii) improved access to sanitation services by extending access to an additional 175,000
households; (iii) further strengthening the national sector framework, the sector's institutions,
especially EWRA, and policy framework; and iv) introducing an Investment Project Financing
(IPF) component for Technical Assistance on strategic sector issues (which is subject of this
ISDS). The AF will extend the restructured original Program closing date by 12 months to June
30, 2024. There is no change in the results area under the additional financing to the original
government program.

The IPF component will be in the form of US$15 million to provide support to MHUUD in
delivering the SRSSP in the following activities:

   1. Strengthening EWRA’s regulatory functions to enable it to deliver its business mandate,
      including: (i) developing a water supply sanitation (WSS) information management
      system and related training; (ii) improving EWRA’s institutional performance through
      conducting institutional development surveys, developing terms of references for EWRA
      staff employment, and staff training; (iv) preparing standard operating procedures and a
      business plan for EWRA; and (v) engaging consultants to support EWRA in improving
      its institutional effectiveness.

   2. Strengthening the Borrower’s capacity in verifying the Program’s DLIs/DLRs through,
      inter alia, hiring of an Independent Verification Agent.

   3. Strengthen the capacity of the Program Implementing Entities in achieving the DLIs /
      DLRs through learning and training support.

   4. Strengthening the capacity of the PMU in performing management, coordination,
      monitoring and evaluation functions for the Operation, through financing required goods,
      consultant services and Operating Costs.
   5. Strengthening the capacity of the MHUUC/PMU in performing sector planning and
      policy making functions for the water and sanitation sector through carrying out related
      advisory, analytical studies and capacity building activities.


D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):

Components 2, 3 and 4 of the TA includes support of the PMU/PIUs capacity building, staffing,
project management, and support consultants (PMCF and ISCs) will cover the six SRSSP
governorates: the three governorates for the parent Program (Dakahlia, Sharkia and Beheira), and
the three new governorates of the AF (Damietta, Gharbia and Menofia). All those governorates
are located in the Nile Delta which is characterized by high population density, fertile agriculture
lands that is rapidly desertified due to rapid urbanization and salt water intrusion at the norther
parts (partly due to climate change and rising sea levels).

Components 2 and 5 of the TA, concerning capacity building of EWRA and MHUUC/PMU will
cover the whole country, but the sanitation interventions are typically implemented in highly
developed areas.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:Through the implementation of
the parent PforR the capacity of the client has been significantly improved. Recent reviews of the
PMU established for the PforR show that the ESIAs prepared by the PMU, who is the
beneficiary from this technical assistance, has highly improved in quality in terms of meaningful
consultation, adequate analysis of alternatives, capture of different risks and impacts and
providing adequate mitigation measures. The PMU/PIUs have also started to initiate and
frequently update the Environmental Registers of WWTPs to include waste handling procedures
and occupational health and safety (OHS) measures. On the OHS aspects, the fatality occurred
on June 5, 2018, during the preparation of the Program, highlighted some weaknesses in OHS
management and recommendations were put in place to address those weaknesses. A Root Cause
Analysis (RCA) was carried out for this accident and recommended certain improvement
measures, including applying United States Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA) Standards for trenching and ensuring the trench works supervision by a competent
person. Those recommendations were committed by the PMU and included in the PAP.

This TA is expected to further improve the capacity of the implementing entities of the Program.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Amal Faltas – Senior Social Development Specialist
Mohammad Kandeel – Senior Environmental Specialist
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                   Yes          No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                             √
The TA focus is mainly on staffing, consultancies and capacity building related to the Program
management as well as strengthening the role of the regulatory authority (EWRA). The planned
activities under the TA does not have any activities that would require triggering for the
environmental assessment.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                     √
The TA focus is mainly on staffing, consultancies and capacity building related to the Program
management as well as strengthening the role of the regulatory authority (EWRA). The planned
activities under the TA does not have any activities that would require triggering for the natural
habitat policy.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                              √
The TA focus is mainly on staffing, consultancies and capacity building related to the Program
management as well as strengthening the role of the regulatory authority (EWRA). The planned
activities under the TA does not have any activities that would require triggering for the forest
policy.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                         √
TA will not include any activities related to procurement or utilization of pesticides
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                          √
TA will not include any activities related to physical cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                   √
The TA will not have any components/activities related to Indigenous peoples.

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                             √
TA will not include any activities related to involuntary resettlement
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                       √
TA will not include components related to development of new dams, existing dams nor dams
under construction, or infrastructure dependent on the performance of existing dams.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                     √
OP 7.50 is applicable to the Program as assessed in the ESSA given the nature and location of
the interventions. However, the Program and the AF fall within the exception to the riparian
notification requirement under paragraph 7 (a) since the interventions comprise an ongoing
scheme but are of a limited scale and will not adversely change the quality or quantity of water
flows to other riparian countries. Overall, the Program will positively impact the reaches of
canals and drains in the program areas. Egypt is located at the extreme downstream of the Nile
River, and the project interventions will actually improve the quality of the final reaches of the
Nile Delta.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                           √
The TA will not involve any interventions in disputed areas
Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address                                    √
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-
Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared:
   N/A

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
   ISDS:


C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A



IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Osama Hamad                                     6.28.2018
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Nina Chee                                       7.03.2018
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Carmen Nonay                                    7.03.2018
   Comments:
