Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1696 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/01/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: El Salvador 
Project ID: P083833 
Project Name: Ensuring SME Participation in International Trade 
Task Team Leader: Pablo Fajnzylber 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 23, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: April 20, 2006 
Managing Unit: LCSFR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General industry and trade sector (100%) 
Theme: Export development and competitiveness (P);Small and medium enterprise 
support (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
1.00
1.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective (PDO) is to increase the competitiveness of Salvadoran small 
and medium enterprises (SMEs) as well as of companies with strategic linkages with SMEs. The 
achievement of the PDO would be measured against the following project outcomes: (i) 
increased compliance with international quality standards and regulations; (ii) increased 
innovation and technology adoption; and (iii) increased direct and indirect exports by SMEs, the 
latter being associated with SME sales to large exporting companies.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
In order to accomplish the project development objective, there is a need for institutional reforms 
in the area of quality and innovation policy, capacity building activities at the agencies in charge 
of implementing those policies, and a change of behaviors both of the target population , SMEs 
and firms with strategic linkages to SMEs , and other relevant stakeholders of the national 
innovation system (CONACYT, INSAFORP, research institutions, financial institutions, relevant 
Ministries).  
 
Page  2
In particular, the task team proposes a project comprised of the following two components.  
 
Component 1:  Support for Policies to Improve the Regulatory and Institutional Framework for 
Enhancing Quality, Innovation and Exports. This component would assist the GOES in the 
development and implementation of a national policy to promote quality upgrading, technology 
adoption, innovation, and exports among SMEs and their strategic partners. The component 
would support changes in the regulatory and institutional framework for improving the national 
metrology, standards, testing and quality (MSTQ) system, as well as to increase the effectiveness 
of the science, technology and innovation (STI) system. The component would also fund 
investments and capacity building activities for strengthening the MSTQ and STI policy 
governing bodies and associated agencies, and would support promotion and diffusion activities 
to assure enough outreach to potential beneficiaries, as well as performance evaluations 
including stakeholder workshops to solicit feedback for improvement of program performance  
 
Component 2 : Investment Program to Promote Business Innovation. This component would 
support competitive funding lines to: (A) foster compliance with international quality standards 
and regulations, (B) promote firm level innovation and technology development, (C) implement 
supplier development and exporter consortia programs to foster direct and indirect exports by 
SMEs. The precise characteristics of the competitive funding lines to be supported and the 
institutional arrangements to manage them are expected to be defined during appraisal, using the 
Bank's experience in similar projects   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be developed in El Salvador on a national scale basis.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
No safeguards are triggered by the project so no assessment is included referred to the 
Borrower's institutional capacity for safeguard policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Judith M. Lisansky (LCSEO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  3
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/17/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No studies are required.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pablo Fajnzylber 
07/14/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
07/15/2005 
Comments:  As acting QAT coordinator,I clear this ISDS. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Michael J. Goldberg 
07/14/2005 
Comments:  As acting sector manager for Sue Goldmark, I clear this ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
