Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/21/2005 
Report No.:  AC1684
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  El Salvador 
Project ID:  P086953 
Project Name:  Land Administration II 
Task Team Leader:  Frederic de Dinechin 
GEF Focal Area: B-Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID: P092202 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 4, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: March 15, 2005 
Managing Unit:  LCSER 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (80%);Central government 
administration (10%);Sub-national government administration (5%);Law and justice 
(5%) 
Theme:  Land administration and management (P);Personal and property rights (P);Rural 
markets (P);Municipal governance and institution building (S);Legal institutions for a 
market economy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.40 
 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT - ASSOCIATED IBRD FUND 
5.00
8.40 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective of the partially blended Second Land Administration 
Project (LAP II) is to improve land tenure security and land transactions by providing 
efficient, equitable, and accessible land administration services, thereby facilitating better 
land-related investments and more productive and environmentally sustainable land use.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will have three components: (i) Strengthening of the National Protected 
Areas System (NPAS); (ii) Consolidation and management of two pilot protected areas; 
and (iii) Project Administration.  
 
Page  2
Component 1: Strengthening of the National Protected Areas System (US$6.0 Total; 
$2.0 GEF)  
 
The objective of this component is to strengthen the NPAS to enable long-term 
sustainable management. This will be achieved through the consolidation of the existing 
strategy for the System,  with the participation and inclusion of all relevant stakeholders, 
and through the development of an adequate institutional and legal framework for the 
administration and management of the NPAS. This component is divided into the 
following subcomponents:  
 
1-1: Consolidation of NPAS strategy  
 
1.2:
Strengthening of the legal and institutional frameworks  
 
1-3: Public dissemination and awareness campaign  
 
Key outputs of this component include: i) completion of a rationalization study of the 
NPAS; ii) delineation of at least 40 protected areas and mangroves; iii) approved updated 
Reglamento for the implementation of the new Protected Areas Law iv) draft inter-
institutional agreements for operating the NPAS; and v) at least 10% of national 
population aware of new protected areas law and reglamento.  
 
Component 2: Consolidation and Management of Pilot Protected Areas (US$6.5 Total; 
$2.3 GEF)  
 
The component aims to develop, test, and finalize a methodology for the consolidation 
of two pilot Protected Areas, including their delineation, demarcation, regularization, and 
to develop and implement management plans for their sustainable use. The results of this 
component will feed into the consolidation of NPAS Strategy (component 1). The 
component is divided into the following sub-components:  
 
2-1: Characterization and delineation of pilot PAs.  
 
2-2: Legalization and regularization of pilot PAs;  
 
2-3: Management plans for pilot PAs.  
 
Key outputs of this component include: i) Socio-economic study, environmental 
information, cadastre and registry for each pilot protected area linked with CNR 
database; ii) demarcation of the pilot PAs; iii) executive decrees to establish pilot PAs; 
and iv) number of beneficiaries associated with implementation of updated management 
plans for two pilot areas.  
 
Component 3: Project Administration (US$0.9 Total; $0.7 GEF)  
 
This component will focus on project management mechanisms including project 
coordination, planning, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E). The M&E system will be 
based on the existing system developed under the LAP II to coordinate and supervise the 
project. The existing system will be strengthened to include key indicators to measure 
GEF project performance. The project will finance administrative, supervision, and M&E 
costs, including M&E surveys.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project addresses the overall national protected areas system (NPAS) through 
improvements to the policy, legal and institutional frameworks for the management of the 
NPAS. Furthermore, the project supports direct investments in two pilot protected areas: 
Bahia de Jiquilisco and Lago Guija-San Diego-La Barra Complex (Lago Guija Complex.  
 
Bahia de Jiquilisco:This proposed Conservation Area (CA), a 63,000 hectare complex 
of mangroves, intertidal mudflats, estuaries, barrier islands, sandy beaches, and remnant 
humid forest patches (totaling 35,600 ha), as well as buffer zones extends along the 
Pacific coast from the mouth of the Rio Lempa to Playa El Espino. The areas biodiversity 
significance includes four species of nesting sea turtles (all globally threatened), the 
threatened Black-handed Spider Monkey (Ateles geoffroyi), and a large diversity of 
migratory birds, including abundant shorebirds and land birds. Due to its importance for 
migratory birds, the area has been nominated as a Ramsar Wetland Site. The mangroves 
and adjacent humid forest patches are bordered by intensive agriculture and several 
towns. The mangrove currently receives limited on-the-ground protection (from AECI), 
and the small remnant forest patches are supported by individual NGOs. Key threats 
include conversion of mangroves for housing, expansion of shrimp and salt ponds, 
agriculture and tourism.  
 
Lago Guija Complex: This complex of proposed natural protected areas is located in 
northwestern El Salvador along the Guatemalan border. It includes the proposed San 
Diego-La Barra National Park, comprising 1,389 ha of relatively contiguous tropical dry 
forest (the largest expanse in El Salvador), 517 ha of disturbed/early regeneration tropical 
dry forest and 11 ha of floodplain forest with an impressive egret breeding colony, as 
well as five lakes and lagoons. The proposed project would directly address the 1,917 ha 
of primary and regenerating dry forest and associated floodplain forest and wetlands. The 
lakes and lagoons could be incorporated into the managed pilot area during project 
implementation  
 
San Diego-La Barra National Park: The proposed park includes one of the largest 
expanses in Central America of Central American Tropical Dry Forest Ecoregion -- an 
area with ?Critical conservation status (the highest ranking.)  This forest area is 
surrounded by intensive agriculture, yet still reasonably well protected by the local NGO.  
 
Lago de Guija and Laguna de Metapan: The larger, multiple-use proposed NPA covers 
several freshwater bodies, including the 3,170 ha Lago Guija and smaller Laguna de 
Metapan. These lakes are of considerable biodiversity interest, harboring at least two 
globally threatened fish species, Mojarra Negra (Cichlasoma guija) and Istatagua (C. 
trimaculatum), plus numerous water birds.  
 
Key threats to the area include encroachments by farmers, agriculture-related forest 
fires, heavy fishing, invasive species (e.g. fish), pollution from agrochemicals and 
sewage.   
 
Page  4
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Elena Correa (LCSEO) 
Mr George Campos Ledec (LCSEN) 
Ms Ann Jeannette Glauber (LCSEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is classified as a Category B, requiring some type of EA but not a full-scale 
Environmental Impact Assessment. Recommendations of the project's EA are embedded 
into the project design.  
 
In accordance with OP 4.01, the project EA builds upon that done for the linked LAP II, 
which was conducted by national and international experts during 2004. Specifically, the 
PACAP EA consists of three studies: (i) an overall PA study developing 
recommendations for improving the NPAS; (ii) ecological assessments of the two pilot 
areas; and (iii) an EA of eligible project activities within the two pilot areas. The project 
design is fully consistent with the Bank?s Natural Habitats, Forests, and Cultural Property 
policies.  
 
The project is expected to have a highly positive environmental impact. If implemented 
as planned, the project would have no significant adverse environmental effects. It would 
also comply with all applicable World Bank safeguard policies.  
 
Although no involuntary resettlement would take place under the project, there might be 
increased restrictions in access to natural resources for some of the people living in, or 
adjacent to, the project pilot areas. Consequently, a Process Framework (see Annex 10C) 
has been developed by the Government to ensure that project beneficiaries receive 
appropriate consideration and assistance in their efforts to maintain or improve their 
livelihoods. Such assistance would be provided during the formulation and 
implementation of management plans for each pilot area.   
 
Page  5
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project's long-term impacts are expected to be highly positive, as it will lead to 
improvements in the management of the national park system and the consolidation of 
two pilot protected areas.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Government of El Salvador commissioned four safeguard-related studies: an EA, 
comprised of three studies (as described above), and a Social Assessment. Results from 
the EA include specific recommendations to improve the overall management of both the 
NPAS as a whole and the two pilot protected areas, as well as environmental procedures 
to be used when selecting and constructing infrastructure in the pilot areas (so as to 
minimize impact). The social assessment includes a Process Framework setting forth the 
procedures to be followed to ensure that those persons whose access to natural resources 
may be restricted as a result of the project will receive appropriate consideration and 
assistance in their efforts to maintain or improve their livelihoods.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include other agencies working in and near protected areas, such as 
MAG, ISTA, ISTU, CNR, MINTUR, CONCULTURA, municipalities, NGOs, and 
ADESCOs, as well as the local stakeholders in the two pilot areas. These stakeholders 
have been consulted through a series of workshops held at the local and national levels.  
 
In accordance with IBRD's policy on Disclosure of Information (BP 17.50), copies of 
the EA and Process Framework are available for viewing at MARN's office (Edificio 
ISTA, km 2.5 Calle a Santa Tecla, San Salvador) and on MARN's website 
(www.marn.gob.sv) and in the Bank's InfoShop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/21/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/12/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/15/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/21/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/31/2005 
 
Page  6
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/15/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
No 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
No 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
Page  7
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Frederic de Dinechin 
09/12/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ann Jeannette Glauber 
09/12/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Elena Correa 
09/12/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr George Campos Ledec 
09/12/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Abel Mejia 
09/12/2005 
Comments:   
