                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                            APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                               Report No.: 133061
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:               15-Nov-2018
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    A. Basic Project Data
    Country:                        El Salvador         Project ID:               P124935
    Project Name:                   El Salvador’s Readiness Preparation Proposal - Readiness Fund of the
                                    FCPF
    Task Team Leader(s):            Rodrigo Martínez Fernandez
    Estimated Board Date:           N/A
    Managing Unit:                  GEN04
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                No
    (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
    Financing (in USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:       2.5                        Total Bank Financing:      0.00
    Financing Gap:            0.00
        Financing Source                                                                          Amount
        Borrower                                                                                      0.00
        Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility                                      2.50
        Total                                                                                         2.50
    Environmental Category          B
    Is this a Repeater project? No
    Is this a Transferred           No
    project?
.




    B. Project Objectives

     1.       Original PDO is to assist El Salvador in the implementation of key REDD+ preparation
     activities identified in the RPP (Readiness Preparation Proposal) including: (i) Promotion of
     institutional arrangements of participatory processes, (ii) Development of ENA-REDD+, (iii)
     Establishment of a national forest emissions reference level and (iv) Establishment of a system to
     monitor greenhouse gas emissions (MRV).

     2.     AF PDO: The Additional Financing proposes to modify the original PDO to be: To
     strengthen the enabling conditions for the implementation of the National Strategy for the
     Restoration of Ecosystems and Landscapes (EN-REP).


                                                                                                           1
.
    C. Project Description

    COMPONENT 1. Consultation and Awareness Raising (USD 154,482)

    3.     The objective of this component is to strengthen governance mechanisms, project
    communication and the institutional capacities of indigenous peoples in the recognition of the rights
    and duties.

    4.      Sub-component 1.a. National Awareness Raising for EN-REP Preparedness. This subcomponent
    aims at strengthening the governance mechanism and institutional capacities, mainly the National
    Council for Environmental Sustainability and Vulnerability and Territorial Platforms (COALES,
    COMITES RAMSAR, PLAS, ROLA, the restoration table of ecosystems and landscapes CONASAV,
    The National Safeguards Committee), for which workshops and exchanges will be developed with the
    participation and support of other institutions and local municipalities.

    5.       Sub-component 1.b. Awareness Raising for Indigenous Peoples’ Rights in relation to EN-REP.
    This subcomponent will focus on the preparation of a plan to strengthen the management capacity of
    indigenous peoples and their community organizations. It includes the improvement on the knowledge
    of the rights of the indigenous peoples. For this purpose, the National Legislation on Indigenous Peoples
    and related international treaties such as ILO Convention 169 will be disseminated in communities.
    This knowledge is planned to be disseminated with public entities that deal with the demands of these
    groups and their management capacity will be strengthened.

    6.      Subcomponent 1.c. Grievance Redress and Consultation. Currently, the MARN has a Grievance
    and Redress Mechanism, however it does not include or consider implications that could occur when
    implementing restoration activities. Having one is therefore necessary to implement the 3 planned pilots
    in the territories where restoration activities are currently being conducted. The main actions to be
    developed are: strengthening of local capacities on safeguards and their compliance, identification of
    communication flows around complaints, identification of national actors’ level of involvement,
    guidance on the design of an integrated monitoring system of compliance with safeguards that is
    connected with the national grievance and redress mechanism.

    COMPONENT 2. Enabling environment for the EN-REP (USD 612,700)

    7.      The objective of this component is to strengthen further MARN’s planning and monitoring
    capacity for the development of early preparation action to address drivers of deforestation –with
    special attention to wildfires- in 15 conservation areas. The component will support MARN’s work on
    linking and harmonizing planning processes of key organizations, on continuing improving the
    dialogue with indigenous and other vulnerable communities with difficult access to urban areas, and on
    providing valuable feedback inputs for the future implementation of the EN-REP, which includes the
    design of a mechanism to support restoration activities for indigenous groups, women and vulnerable
    producers.

    8.      Subcomponent 2.a. Drivers of Deforestation and Landscape Degradation. This subcomponent
    seeks to protect forest resources of the country from major drivers of deforestation and forest
    degradation in particular wildfires. This subcomponent will help monitor deforestation and forest
    degradation activities and impacts from agriculture, mainly in the 15 Conservation Areas. Special
    attention will be devoted to the driver of wildfires, by integrating local actors to fire prevention planning
    activities that will provide valuable inputs and feedback to the National Fire Management Plan and the

                                                                                                                2
EN-REP.

9.      Specific activities to be drawn with communities include how to identify the most cost-effective
and less riskier way to prevent and address fires, and developing procedures for estimating economic
losses due to fires. It is expected that additional GEF-7 funding will complement the above-mentioned
activities by contributing to the better understanding of the economic costs of fires through the
calculation of its impacts on the degradation of forests.

10.      Subcomponent 2.b. Assessment of Potential Modalities for Marginalized Groups to Access
Funding for Restoration Activities under EN-REP. This subcomponent will support assessing and
holding workshops on the potential modalities through which marginalized groups, such as women,
Indigenous Peoples, and vulnerable producers of agricultural products. It will also provide access to
benefits/investments mechanism for indigenous peoples, women and vulnerable producers coming from
restoration activities.

COMPONENT 3. National Forests Reference Levels / National Forest Emissions (USD 150,000)

11.    The objective of this component is to complete the construction of forest carbon emissions and
removals reference levels to enable future negotiation on REDD+ initiatives that pay for the reduction
of deforestation and the sustainable management of forests.

12.      Subcomponent 3.a. Elaboration of a forest emissions reference levels, and the preparation of
the report for the FCPF and the UNFCCC. This subcomponent will finance a consultancy for the
construction of the National Forest reference levels to improve the analysis carried out by GIZ 2000,
2005, 2010 and 2015 of change in land and land use with Landsat images. An important complement
of this process will be the strengthening of local capacities for the future preparation of reference levels.

COMPONENT 4: National Forest Monitoring System (USD 964,000)

13.     The objective of this component is to implement and improve the monitoring system, as well as
to design a monitoring system for the implementation and compliance of safeguards.

14.     Subcomponent 4.a. Operationalization of the Monitoring, Reporting and Verification System.
This subcomponent seeks to adjust the operationalization of the MRV system at the sub-national and
national levels and prepare protocols for each component (carbon, co-benefits, forest management); In
parallel, it is intended to strengthen technological capabilities (software and hardware) for the operation
of the MRV system. This subcomponent includes the design of an Information System for safeguards.

15.     It is intended that any additional activity of this subcomponent and/or of component 3 that is
identified as needed will be co-financed by GIZ’ El Salvador FdV/REDD+ Landscape Program. The
GIZ has started working on deepening the 2000-2018 forest cover and land use change analyses using
a higher resolution satellite images and a 1x1 km reference systemic mesh. It is expected that this
analysis will serve as basis for the future replication of this exercise in other sites of country, and to
then be integrated into the country’s national forest monitoring system.

16.     Subcomponent 4.b. Expansion of the Measuring, Reporting and Verification System for Non-
Carbon Co-Benefits and Safeguards Management. This subcomponent will support the establishment
of a measurement, reporting and verification of non-carbon co-benefits system. Activities include the
identification of priority co-benefits, the design, development and implementation of an information
system, the development of system modules, the procurement of software, image licenses and hardware,
and the establishment of networks to define the monitoring network, optimization of the network and

                                                                                                            3
    establishment of a baseline and an indirect monitoring mechanism and field verification.

    COMPONENT 5: Administration of the Grant (USD 618,817)

     17. This component will support for coordinating and executing technical and fiduciary activities of
         the Grant.
.




    D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
    (if known)
    18.     The AF will continue financing a series of consulting services and analytical studies, as well as
    providing technical assistance to enhance institutional capacity at the national and local levels with the
    aim of enabling the government to transition from REDD+ readiness to REDD+ implementation. While
    Readiness Preparation is conceived as mostly strategic planning at this stage, it is expected that key
    policy, regulatory and institutional precedents that are being set at this phase will downstream to the
    national level and contribute with EN-REP’s implementation. The AF to the FCPF Readiness
    Preparation Grant does not entail pilot projects on the ground.
.




    E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

    19.      The MARN has carried out activities satisfactorily in the framework of the original grant,
    supporting with its own resources the necessary actions for the satisfactory execution of the programmed
    activities.

    20.     The executing agency for the additional financing will continue to be the MARN, which has
    been responsible for preparing the Readiness Package. The MARN has a technical team that has been
    strengthened during the Readiness process with the experience, systematic commitment, and support of
    a wide range of stakeholders, including the CONASAV (National Council for Environmental
    Sustainability and Vulnerability) and its Safeguards Committee (both comprising more than 60 actors
    from different sectors and levels, and promoting the participation of indigenous peoples, civil society,
    academy, private sector, women organization, etc.). Social and environmental dimensions of REDD+
    Readiness are being handled satisfactorily under the original grant, although with some lags due to
    changes in the public administration.

    21.      Institutional arrangements agreed on the continuity of the Indigenous Roundtable for the
    Environment (Mesa Nacional Indígena de Medio Ambiente), as a coordination mechanism to promote
    the ongoing dialogue on environmental issues relevant to MARN and indigenous people, and to define
    and implement action plans, strategies, or other national measures to achieve common goals associated
    with indigenous peoples, local communities in relation to peoples ' rights considered in the Plan of
    Indigenous Peoples (PLANPIES). The Mesa Nacional Indígena includes leaders representing all four
    of the indigenous communities of the country. Its members have participated in some of the REDD+
    early information sessions as well as in several of the SESA dialogue activities hosted by MARN.

    22.    The participation of the Rural Women's Collective of El Salvador, has also served as a
    coordination and dialogue mechanism. Moreover, it has provided inputs for incorporating a gender
    approach to Safeguards, SIS, SESA, ESMF and for introducing a gender focus into EN-REP.




                                                                                                             4
    23.      The analysis on the country’s legal and institutional framework concluded that the national
    legislation is robust and consistent with the World Bank's Operational Policies. These guarantees the
    development of policies, strategies, plans and adaptation of national laws to address the approach to
    climate change.

    24.     However, the EN-REP raises the need to: enforce and adjust existing forest and water sector,
    environmental protection and climate change regulations; consolidate the Ecosystem and Landscape
    Restoration Program (PREP); strengthen a program of incentives and compensation, with initial actions
    that involve not only the MARN, but other state actors, and verify processes to be strengthened to
    confirm its correct application.

    25.     The EN-REP should pay specific attention to issues of gender, forest governance, land tenure
    and social and environmental safeguards as established in the Convention.
.




    F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
    Lilian Pedersen (GSU04)
    Dora Patricia Andrade (GEN04)
.


.




II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

    Safeguard Policies                     Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
    Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01    Yes             Environmental Category continues to be B, as the
                                                           Grant will finance activities with the objective of
                                                           consolidating the documents needed for the
                                                           readiness package and of strengthening MARN’s
                                                           capacity to transition from a readiness process to
                                                           implementation.
                                                           A participatory Strategic Environmental and Social
                                                           Assessment (SESA) was conducted (currently in a
                                                           final draft form) in compliance with OP/BP 4.01, in
                                                           order to identify, avoid, and mitigate the potential
                                                           negative environmental and social impacts
                                                           associated with future activities to be supported by
                                                           the EN-REP. SESA provided key guidance and
                                                           elements for preparation of an Environmental and
                                                           Social Management Framework (ESMF and an
                                                           Integrated Pest Management Plan) (also in
                                                           advanced draft form), and for the preparation of the
                                                           Indigenous Peoples' Planning Framework, the
                                                           Resettlement Policy Framework, and the Process
                                                           Framework. All of them, have directly influenced
                                                           the final version of the EN-REP by ensuring that
                                                           social and environmental risks are factored in the
                                                           design of activities to be implemented on the
                                                           ground.
                                                           In the process of formulating the ESMF, a gap
                                                           analysis on national legislation and WB Ops was
                                                           held, which showed the need to strengthen


                                                                                                              5
                                    regulations on forestry and land tenure, fire and pest
                                    control, as well as the provisions on occupational
                                    health and safety issues that involve the forestry
                                    activities. On the other hand, the SESA process
                                    reveals the need to strengthen the institutional
                                    capacity in monitoring and supervising the
                                    application of legal regulations and mitigation
                                    measures related to the sustainable development of
                                    forests. These aspects were duly integrated in the
                                    ESMF, and in the manuals and techniques that will
                                    be used during the implementation of the Strategy;
                                    On the other hand, to reinforce the prevention of
                                    potential    environmental      impacts      in    the
                                    reconditioning activities of the weather monitoring
                                    stations network included in this additional
                                    financing, a Guide for Managing the Environmental
                                    and Social Impacts of Retrofitting Monitoring
                                    Stations of MARN was developed. The safeguard
                                    instruments must be finalized and validated through
                                    the participatory platforms and sent to ESSA for
                                    approval prior to their dissemination and official
                                    publication.



Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   This policy seeks to ensure that all options
                                    proposed in the EN-REP consider the conservation
                                    of biodiversity, and the numerous environmental
                                    services and products that natural habitats provide
                                    to society. Overall, the REDD+ activities are
                                    expected to have significant positive impacts on
                                    natural habitats, as the country puts in place an
                                    effective strategy to reduce the degradation of the
                                    environment, the ANP’s and forests areas. The
                                    SESA draft addresses issues related to natural
                                    habitats and potential impacts of the EN-REP,
                                    specifically in terms of supervision activities in the
                                    ANP and the restriction use of forest resources,
                                    which are being incorporated in the ESMF. The
                                    first pilot experience will be implemented
                                    employing 15 restoration techniques in 15
                                    Conservation areas. These techniques have its own
                                    good practices manuals that will be reviewed to
                                    align them with WB standards.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   Overall, proposed activities in the EN-REP are
                                    expected to have significant positive impacts on
                                    the country’s forests resources, to contribute to the
                                    restauration of natural resources and its services,
                                    reduce the vulnerability to climate change, and to
                                    promote the well-being of forest-dependent
                                    communities. Potential impacts of the EN-REP on
                                    natural forests have been assessed through the
                                    SESA and mitigation measures are being
                                    incorporated in the ESMF in particular strengthen
                                    monitoring and report activities and the reference


                                                                                         6
                                               to applicable EHS Guidelines on Forest Harvesting
                                               Operations; Sawmilling and Wood-based Products.
                                               which reflect the requirements of the Bank’s
                                               Operational Policy regarding forest management.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  Yes   This policy is triggered because the main driver of
                                               soil degradation identified during the SESA
                                               process was the indiscriminate use of
                                               agrochemicals in agriculture and livestock
                                               practices all over the territory. Thus, the protocol
                                               on integrated pest management has been
                                               incorporated at the ESMF per WB standards.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes   Regardless that EN-REP will not finance activities
                                               that involve alteration on physical cultural
                                               resources this policy is triggered, since during the
                                               SESA process, risks on national cultural heritage
                                               linked to implementation of some action were
                                               identified. This becomes relevant for the design
                                               and execution of proposed activities that may
                                               affect tangible or intangible heritage resources,
                                               including sacred sites for indigenous communities
                                               related to forests. To enforce this issue, on the
                                               ESMF a procedure that guarantee the identification
                                               and protection of cultural assets was included,
                                               according to national regulations and WB
                                               standards
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            Yes   The policy is triggered as there are indigenous
                                               peoples in El Salvador that meet the four criteria
                                               outlined in the policy. These populations are
                                               especially vulnerable to changes in land use or
                                               restrictions on their use. Some of the
                                               recommendations collected during the
                                               participation phase of SESA in relation to
                                               indigenous peoples are: recognition of indigenous
                                               peoples' knowledge on forms of production,
                                               systems of organization, and their Worldview and
                                               inter-relationship with ecosystems that they
                                               inhabit; to recognize and contribute to the
                                               strengthening of capacities of the organizational
                                               structures of indigenous peoples; to guarantee
                                               consultation processes with indigenous
                                               organizations; recognition of structures; creation of
                                               native seed banks; and design of benefit-access
                                               mechanisms, specific to indigenous people. IPPF is
                                               under preparation, including the potential impacts
                                               and risk of a EN-REP on indigenous peoples and
                                               measures to mitigate any impacts or maximize the
                                               benefits associated with RE EN-REP activities.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes   As there is potential for restrictions on the use of
                                               natural resources in national protected areas this
                                               policy has been triggered. While it’s not expected
                                               that measures from de EN-REP will result in
                                               people displacement, it is probable that measures
                                               could imply the displacement of economic


                                                                                                      7
                                                               activities. An assessment is being carried out as
                                                               part of the SESA process to address this kind of
                                                               impacts. A Process Framework (PF) is being
                                                               prepared as part of the ESMF draft. Additionally, a
                                                               Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) could be
                                                               prepared to provide procedures to manage impacts
                                                               in the event of potential economic displacement
                                                               and/or land acquisition resulting from the
                                                               implementation of the EN-REP.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                 No               This policy is not triggered as the AF will not
                                                               support the construction nor the rehabilitation of
                                                               dams, nor will support other investments relying
                                                               on existing dams’ services.
    Projects on International Waterways       No               This policy is not triggered as the AF will not
    OP/BP 7.50                                                 finance activities related to the use or potential
                                                               pollution of international waterways.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60     No               This policy is not triggered as the AF will not
                                                               finance activities in disputed areas as defined in
                                                               the policy.
.




III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
.




A. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
       26.     To date, the Readiness Preparation initiative has made significant progress. A broad process
       of dialogue and consultation has been conducted. Results have contributed to analyze restoration
       techniques and strategic options in the design of the EN-REP, and to analyze drivers of deforestation
       and degradation, while ensuring the participation of diverse sectors and stakeholders such as
       representatives of the sugar and coffee industry, agricultural producers, members of vulnerable
       groups, indigenous communities and local people, rural women, and small and medium scale
       agricultural producers, among others.

        27. An advanced draft of Environmental and Social Strategic Assessment (SESA), and
            Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) have been completed. Related
            frameworks (IRF, IPPF, and PF) are currently being developed. Final safeguard instruments
            will be delivered as outputs of the project at completion. An analysis of the Legal, Institutional
            and Compliance frameworks has been carried out; together with the interpretation of UNFCCC
            Safeguards and Operational Policies of the World Bank. The National Safeguard Approach
            (ENS) and Safeguards Information System have been formulated and validated.

       28.      The EN-REP clearly identifies the four main drivers of deforestation and proposes a
       foundation in five strategic options considering the harmonization of policies and laws related to land
       use, the activation of legal instruments, the national plan of fight against wildfires, and the incentives
       and compensation mechanisms that are currently being implemented through the Initiative Fund of
       the Americas (FIAES) in five ANP’s through a Local Development Plans str ategy. A forest map is
       available, and the national forest inventory is about to be completed. A national inventory of
       greenhouse gases is also available, and work is being done to establish an MRV system whose scope
       would be improved with additional financing in the new phase.



                                                                                                                    8
        29.   In a nutshell, El Salvador has advanced in the development of the following requirements
        demanded by REDD +:

         i)        The EN-REP or National REDD + Strategy has been designed and was complemented by
                   an Economic Analysis of actions for restoration of productive landscapes that has led to the
                   elaboration of a Restoration of ecosystems and landscapes Plan,
         ii)       Construction of the Reference Level (Issuance) of the National Forest, and
         iii)      An advanced approach of National Safeguards System (ENS) and Environmental, and
                   Social Management Framework (ESMF) and an Integrated Pest Management Plan have
                   been prepared, the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework, Resettlement Policy
                   Framework and Process Frameworks are in progress, that will be consolidated and validated
                   in a consultation process by December 2018.
.




IV. APPROVALS
    Task Team Leader(s):                   Name: Rodrigo Martinez Fernandez
    Approved By:
    Safeguards Advisor:                    Name: Noreen Beg                                        Date: November 13,
                                                                                                   2018
    Practice Manager/Manager:              Name: Valerie Hickey                                    Date: November 15,
                                                                                                   2018



    1
      Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
    InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
    affected persons.




                                                                                                                                   9
