                             Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)

                                                                                                 Report No: AC530
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/30/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: ERITREA                                               Project ID: P044675
Project: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM                         Task Team Leader: Marylou R. Bradley
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 8, 2004                     IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: June 29, 2004                                   IDA Amount ($m): 3.00
                                                                    IDA GRANT FOR POST-CONFLICT: 22
Managing Unit: AFTH1                                           Sector: Other social services (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)             Theme: Participation and civic engagement (P);
Status: Lending                                                Water resource management (P); Other social
                                                               protection and risk management (P); Conflict
                                                               prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (P); Other
                                                               human development (P)

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The Project's development objective is to strengthen the capacities of communities and Local Governments
to improve the delivery of sustainable, equitable, affordable, and accessible basic social and economic
services.

The Community Development Program (CDP) will build and significantly expand on the experiences and
achievements of the first ECDF Project in harnessing and sustaining local participation in the delivery of
basic social and economic services. The first project had a good track record in building physical capital,
but engaged less in the process of strengthening human and social capital at the community level. In CDP,
the investments in physical, human and social capital will be organized in a more sharply-focused CDD
framework in order to give greater control over decisions and resources to community groups and local
level institutions, including local government. One of the lessons learnt from the first project was that in
order to ensure participatory articulation of priorities from the communities, the existing organizational
arrangements and institutions must be complemented with methodologies for broad participatory
community involvement.

Following this approach, CDP will provide support to a governance structure that creates norms and
networks among community members and local institutions to facilitate collective action around common
goals, with an emphasis on participation, social inclusion, and mutual accountability. The provision of
basic social and economic services to communities, on a demand-driven basis, will be based on notional
allocations to the six regions and capacity development of communities and Local Governments so that (i)
community priorities can be integrated into Regional Development Plans, and be funded; and (ii)
communities can be mobilized to implement interventions that address their development priorities. The
regions will use information on gaps in service access in the sub-regions to target areas where Participatory
Rural Action (PRA) facilitation can be undertaken as the chosen mechanism to target resources to
underserved communities willing to partner with Government in improving services. CDP will be guided
by the current status of services delivery in Eritrea. The use of an open menu will ensure that communities
can undertake activities that provide public services, but also create opportunities for individual households
to increase their incomes.

                                                       2
                                                                                                          ISDS


Empowerment of communities and Local Governments is followed with efforts aimed at capacity building
at national, regional, and community levels so that the alignment of functions between these two actors and
national development policies can be strengthened. By incorporating communities' priorities in the
Regional Development Plan and then empowering these Local Governments to target resources to
under-served areas, the CDP will provide Local Governments with a mechanism to coordinate investments
from various sectors and thereby minimize duplication and mitigate gaps. The outcome should be
sustainable development based on mutual accountability between communities, regions, and national
ministries. This harmonization of development management procedures at the regional level and the
notional allocation of resources to the Regions, can help "prepare the ground" for implementing effective
decentralization in Eritrea. Regions will be capacitated to take over the management of contracts from the
central ECDF Management Office established under the first Project, and implementation responsibilities
will be split between communities and private contractors managed by the region. This change in
implementation and overall management has necessitated a re-alignment of institutional functions and
partnerships.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The Project includes four components, for which detailed descriptions and detailed project cost breakdown
are provided in Annex 2 and Annex 3, respectively.

Component 1: Social Economic Services (SES): This component will finance local initiatives to improve
the delivery and utilization of basic social and economic services through a community-driven development
(CDD) approach and based on communities' own identification, prioritization, implementation and
maintenance of small-scale subprojects. It will improve access, management and sustainable use of basic
social and economic infrastructure and services, improve governance, and build and improve social capital
by harnessing community participation and strengthening incentives for participatory development. The
SES component will give increasing control over decisions and resources to community groups and local
governments, contribute to organization and accountability, and ensure involvement of communities in all
stages of the subproject cycle. The SES component will be instrument in testing out and strengthening
operational modalities and participatory planning processes which will lay the foundation for fostering a
mutually reinforcing process between community development and local government development

This component operates with an open menu, empowering communities to identify their own priorities.
The use of an open menu will ensure that communities can undertake activities that provide public services,
but also create opportunities for individual households to increase their incomes. However, the SES
component will focus the bulk of its support in certain broad subproject areas that are high priorities in the
country's overall development and poverty strategies, and which are also specifically suitable for
community implementation. In view of the overall objective of improved services delivery, community
subprojects will take the form of integrated service packages, aimed at filling the gaps between existing
provisions and minimal functional standards, as defined by relevant line ministries. These packages will be
guided by the current status of services delivery in Eritrea, and concentrate on the consolidation, upgrading
and/or maintenance of existing facilities, "software" components of social and economic services; and
complementarity with other ongoing development interventions.

Broadly, subproject interventions are expected to include: (i) water and sanitation; (ii) natural resources
management and environment; (iii) income generating activities; (iv) education; (v) health; (vi) feeder
roads, and (vii) other social and economic interventions requested by the communities and compliant with
regional plans and sector norms. CDP will finance activities in accordance with the guidelines set out in
the Operational Manual. Subprojects eligible for financing will have to meet technical, financial,
economic, social and environmental criteria as described in the Operational Manual. Procedures to be

                                                        3
                                                                                                         ISDS


followed for targeting, social mobilization, facilitation, appraisal, approval, implementation and monitoring
of subprojects will also be defined in the Operational Manual and in various technical/implementation
handbooks, for use at central, regional, and community levels.

Component 2: Savings and Micro-Credit (SMC). The objective of this component is to continue
bringing banking services closer to communities in a systematic and sustainable manner. This component
will provide marginalized segments of the communities in rural and peri-urban areas who have no access to
the formal banking system with financial and non-financial services to improve their productivity and
livelihoods, while also working towards the establishment of a sustainable financial institution that is
owned and managed by communities. The provision of both financial services (i.e. savings and loans that
serve as risk management strategy) and non-financial services (business development services) can enable
poor and low-income households, small and micro entrepreneurs to save and acquire productive assets and
skills that would allow them to generate increase income, promote their financial empowerment, and reduce
their economic viability.

The SMC Component will assist the Savings and Micro Credit Program (SMCP) under the Ministry of
Local Government, to expand its outreach services through the continued provision of three loan products
based on the village banking model. This component complements key activities funded by the
Bank-financed Demobilization and Reintegration Project towards the institutional development of SMCP --
making it an autonomous institution, and the establishment of an appropriate legal structure to foster the
necessary links between community banks and the formal financial sector.

Component 3: Capacity Building (CB). The CB component aims to strengthen capacity for accountable
development management and regional governance at all levels. The emphasis will be on strengthening the
ability of and instruments available to (a) communities to demand accountability; and (b) zobas to respond
to this demand. This is a cross-cutting component to capacitate local governments, communities and other
implementing agencies in improving livelihoods in a transparent and accountable manner. In the case of
communities, the main focus of capacity building will be in the promotion of community-owned
development through bottom-up participatory planning, implementation and management of interventions.
The demand for basic services put on government by communities will stretch existing capacities at the
Regional and National levels, and resources will be provided to assist in closing capacity gaps in planning,
monitoring, and evaluation, as well as in refining norms and standards needed for efficient and effective
service provision. Informing communities of their entitlements and responsibilities, strengthening LGs in
the collection, analysis, and dissemination of information, and providing supportive supervision to
community management committees will be important activities supported under this component. This will
provide LGs with an opportunity to develop cost-effective output-based service delivery within a
decentralized framework.

The CB component includes four key elements: (i) development of strategic communications to facilitate
the effective participation of communities and other stakeholders in development projects; (ii) training of
ECDF staff, regional agencies, NGOs/CBOs, and Community Development Committees in the use of
procedures, systems and criteria developed to improve implementation; (iii) Management Information
System (MIS), including an effective decentralized Zoba-based MIS which will feed into the overall
monitoring and evaluation system; and (iv) monitoring and evaluation. Together, these elements aim to
provide an enabling environment for: (i) promoting transparency and accountability inthe management of
activities with CDP funding assistance at all levels of project management and implementation; (ii)
strengthening institutional and human resource capacities for community development, management and
regional governance, and (iii) supporting the enhancement of institutional linkages, knowledge and
information management and strategic communication systems. The CB component will put in place

                                                        4
                                                                                                           ISDS


mechanisms to monitor inputs, processes, outputs, outcomes and impacts, thus linking the Social and
Economic Services (SES) and the Savings and Micro Credit (SMC) initiatives.

Component 4: Institutional Development (ID). The ID component will support GoE's efforts to
progressively decentralize its implementation capacities to the region while retaining a critical mass of
experts at the center and in ECDF Management Office (MO) to support the regions and communities
implement development interventions. The ECDF MO's roles, functions and staffing as well as operating
systems will be revised to provide the Ministry of Local Government with the technical and supervisory
support it needs at national, regional and community levels. Lessons accumulated by the Management
Office on how to decentralize technical expertise from the center without compromising service provision
would be made available to other central ministries pursuing activities in line with the GOE
decentralization strategy. The ID component will also meet the costs of ensuring that appropriate skills are
available at national and regional levels, including an Internal Audit Unit within the ECDP.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)

Project activities will take place throughout the country. The exact location will depend on the type of
activities identified by various communities based on a participatory consultation process.

The effects of the recent war with Ethiopia coupled with the recent drought for which Eritrea is particularly
prone on a cyclical basis due to its geographic location, the effects of an already severely depleted land and
other natural resources due to unsustainable human activity and difficult mountainous terrain have together
reversed the positive gains Eritrea made during the post independence, pre-conflict period. This has resulted in
a heavy humanitarian crisis with associated critical environmental and social concerns.

For instance, in some areas, the poor have become even more vulnerable due to the compounded effects of
war, poverty and drought. Vulnerable groups include IDPs awaiting return to their original homes, farmers
with failed crop production mainly due to the drought resulting in a situation where they remain critically food
insecure and those residing in areas with a notable absence ( or distant access) of vital social and economic
services. This is further exacerbated by critically low surface or ground water sources, thereby presenting
difficult challenges for reliable water supply for human consumption and agricultural use, considering that
about eighty percent of the population live in rural areas and engage in agricultural activity to sustain
livelihoods.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: The environmental classification for this Project has been categorized as "B".


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on    for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                      Policy                                           Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                          Yes     No
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                  Yes     No
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                   Yes     No
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                     Yes     No
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                 Yes     No

                                                        5
                                                                                                           ISDS


    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                  Yes    No
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                         Yes    No
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                             Yes    No
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                  Yes    No
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                       Yes    No



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
 Activities funded by the project under the SES and SMC Components are where impacts are likely to arise
   from. Initial screening of the project activities funded under these components trigger the Environmental
   Assessment OP 4.01 and in some cases may trigger the Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12. The project
   activities, implemented through the application of CDD principles, and with very small scale multiple sub
   projects in the form of integrated service packages aimed at filling the gaps between existing provisions and
   minimal functional standards, as defined by relevant line ministries, are expected to have positive impacts.
   However when adverse impacts occur, they are expected to be local and site specific, relatively
   manageable if not completely irreversible through tangible mitigation measures.

   In compliance with the triggered OP 4.01 and OP 4.12, the adverse impacts from this project would be
   identified and mitigated through the application of the Environmental and Social Management Framework
   (ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) documents, during project implementation. With
   regards to medical waste management, the environmental checklist in the ESMF will propose tangible
   guidelines on how to safely disregard medical waste.

   With regards the other eight OPs, it is anticipated that project activities would not trigger them. For
   activities that trigger them, those sub projects would not be approved for funding under this project.

   With regards to the water sector, the Project can confirm that subprojects would be focusing on small-scale
   water harvesting, conservation activities, and small-scale community-based water subprojects only. There
   will be no activities on international water ways, rivers or tributaries. The issues of Riparian rights and the
   need for notification will therefore not arise. Therefore, OP 7.50 is also not triggered.

   With regards to OP 7.60 on Projects in Disputed Areas, the ruling of the Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary
   Commission (EEBC) to demarcate the disputed border between Eritrea and Ethiopia is binding and final on
   both parties. Decision of EEBC is to grant the disputed town of Badme to Eritrea. The Project is not
   expected to finance activities in disputed areas. Therefore, OP 7.60 is not triggered.

   Project activities triggering OP 7.50 and OP 7.60 will not be funded by the Project.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
 Cumulative impacts due to project activities will be positive because sub projects will (i) take the form of
   integrated service packages that focus on consolidation, upgrading and/or maintenance of existing facilities,
   "software" components of social and economic services, and complementarity with other ongoing

                                                        6
                                                                                                           ISDS


   development interventions; and (ii) be in the areas of provision of essential and basic social services in rural
   communities, such as the provision of schools and primary health care facilities, including related quality
   enhancing inputs, sustainable restoration and use of natural resources, water supply and sanitation
   infrastructure, and provision of savings and micro-credit opportunities to help generate rural economic
   activity geared towards raising rural incomes and improving livelihoods

   The ESMF will contain tangible measures for surveillance and monitoring of cumulative impacts that would
   also allow adjustments (feed back) to be made through the project institutional arrangements for screening
   of sub projects activities and re-designing of mitigation measures where necessary.

   The ESMF will identify potential adverse cumulative impacts arising out of construction and operation
   activities associated with the provision of these social services and provide adequate mitigation at the
   cumulative level.

   The ESMF builds and substantially expands on the experiences and lessons learned from the preceding
   ECDF project in sub project screening.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Potential long term impacts are likely to be positive as access to integrated social services by rural
communities through the SES Component and savings and income generating activities through the SMC
Component are increased.

For example, through Natural Resources Management (NRM) type sub projects, ongoing land degradation
and erosion will be reversed in some areas over time and capacity in the local communities would be built
to use sustainable measures in the future. Long-term social effects of empowering local communities could
be strengthening local democracy.

No long term adverse impacts are anticipated.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
N/A.

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) is being prepared, (i) reviewing the
project's compliance to safeguard policies; (ii) assessing the environmental and social impacts of the
expected subprojects; and (iii) presenting an environmental management procedure and tools, including
screening mechanisms to identify subprojects, and assessment forms, guidelines, and management plans to
integrate environmental considerations into each phase of the CDP subproject cycle for all category of CDP
funded subprojects. The RPF will be submitted to the Bank for review and approval, and disclosed in
Eritrea and the InfoShop, before appraisal.


II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
 CDP subprojects are identified and prioritized at community level with a preceding PRA process, then
   appraised at regional level by technical staff, including regional environmental and social staff. Community
   members will also participate through community meetings and initiatives instigated by ECDF for
   mobilization, participatory planning and decision making, capacity building activities, co-production of
   services, implementation of subprojects, participatory monitoring and evaluation, supervision of

                                                        7
                                                                                                           ISDS


   contractors, community contribution to projects costs and maintenance.

   Partner civil society organizations will participate through intermediary facilitation and co-production, and
   capacity development activities.

   Regional administrations and local government will, in conjunction with community groups and civil
   society organizations, participate through involvement in local participatory planning, appraisal, approval,
   monitoring and maintenance. Consultation with local governments, started during the preparation mission,
   will be an ongoing process.

   During the preparation of the ESMF and RPF, consultation with the local communities and potential PAP's
   will occur and the ESMF in particular will contain a consultation plan.

   Regional and central government will participate through regional and national oversight committees and
   sector policy coordination.

   As the project is implemented, consultations will gather momentum regularly as the CDD approach by
   nature will involve effective participation of local communities and potential PAP's as local development
   plans are developed and sub projects that are consistent with these plans are approved. Project success
   would primarily depend on close and effective collaboration and participation of local governments and
   local communities. Capacity would also be built at the local government and local communities level (
   including among PAP's). Details of the measures for consultation and effective participation will be
   incorporated in the ESMF, RPF, PAD, Operational Manual, including related technical handbooks, and
   checklists for sector specific interventions. The ESMF and RPF are currently being prepared and will be
   submitted to the Bank for approval and disclosure before appraisal of this project as scheduled in Section
   F. below.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
         management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
         technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
         projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
         issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                         Expected           Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               12/31/2003          Not Available
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           3/1/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            3/1/2004
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive         Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)

                                                    8
                                                                                                    ISDS



Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              12/31/2003      12/15/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          3/1/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           3/1/2004

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                     Marylou R. Bradley                                 12/09/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

Approved by:                         Name                                                Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Thomas E. Walton                                        12/22/2003
Sector Manager/Director               Dzingai B. Mutumbuka                               12/19/2003

