Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1899 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/07/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ethiopia 
Project ID: P097271 
Project Name: ET- Electricity Access Expansion (FY06) 
Task Team Leader: Philippe Charles Benoit 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 22, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 23, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
77.00
77.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project's development objective is to establish a sustainable program for expanding the 
population's access to electricity, notably in small and medium sized communities located in 
rural areas, thus supporting a broad-based economic development and helping alleviate poverty.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
This project involves US$100 million to support the next two years of GoE's electrification 
program.  The project would have the following two components:  
 
(a) Electrifying 200 rural towns ($173 Million) by extending the grid to (i) connect about 
150,000 customers in an initial 2-3 year period, with additional connections expected thereafter; 
(ii) electrify commercial and some industrial users (such as town water supply infrastructure, 
irrigation systems, schools, health centers, laboratories, and telecommunication centers); and (iii) 
provide efficient street lighting.  
 
(b) Capacity building and increased affordability (US$4 million) for electricity access 
expansion, including (i) logistical support to the EEPCo unit responsible for implementing the 
Page  2
UEAP, (ii) an analysis of barriers to connections for the poor with a view to developing 
mechanisms to overcome these barriers, (iii) study on opportunities to reduce cost of grid 
extension and connections (such as use of single phase distribution for small loads), and (iv) an 
economic analysis of the UEAP's proposed annual programs for the next several years.  This 
componentwould also involve the distribution of compact fluorescent lamps (CFLs) (US$2 
million) to poorer new customers (about 100,000) to enhance affordability given 75% expected 
efficiency gains and related benefits to the system.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will operate at various locations throughout Ethiopia, notably in rural towns and at 
locations joining rural towns to the existing electricity network.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower's institutional capacity for safeguard policies will be evaluated during project 
preparation, as part of the EA process, and will build on the Borrower's compliance under the 
ongoing Energy Acccess project, which includes a similar rural town electrification activity.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTTR) 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTS3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
It is expected that there may be some potential negative impacts arising from the physical 
works.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
It is likely that there will be some resettlement/compensation as a result of the physical 
works.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/14/2005 
 
Page  3
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An ESMF and an RPF are to be prepared by end-December. They will be disclosed prior to 
appraisal.  The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Philippe Charles Benoit 
12/02/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
12/02/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Joel J. Maweni 
12/02/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
