                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                 CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                                  Report No.: 113005


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30Jan-2017

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC                       Project ID: P160108
REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA
                                              Additional Project ID (original): P123531
Project Name: Health MDGs P4R Additional Financing
Task Team Leaders: Anne Bakilana
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 15, Estimated Board Date: April 03, 2017
2017
Managing Unit: GHN07                              Lending Instrument: Hybrid PforR with
                                                  TA IPF component
Sector: Health, Nutrition, Population

Theme: Maternal and Child Health; Reproductive Health, Nutrition, Civil Registration
and Vital Statistics

IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.): 150.00
GFF Amount (US$m.): 60.00
Power of Nutrition Amount (US$m.): 20.00
Other financing amounts by source:
Environmental Category: C
Simplified Processing              Simple [X]                      Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project      Yes [ ]                         No [X]

B. Project Objectives:

To improve the delivery and use of a comprehensive package of maternal and child health services.

C. Project Description:

PforR Program Boundary

1.    The proposed AF to the Health MDGs Program for Results (PforR) responds to the
Government’s request to continue support to the Sustainable Development Goals Performance Fund (the



                                                                                                    1
Pool Fund1) that supports the Health Sector Transformation Plan (The Sector Strategy) with a focus on
Primary Health Care Services. The Program boundary will remain the SDG Performance Fund. The AF
to the PforR will support the Pool Fund through non earmarked harmonized support to select areas of the
sector strategy using country systems. The Sector Strategy 2015-2020 is a continuation of 20 years of
Health Sector Development Programs that have provided strong guidance on key areas resulting in
consistent progress in health outcomes over the last decades. The Sector Strategy is in line with
Ethiopia’s Second Growth and Transformation Plan (GTPII 2015/16-2019/20), which sets ambitious
targets for Ethiopia to become a lower middle income country by 2025. The Sector Strategy has
translated GTP II goals into concrete directions for the improvement of coverage, quality and access to
essential health services, while enhancing implementation capacity of the health sector at all levels of the
system. The focus on quality and equity requires a shift in the status quo to drive improvements at the
national scale over the next five years.

2.       The Ethiopia Health MDG PforR Additional Financing (AF) aims to scale up development
impact through: (i) increased focus on the Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn, Child, Adolescent and
Youth Health to reduce maternal and child deaths; (ii) build the Government's capacity in key areas such
as coordination of multi-sectoral aspects of the nutrition agenda; management of key fiduciary functions;
and health economics and financing; and iii) strengthen the Government's data system including support
for the Civil Registration and Vital Statistics system. The addition of an IPF component, which will
change the pure PforR instrument into a hybrid PforR, aims to address a critical needs in capacity
building and technical assistance responding to challenges and lessons from implementation of the
original PforR.

3.        The Program for Result will track results in the following areas:

         Skilled Birth Attendance (Reduce Regional Differences): The DLI will aim to spur results for 3
regions that had the worst performance in the DHS 2016 (Afar, Somali, and Oromia).
         Maternal and Child Nutrition and Micronutrients: DLIs on nutrition have been added in
response to an intensified focus on child nutrition (stunting) and micronutrient deficiency, these are:
Growth monitoring and Promotion (GMP); percent of children receiving Vitamin A supplementation;
and Iron folate supplementation during pregnancy.
         Adolescents Health: A DLI on improving adolescent health services that includes a) developing
providers’ Training Manual on the package of Adolescent Health Services; b) Percentage of facilities
with Staff trained in provision of adolescent health services and guidelines; c) Proportion of facilities
/Primary Health Care Unit/ which provide a minimum package of adolescent health services, has been
added.
         Quality of Health Services: A DLI on readiness of facilities to provide Reproductive, Maternal,
Newborn, Child, Adolescent and Youth Health services has been added: Percent of Primary Health Care
facilities with essential drugs has been added to measure how supply chains function and results in
development and implementation of a postnatal care manual and guidelines implementation will be
measured.
         Health Care Financing: In order to support results in the roll out of Community Based Health
Insurance, a DLI on scale up of Community Based Health Insurance has been added.
         Fiduciary Management: Results in the fiduciary systems at PFSA will be tracked t ensure that
the Agency’s capacity to meet its mandate is strengthened.
         Community Participation and Engagement for Service delivery: the DLI aims to strengthen the
Federal MOH’s collaboration with the Regions in strengthening the participation of communities in
making decisions on service delivery.
1
 The Sustainable Development Goals Performance Fund (The Pool Fund) is new name for the Millennium Development Goals Performance
Fund.

                                                                                                                                   2
4.       The AF will add an IPF component (OP/BP 10.0) for a proposed total amount of US 22.00
million. The IPF will have three sub-components as follows: i) Support for Civil Registration and Vital
Statistics system at VERA (US$15 million); ii) Technical Assistance and Capacity Building to Support
NNP II (US$5 million); and iii) Unallocated amount (US$2 million) for Technical Assistance and
Capacity Building activities to be undertaken by FMOH that will be identified during the course of
implementation.

5.      Activities under the IPF component will support attainment of key results under the program,
and aim to build specific capacity in areas that were identified during the supervision of the original
program. For example, support for the CRVS agenda will strengthen the availability of quality data
including data on early marriages which is linked to issues of adolescent fertility. Capacity building and
technical assistance for financial management and procurement will address identified needs at PFSA.
The Nutrition agenda will be supported through strengthening the capacity of the FMOH to manage the
multisectoral agenda.

Summary Description of IPF Component

The IPF component will support activities under three sub-components as follows:

6.       Sub-Component 1: Support to Civil Registration and Vital Statistics (US$ 15 million): In
order to strengthen availability of quality data on births and deaths as well as registration of marriages
and divorces, this sub-component will support the CRVS agenda under the Federal Vital Event
Registration Agency (VERA). The sub-component will provide technical support and capacity building
for VERA to convert from a paper-based registration system to an electronic system. As a newly
established agency, VERA will also be supported to procure motor cycles and field vehicle to facilitate
supervision and monitoring of registration activities as well as transfer of registration document between
kebeles, woredas, and zones, regional and federal offices. In addition, the AF will support the
procurement of equipment required for storage and archiving of documents at the points of registration
to ensure that the documents are kept in a secure environment. The sub-component will also support
activities aimed at creating awareness to the general public on the importance of CRVS.

7.       Sub-Component 2: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building to Support National
Nutrition Program II (US$5 million): This sub-component will support selected capacity building
activities contributing to the implementation of NNP II, including: (i) Strengthening coordination of
multisectoral nutrition activities; (ii) Strengthening monitoring of National Nutrition Program II
implementation activities through support to improve data flow, quality, and utilization of nutrition
specific and sensitive indicators included in the National Nutrition Program II results framework; and
(iii) Operational research and evaluation, including baseline and end-line nutrition surveys. The
operational research will focus on community-based nutrition activities including social mobilization and
growth monitoring and promotion (GMP). An independent evaluation of the scale-up of community
based nutrition activities will be financed through the IPF component using baseline and end-line
surveys. This sub-component will also support Technical Assistance which will be provided by UNICEF
through a basic cooperation agreement between the Government and UNICEF. Required goods and
consulting services that will be financed under this sub-component will be detailed in a Procurement
Plan and will be procured in accordance with the requirements set forth or referred to in the Procurement
Regulations.

8.      Sub-Component 3: Unallocated for Technical Assistance and Capacity Building (US$2
million): A list of activities to be supported under the sub-component will be finalized at a later date,
following consultations between the Government and partners on anticipated support for capacity

                                                                                                        3
building. Potential areas to receive support for capacity building and technical assistance would include
financial management and procurement capacity at the Pharmaceuticals Agency; data and management
information systems including CRVS, and undertaking of facility based surveys.

9.      Environmental and Social Systems Assessment will be the primary analytical instrument that
will be used to evaluate environmental and social risks and benefits associated with the proposed
operation. The proposed TA sub-component will not support program activities that are judged to be
likely to have significant adverse impacts that are sensitive, diverse, or unprecedented on the
environment and/or affected people. This ISDS was prepared to address the TA sub-component of the
proposed operation.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

10.     The proposed TA sub-component under the Operation has no physical footprint and there will be
no adverse environmental and social risks and impacts. The TA sub-component activities do not trigger
any of the Bank’s safeguards policies.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:

11.     A series of legal proclamations form the basis for the environmental and social assessment and
management framework in Ethiopia: The Proclamation on the establishment of Environmental
Protection Organs (No. 295/2002); The Proclamation on Environmental Impact Assessment (No.
299/2002); and The Proclamation on Environmental Pollution Control (No. 300/2002). There are also
several directives in the health sector to manage potential environmental and social effects of health
related activities. These include: Healthcare Waste Management Directive No. 16/2013, Medicines
Waste Management and Disposal Directive, 2011, and Small Scale Medicine Establishment Directive
No. 26/2014.

12.     Environmental and Social System Assessment (ESSA) was conducted for the original Health
MDG PforR in 2012. Stakeholders’ consultation on the ESSA was held, and it was disclosed on the
World Bank Infoshop and in-country on December 12, 2012. An Update of the ESSA examined existing
environmental and social management systems relevant to the health sector, based on the review of the
original ESSA, and recommends actions to address any risks or challenges identified. The exercise
undertook performance assessment of the existing country systems in relation to the needs of the
proposed AF, in relation to (a) the environmental and social management systems defined in the
country’s policies, legal and strategic frameworks; and (b) the capacity and experience of the health
sector in applying the environmental and social management systems associated with the program’s
environmental and social effects.

13.     The original Health MDGs PforR has seen mixed progress on Program Action Plan on
Environmental and Social Safeguards. There is relatively good progress on the following actions: (i) All
health facilities establishing and operating infection prevention and patient services committees, and (ii)
Availing appropriate temporary storage facilities for collection of hazardous wastes until final disposal is
completed. The mid-term review (MTR) of the Health MDG PforR, in January 2016, noted that more
progress is required under these actions because the implementation of the actions is not consistent
across all health facilities, and achievements vary across regions.

14.    There are two key public institutions that are directly responsible for supporting environmental
and social compliance in the health sector: the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
(MoEFCC); the FMOH, and FVERA which have decentralized to the regional and woreda levels.

                                                                                                          4
However, lack of an effective institutional mechanism for coordination and reporting on environmental
and social safeguards in FMOH remains to be a challenge. The IPF component will address some of the
challenges by providing capacity building support for strengthening the coordination mechanism and
reporting on environmental and social safeguards.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Chukwudi H. Okafor ( GSU07 )
Tamene Tiruneh Matebe ( GSP01 )
Yalemzewud Simachew Tiruneh ( GSU01 )

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                Yes         No           TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                        X

Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                X

Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                         X

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    X

Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                     X

Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                              X

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        X

Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                  X

Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                             X

Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                      X

Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-
Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)




III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would
   be prepared: January 30, 2017.

                                                                                                   5
B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   January 30, 2017.

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing2 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: N/A


IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leaders:                            Anne Bakilana                                    February 10, 2017
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Adviser:                  Nathalie Munzberg
      Comments:
    Sector Managers:                              Trina Haque
      Comments:




2   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.

                                                                                                                                6
