Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC553 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: January 9, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ethiopia 
Project ID: P079275 
Project Name: Rural Capacity Building Project 
Task Team Leader: David J. Nielson 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 15, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: June 22, 2004 
Managing Unit: AFTS2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: Agricultural extension and research 
(70%);Vocational training (30%) 
Theme: Other rural development (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 100 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN] 
  
To increase the productivity and profitability of the agricultural sector in Ethiopia through investments 
designed to raise the human capital of farmers and improve the effectiveness of agricultural technology 
institutions and the efficiency and accessibility of agricultural markets. 
 
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN] 
 
Component 1.  Technical and Vocational Education and Training for Agriculture (TVET)
 - 
(US$30 
Million)
   
The immediate objective of the TVET component is to upgrade the skills and human capital of the young 
rural labor force – particularly in agricultural topics as many will pursue careers in farming, agribusiness, 
or related industries.  A secondary and related objective is to retrain some 15,000 existing development 
agents (DAs) while training a new batch of some 30,000 development agents.  The more general objective 
is to improve productivity in rural areas in order to generate (agricultural-led) growth and increase the 
incomes of poor farmers.  These objectives are being pursued through the establishment of schools, 
training centers, and the staff and curriculum to accompany them. 
The TVET component encompasses three sub-components:   
(i) 
Middle Level Training 
-- targeted toward students finishing 10th grade and leaving the formal 
education system as well as for existing agricultural extension staff (“development agents”).  
Twenty-five (25) agricultural “colleges” have been established for this purpose – some using 
existing facilities, others on entirely new campuses.  Construction is on-going on almost every 
campus to complete the needed facilities. The colleges (ranging from 500 to 3,000 students in 
size) will offer two years of coursework and one year of practical field-based apprenticeship in a 
range of agricultural specializations (e.g., crop science, livestock production, agricultural 
extension, horticulture, natural resource management, etc.).  Graduates of the Middle level 
Page  2
 
 
training program would be qualified to become agricultural extension agents (Development 
Agents – or D.A.s in the local terminology). 
 
(ii) 
Junior Level Training
 – targeted toward students completing the 8th grade and leaving school to 
farm or find other employment.  This training would take place in Farmer Training Centers 
(FTCs) to be constructed as part of component 2. DAs would offer 6-9 month Junior-level 
Training Courses to students who intend to farm or work in agri-business in that locality. The 
TVET programs would be used to re-train existing and new DAs for their responsibilities at the 
FTC level.  
 
 
(iii) 
Staff Training and Development
 – targeted toward the teaching staff of the agricultural 
colleges.  This component would support furthering the formal education of TVET staff, on-
going and in-service training for TVET staff, and the development of curriculum and materials 
for the training courses being offered to students by the TVET program.  
 
Component 2.  Agricultural Advisory Services - (US$75 Million) 
At present, a large agricultural extension program is active in some 15,000 sites across the country, each 
site with one Development Agent (DA).  DAs are employees of the Wareda Bureau of Agriculture and 
each DA typically serves 2 kebeles (this ratio varies, of course, across waredas and kebeles).  This 
(newly) decentralized structure is working well administratively.  It may not yet be decentralized enough, 
however, to permit a real demand-driven dynamic to emerge – this might require further decentralization 
beyond the level of the wareda.   
 
Under RCBMD, the Government intends to construct Farmer Training Centers (FTCs) at each of the 
existing 15,000 sites.  These FTCs would be constructed at some 15,000 sites across the country and   
would consist of office facilities for three D.A.s, simple meeting/classroom facilities, and several hectares 
of land for demonstration plots. Construction of most FTCs will occur on new sites, however some may 
expand on existing offices (currently all sites have at least one DA and office). Each FTC would be 
staffed with three DAs. – a livestock specialist, a crops specialist, and a natural resource management 
specialist.    The project would develop mechanisms through which the responsibility for FTCs and their 
staff would be decentralized to the most local levels possible - even perhaps to the level of the kebele.  
Further, the project would develop mechanisms through which non-public development agents could 
compete for contracts to provide agricultural extension services in the FTCs.  The FTCs would be 
developed as multi-purpose sites at which farmers would:  receive training and exposure to new 
technologies and management techniques; be able to work collectively on marketing issues such as access 
to modern inputs and collective marketing of their products.       
 
Component 3.  Agricultural Research (US$30 Million)  
 
The Agricultural Research component would improve the capacity and responsiveness of the public 
agricultural research system to the needs and priorities of farmers and agri-business. The project would: 
(a) support human resource development of federal and regional research staff; (b) strengthen federal and 
regional research programs and facilities; (c) establish institutional mechanisms to provide feedback to 
the research system on the released technologies and future priorities of farmers and agri-business; and 
(d) establish a national and regional competitive grants mechanisms to enable public and private research 
entities to compete for research funding. The project would finance recurrent expenditure, civil works for 
upgrading and maintenance of existing federal and regional research centers; procurement of goods and 
services; and long-term and short-term training to upgrade skills of federal and regional research staff.  
At present, Ethiopia has a strong federal public agricultural research institution in the Ethiopian 
Agricultural Research Organization (EARO); Alemaya University (AU) is playing an increasingly 
Page  3
 
 
effective role in human resource development for agricultural research through its post-graduate 
programs. In addition, during the last few years, “regional” agricultural research institutes have been 
established in most of the country’s “national” regional states.  Infrastructure and capacity building at 
EARO and Alemaya University are supported by successful World Bank and IFAD Credits (the 
Agricultural Research and Training Project) which will be completed in early 2005.   
The agricultural research component of the RCB would focus on enhancing the effectiveness and 
efficiency of the agricultural research activities in Ethiopia through:  
(i) 
Support to the continuation of the ongoing human resource development and capacity improvement 
program by providing opportunities for post-graduate and short-term training of agricultural scientists 
at domestic universities and “overseas”. 
 
(ii) 
Assisting additional strengthening of AU and agricultural faculties of other Ethiopian universities, 
including support for linkages with other Centers of Excellence, to provide high-quality graduate and 
post-graduate training in agricultural sciences and also to develop capacity in urgent priority areas of 
basic research. 
 
 
(iii) 
Financing an expansion in the national-level competitive grants mechanism for agricultural research 
in order to make it possible for a wide variety of institutions with research capabilities to compete for 
public support. 
 
(iv)  Financing the further development of the research programs being developed by the regional 
governments and at the federal level, including where essential improved infrastructure, equipment, 
transport and communications. 
 
(v) 
Financing competitive grant mechanisms for agricultural research at the regional levels to make them 
more responsive to local conditions. 
 
(vi)  Facilitating further strengthening of research-extension-client linkages and interaction in order to 
accelerate technology dissemination and adoption, and, importantly, improve feedback to research 
centers on the performance of developed technologies and emerging priorities. 
 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project will operate nation-wide through the TVET facilities in every region, through Farmer 
Training Centers in most kebeles, and through the presence of agricultural markets throughout the rural 
areas. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
The Government of Ethiopia is familiar with the Banks Safeguards policies, with recent experience from 
the following projects; Road Sector Development Program (II), Food Security Project and Pastoral 
Community Development Project, to list a few. 
 
Furthermore, the Government of Ethiopia has secured a PHRD grant for preparation of this project, and 
intends to apply part of this grant towards meeting its Safeguards obligation. For instance, the 
Government is preparing the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), for submission to the Bank, as required by triggered polices. ( see 
later sections). 
 
Page  4
 
 
The Ethiopia Environment Protection Authority will be involved in the project, specifically with 
reviewing documents and will play a monitoring role during project implementation. 
 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[x] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
The project will finance construction at 15,000 FTC sites and 26 TVET Colleges, which 
may result in environmental impacts that will require assessment and mitigation. 
Construction will comprise only one aspect of project components and the overall 
environmental impact of the project is likely to be minimal. All 26 TVET colleges are 
currently operational and the project will only finance construction of additional buildings. 
FTCs and demonstration plots will be constructed on a relatively small scale. An 
Environment and Social Management Framework is an appropriate instrument for 
assessing and mitigating the potential impacts associated with the project.  
[ ] 
Natural Habitats
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
The project area does not include any natural habitats.  
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management
 (
OP 4.09
) 
The project will not finance the procurement of pesticides 
directly. While students may use pesticides during the course of their training, this will be 
on an very small scale and under controlled circumstances. The ESMF should be 
sufficient to address this issue. 
 
 
 
[x] 
Involuntary Resettlement
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
Construction of FTCs and TVET colleges may result in alteration of land use and could 
conceivably result in a change in livelihoods or incomes. The Government is required to 
prepare, disclose and submit to bank, a RPF, by project appraisal. 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples
 (
OD 4.20
) 
The project will be implemented across the country on a 
non-exclusionary, community-wide basis and will not negatively impact any indigenous 
people as defined by OP 4.20. 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
The project will not be implemented in protected forest areas.  
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
The project does not involve any dams or construction of 
dams.
 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property
 (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
The project will be implemented on a 
nationwide basis and will not include areas of significant cultural value. However, the 
project may impact small communal cultural property during the construction of FTCs. 
This issue will be addressed during preparation of the ESMF. 
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
The project area does not include any 
disputed areas.   
 
 
[ ] 
Pro
j
ects on International Waterwa
y
s
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50
)
 
The 
p
ro
j
ect does not envision 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
 
 
extensive use of irrigation or other consumptive water use activities. 
 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that EA 
category (mandatory): 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would 
be prepared. 
 
The QER target date is February 22
nd
 2004. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS 
N/A. 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  The 
specific studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
The ESMF and RPF are expected from the Government of Ethiopia by the end of February, 2004. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
David J. Nielson 
Date: February 
12, 2004 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards 
Coordinator: 
Thomas Walton 
Date: February 
12, 2004 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
Date: February 
12, 2004 
Comments 
                                                          
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
 
