                                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                               APPRAISAL STAGE

                                       Date prepared/updated: April 25, 2019

           I.      Basic Information

        Basic Project Data
 Country: Ethiopia                                           Project ID: P162607
                                                             Additional Project ID: N/A
 Project Name: Renewable Energy Guarantees Program (REGREP) - Phase 1 Metehara Scaling Solar
 Task Team Leaders: Rahul Kitchlu, Arnaud Braud, Joern Huenteler
 Estimated Appraisal Date: April 25, 2019                    Estimated Board Date: May 23, 2019
 Managing Unit: GEE01                                        Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                                             Financing
 Sector: Energy
 Theme: Renewable Energy
 IDA Guarantee Amount (US$m): - 10
 Other financing amounts by source (US$m): - 120
      • Estimated Private Equity representing 25% of Project Cost - 30
      • Estimated Debt from Development Finance Institutions, representing 75% of Project Cost - 90
      • Estimated Commercial Debt, representing 0% of Project Cost - 0
 Environmental Category: B
 Is this a transferred project                               Yes [ ]                  No [✔]
 Simplified Processing                                       Simple [ ]               Repeater [ ]
 Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                Yes []       No [✔]
 Emergencies)

       Project Objectives:

1.    The Project Development Objective (PDO) for REGREP Phase 1 is to support increased renewable
energy generation capacity and diversify electricity generation resources in Ethiopia.

       Project Description:

2.      The proposed Ethiopia Renewable Energy Guarantees Program (REGREP) supports a remarkable
transition from public sector led energy sector development to private sector driven expansion of new
generation capacity – representing what could be one of the largest independent power producer (IPP)
programs in Sub-Saharan Africa. The proposed REGREP will mobilize IDA guarantees to back-stop certain
obligations of the Government for the country’s first set of competitively procured renewable energy (solar
and wind) auctions to be developed as IPPs, enabled by the 2018 Public-Private Partnership (PPP)
Proclamation. The proposed REGREP will be the first instance of IDA Guarantees being deployed in Ethiopia
and is exceptionally well aligned with the World Bank’s corporate priorities on climate change and
maximizing finance for development. Overall, the proposed REGREP could mobilize over US$ 1.5 billion in
investment for over 1,000 MW of renewable energy (solar and wind) IPPs in Ethiopia (subject to the readiness
of the IPPs as well as the guarantee coverage requested by each IPP).
3.     The REGREP is structured as Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) for IDA Guarantees, with
one front-runner solar IPP transaction (Metehara Solar IPP) supported in the first phase (REGREP Phase 1)
with three future phases over a six-year period. Structuring the REGREP as an MPA responds to the
Government’s need for long-term support to build a strong IPP program and track record of bankable
transactions to attract credible private sector sponsors and financiers. First, the MPA allows for continuity
and lessons learned to be incorporated into the process and investment framework. Second, the MPA signals
a long-term Government commitment (backed by IDA Guarantees) to the private sector to develop IPPs in a
transparent, affordable, and sustainable manner. Third, the MPA facilitates the implementation of the
ongoing power sector reform program to maximize private sector financing through a longer-term, adaptive,
and continuous engagement. Fourth, the MPA offers a more efficient and agile response to private sector
investors, further improving the attractiveness of the investments.

4.      The REGREP is designed as a World Bank Group (WBG) engagement to harness world-class solar and
wind resources in Ethiopia’s renewable energy led power system. The first phase includes one IPP, the
Metahara solar IPP (supported by USAID for advisory services), with all the WBG instruments available to the
selected sponsor. The second phase of this MPA encompasses two IPPs developed under the WBG’s Scaling
Solar initiative, supported by IFC Advisory Services as transaction advisor and offers IDA guarantee, MIGA
political risk insurance, and IFC blended finance to potential investors. The Government of Ethiopia (GoE) has
requested continued IFC Transaction Advisory Support in the development of future solar IPPs. The technical
work for site selection and pre-feasibility of wind IPPs, in collaboration with the Government of Denmark, is
ongoing and will be considered in third and fourth phases of this MPA.

5.      The program complements the ongoing Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness Programmatic
Development Policy Operation (DPO) series to sustain GoE’s ambitions and defined targets towards
economic transformation, underpinned by reforms in infrastructure sectors, including power. The power
sector reform program under the DPO series encompasses: (a) the legal and regulatory framework to attract
private sector financing from IPPs; (b) tariff reforms aiming at achieving cost recovery in the medium term:
under the approved multiyear tariff reform, the average effective tariff would increase to US$ 0.07 per kWh
by 2021; (c) institutional reforms toward unbundling of sector institutions and privatization of selected
generation assets; (d) measures to improve the operational efficiency, service delivery, and customer service
of the utilities; and (e) restructuring of the power sector utilities’ existing debt obligations. The first operation
in the DPO series was approved in 2018 and preparation of the second operation, including for the measures
on the power sector side, is well underway.

6.      The proposed REGREP Phase 1 consists of IDA guarantee support to the Metehara Solar IPP (100
MW), the most advanced of the renewable IPP transactions. The Metehara Solar IPP is expected to be
operational by 2022. Under the IPP project, an ENEL1-led consortium will be investing approximately
US$120 million in the construction of the solar PV plant. The facility will generate approximately 280 GWh
per year. This output will be sold under a 20-year PPA to EEP that covers all the energy generated by the
plant. The IPP project’s location is in the Oromia region, almost 200 km east of the capital Addis Aba ba, an
area that enjoys high levels of solar radiation. The power plant will cover an area of roughly 250 ha.




       1Enel Green Power S.p.A. is an Italian multinational renewable-energy corporation, headquartered in Rome. The company
       was formed as a subsidiary of the power generation firm Enel in December 2008, grouping its global renewable energy
       operations. As of March 2019, Enel Green Power has over 1,200 active power plants on 6 continents (Europe, North America,
       South America, Africa, Asia, Australia) and manages a total production capacity of over 42,000 MW from hydro, wind, solar,
       biomass, and geothermal (around 17,000 MW of which are owned by Enel Green Power).
7.     Procurement of the IPP was supported by U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) and
took about two years starting in 2016. USAID’s Power Africa Transactions and Reform Program (PATRP)
provided transaction advisory assistance to the GoE and EEP for the development of the Metehara Solar IPP.
PATRP supported EEP in their efforts to identify a qualified developer through a competitive bidding process
to design, construct, own, operate, maintain, generate, and sell the energy produced. The RFP was first issued
in May 2016 and revised in December 2016. The deadline for bid submission was in February 2017. The
tender attracted more than 60 bids, out of which in September 2017 five consortia were short-listed. The
bidding process has been completed and the Letter of Intent signed with the awarded consortium, led by
ENEL, in December 2018. Commercial agreements, geotechnical studies and surveys, implementation and
connection agreements, as well as relevant safeguards instruments were prepared by EEP with support from
USAID/Power Africa. Financial close is expected to be achieved by end of calendar year 2019.

Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the assessment of environmental and social
risks and impacts:

8.       Metahara town is situated about 196 km from Addis Ababa along the highway to Djibouti. The project
site is situated outside the urban town area, with its western perimeter running along the boundary between
the rural Gelcha kebele and Metehara town. The rural population is mainly composed of Karrayu Oromos,
who are predominantly agro-pastoralists. The pastoralist livelihoods have declined in recent decades due to
the expansion of irrigation farming and urban settlements combined with restrictions on livestock herding
imposed by the Awash National Park.

9.     The Metehara solar PV plant will be situated on the flat plains between Mount Fentale, a semi-
dormant volcano rising to 2,007 meters above sea level, Lake Beseka and the Metehara Sugar Estate. The
vegetation originally consisted of grassland with scattered trees but has in recent years been invaded by the
exotic Prosopis juliflora forming almost impenetrable thickets in parts of the project site. There are no
permanent water bodies within the project boundaries, but Lake Beseka is located less than 1 km to the west.
Beseka is a saline lake that has grown significantly in the past half century. The lake expansion has already
caused submergence of the old highway and is posing a risk to the nearby sugar estate and to properties at
the outskirts of Metehara town. A drainage canal has been excavated from Lake Beseka to the Awash River
in order to limit the rise in lake-water level. This canal borders the project site to the south.

10.    With the poor vegetation cover and the proximity to Metehara town, wildlife biodiversity is also low,
decreasing and stressed. While the Awash National Park is relatively close to the project site, there is no
evidence that the space is used as a migration corridor for terrestrial animals. No threatened mammals
(including bats), reptiles or amphibians were observed in the project area.

11.    Based on the updated assessment from Birdlife international data zone 2013, it is clearly pointed out
that the boundary of IBA was identical with the boundary of Awash National Park (75,240 ha). However, at
the reestablishment of the Awash National Park boundary (Regulation 329/2014) which is reduced to 59000
ha, which by default make the National Park within the IBA boundary but not the project. However, as the
project is 3.5 km away from the Awash National park, it is a borderline case to be categorized as a critical
habitat. The consultation with Ethiopian Wildlife and Natural History Society (EWNHS) informed that IBA also
marked the surrounding area out of the IBA boundary with an interest to conservation in relation with the
Park and Beseka Lake in which many species of conservation are found. Therefore, to be more comfortable
and avoid any impact on the avian biodiversity EGP is required to identify competent professionals who are
able to involve in the bird impact assessment and propose appropriate mitigation and management options.
       Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

           •    Simon Sottsas- Senior Social Development Specialist
           •    Yacob Endaylalu – Senior Environmental Specialist
           •    Samuel Lule- Social Development Specialist

        Applicable Performance Standards                     Yes                              No
        PS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and     ✔
        Social Risks and Impacts
        PS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                       ✔
        PS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention       ✔
        PS 4: Community Health, Safety, and Security             ✔
        PS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement      ✔
        PS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable          ✔
        Management of Living Natural Resources
        PS 7: Indigenous Peoples                                 ✔
        PS 8: Cultural Heritage                                  ✔


       Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
12.     Overall, as the technology is relatively simple with manageable impacts, and based on the experience
of similar projects, Therefore, this project is classified as Category ‘B’, mainly to reflect the impacts associated
with solar PV installation and operation.

13.     Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. The site is generally characterized as a bare land which is mostly
covered with the invasive and evergreen shrub species Prosopis juliflora. There are also some acacia tree
species with no concern of conservation status. Nonetheless, clearing of vegetation for the PV installations,
risks of contamination from accidental spills or improper storage/disposal of hazardous waste (including PV
panels and oils of different purpose), potential collision of birds and bats with project infrastructure, site
sensitivity in relation to the IBA boundary, encroachment of invasive species and water consumption for
cleaning of the PV panel are some of the issues.

14.    EGP’s capacity and future commitment to implement its Environmental and Social Management
System (ESMS), contractor management to their social, environmental and safety performance and
engagement with project stakeholders; assurance of fair, safe and healthy working conditions for all workers
during construction and operations; and management of community health and safety, are some of the
major issues that can be mentioned.

15.    Mitigation measure will be applied based on the national laws and regulations and international best
practices including application of OP 4.03 and implementation of ESMP based on the ESMS which will be
prepared by EGP. The project’s key social impact is expected to be: the physical and/or economic
displacement of 562 households. Results of the census enumeration and property registration surveys
revealed that a total of 38 residential houses and related structures with an approximately estimated 228
people are currently located within the project site will have to be relocated/resettled. Out of the 38
households, 8 households are physically displaced (lose only their houses) and 30 households are displaced
both physically and economically. Another 524 households will be economically displaced as they have
agricultural and/ or grazing land affected by the project activities. The census including asset inventory for
Metehara Solar PV Project was completed on April 4, 2019 and this date therefore serves as the project cut-
off date.

16.    Mitigation measure will be applied based on the national laws and regulations and WB PS
requirements. Therefore, impacted households will be provided with compensation resources with more
development-oriented investment resources to prevent or mitigate impoverishment of resettles through
creating new jobs and is improving incomes. These include livelihood restoration plan and community
development interventions.

17.     These project-affected households comply with the criteria outlined in PS7 and therefore the project
has asserted Free Prior and Informed Consent following Good-Faith Negotiation in line with the respective
requirements in this PS. Labor influx will add pressure on public services including health, water supply and
sanitation, and increases the risk of increased prevalence of HIV/AIDS, other infections/diseases, and gender-
based violence. Other potential adverse social impacts include: increased health risks for communities due
to increased dust and traffic during construction and operation periods, malaria, and water-borne diseases;
infrastructure and services due to population influx to the area and conflicts between local people and
migrants.

18.     EGP is required to develop and implement the ESMS for construction and operation of this project
suitable to its scale and meeting the requirements of applicable Ethiopian laws and WB Performance
Standards. The ESMS will include policies, plans, manuals and procedures aligned with ISO 14001. The ESMS
will incorporate the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) developed for the project as well as
aspects related to construction covered in the WBG General Environmental Health and Safety (EHS)
Guidelines. The ESMS will be updated to reflect the Equator Bank Performance Standards and the new WBG
EHSGs for the energy sector. In addition, EGP is required to perform the environmental and social
management of the suppliers and manufacturers.

       B. Disclosure Requirements

 Disclosure Requirement                                                   Date
 Environmental and Social Review Summary (ESRS):
    Dates of "in-country" disclosure                                      N/A
    Date of submission to Bank website                                    [April 24, 2019]
    For Category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary
                                                                          N/A
    of the client’s ESIA to the Executive Directors
 In-country disclosure of the above document i.e., ESRS is not expected, Because the main purpose of the ESRS
 is to provide an independent assessment of the Project’s environmental and social performance, including
 site-specific ESIA and RAP, against the WB environmental and social performance standards, requirements
 and policies.
 Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA):
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                           23 April, 2019
    Date of submission for disclosure                                     23 April,2019
    Date of "in-country" disclosure                                       24 April, 2019
    The Environment and Social Impact Assessment was prepared by Multi-consult Norge AS in association with
    Shebelle Consult PLC;
 Resettlement action plan (RAP):
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                           8 April, 2019
    Date of submission for disclosure                                     23 April, 2019
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 24 April, 2019
The RAP was prepared by EEP with support from Mid-Day Consulting.

      C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized
      by the project decision meeting)

Performance Standards
Client’s Environment and Social Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone Environmental and Social             Yes [✔] No [] N/A []
Assessment (including ESMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager            Yes [✔] No [ ] N/A []
(SM) review and approve the EA report?
Client’s Environmental and Social Management System
Has the client developed an appropriately detailed ESMS, and does           Yes [✔] No [ ] N/A []
the client have the technical and organizational capacity to
implement it?
Labor and Working Conditions
Does the client have a written human resources policy available to all      Yes [✔] No [] N/A []
employees that describes labor and working conditions?
Biodiversity and Natural Resource Management
If PS 6 is applicable, would the project result in any significant          Yes [] No [✔] N/A []
conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of     Yes [✔] No [] N/A []
other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
If the project entails use of living natural resources, has certification   Yes [] No [] N/A [✔]
been obtained or a time-bound plan established to obtain
certification?
Physical Cultural Resources
If PS 8 is applicable, does the project design include adequate             Yes [✔] No [] N/A []
measures related to physical cultural resources?
Indigenous Peoples
If PS 7 applicable, and have Indigenous Peoples communities been            Yes [✔] No [] N/A []
consulted in accordance with requirements of PS 7?
Have the requirements for Free Prior Informed Consent been met,             Yes [✔] No [] N/A []
and is there reasonable evidence of broad community support by the
affected Indigenous Peoples communities?
Involuntary Resettlement
If PS 5 is applicable, have the requirements been complied with by the      Yes [✔] No [] N/A []
client?
Pollution Prevention and Efficient Use of Resources
Does the project comply with good international industry practice as        Yes [✔] No [] N/A []
presented in the WBG EHSGs or a similar internationally recognized
benchmark?
Is the project designed for energy efficiency and waste minimization?       Yes [✔] No [] N/A []
Community Health and Safety
Has the assessment determined that local communities could face          Yes [✔] No [] N/A []
significant adverse impacts in event of an accident or emergency
situation associated with the project?
If so, has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and        Yes [✔] No [] N/A []
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified by the Bank of the project?       Yes [] No [] N/A [✔]
Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the                  Yes [] No [] N/A [✔]
international aspects of the project, including the procedures to be
followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the issue, been
prepared by the Bank?
Disclosure
If Category A or B, has the ESRS been sent to the World Bank's Info      Yes [✔] No [] N/A []
Shop?
Have relevant assessment documents prepared by the client been           Yes [✔] No [] N/A []
disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local
NGOs?
Monitoring and Reporting
Has the client agreed to submit an Annual Monitoring Report to the       Yes [✔] No [] N/A []
Bank to report on the management of environmental and social risks
and impacts, and does the Legal Agreement contain this provision?
Has the client agreed to report at least annually to local affected      Yes [✔] No [] N/A []
communities on how the project is performing with respect to
environmental and social risks and impacts of concern to those
communities?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World        Yes [✔] No [] N/A []
Bank for disclosure?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place      Yes [✔] No [] N/A []
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to
project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional               Yes [✔] No [] N/A []
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the     Yes [✔] No [] N/A []
project cost?
Does the monitoring and evaluation system of the project include the     Yes [✔] No [] N/A []
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with           Yes [✔] No [] N/A []
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?
   D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:            Name                                                  Date
Task Team Leader:                   Rahul Kitchlu – Senior Energy Specialist              23 April, 2019
Environmental Specialist:           Yacob Endaylalu – Senior Environmental Specialist     23 April, 2019
Social Development Specialist:      Simon Sottsas- Senior Social Development Specialist   23 April, 2019
                                    Samuel Lule- Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or     Selam Tarkeghn- Environment Safeguard Specialist      23 April, 2019
Social Development Specialist(s):   (Consultant)
                                    Million Legesse – Social Development Specialist
                                    (Consultant)
Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Adviser:                                                              25 April, 2019
  Comments:
Practice Manager:                                                                         25 April, 2019
  Comments:
