Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC681 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: March 8, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Europe and Central Asia 
Project ID: P086694 
Project Name: South East Europe Regional 
Energy Market (SEEREM) APL 
Task Team Leader: Kari J. Nyman 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 20, 
2004 
Estimated Board Date: December 9, 2004 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan (APL) 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Regional integration (P); 
Regulation and competition policy (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  Bernard Baratz 
Loan/Credit amount for APL1 ($m.):  
IBRD: 75 
Other financing amounts by source:  APL1 Borrowers 25 
($m) 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives 
 
The Athens process aims at creating a functioning regional energy market in South East Europe, 
covering both electricity and gas.  The proposed SEEREM APL project supports the countries of 
South East Europe and Kosovo in the implementation of their electric power sector commitments 
under the Athens process.   The World Bank may propose a separate APL program for the gas 
part of SEEREM once the proposed electricity APL program is underway.   South East Europe 
Regional Energy Market (SEEREM) is being developed for:  
 
• 
Affordable and secure power supply - to address the tightening power supply and to 
avoid power shortages and resulting slowdown of economic growth in the region; 
• 
Ultimately the integration into the European Community Internal Energy Market - 
facilitating energy trading and also EU accession of SEEREM participants  - The Athens 
Memorandum states that all SEE countries have the prospect of EU membership; and 
• 
Promotion of peace and stability in the Balkans - SEEREM is a priority program of the 
Stability Pact.    
 
The APL program would be considered successful if the countries in the region are able to fulfill 
their obligations under the Athens process and improve power supply in the region.   The 
countries will have to continue ongoing restructuring and reform measures, build up their 
Page  2
 
 
institutions and improve their power systems including interconnections so that regional trade 
can increase.   APL1 would help launch the program and provide investment support for two of 
the countries.   The key performance indicators that will be used to assess the fulfillment of the 
APL1 project’s development objectives in terms of outcomes and outputs would be developed 
accordingly.   
 
 
C.  Project Description 
 
SEEREM is a regional program and it is proposed that the Bank investment support be provided 
using the APL instrument, horizontally on a regional basis (to support up to eight countries and 
Kosovo) and vertically (each country can in principle receive support from more than one APL 
installment over the APL program period).   
 
The APL instrument, by visibly committing substantial resources and complementing activities 
supported by other donors, would help ensure the availability of adequate resources to fund 
priority investments for a functioning electricity market.    The APL instrument would enable the 
Bank to provide support in a flexible manner – when individual countries have met the policy 
triggers (mostly country criteria under the Athens process) and when individual projects are 
ready to receive Bank support.  All countries might not actually borrow under the APL program, 
some might not be able to meet the eligibility criteria within the program period and some might 
not require Bank financing.  However, countries would know up-front that they can rely on the 
Bank to support them in achieving the goals of the SEEREM if they meet specific eligibility 
criteria and if they need Bank support. 
 
The key policy and institutional elements for the APL program have been defined and 
established in the Athens process.   SEEREM is a regional program, with strong country 
commitment and with well-established coordination mechanisms at the highest political level (a 
Ministerial Council), at the level of regulators and transmission companies in the region, as well 
as among donors supporting the program, plus a the South East Europe Energy Regulation 
Forum (The Athens Forum) which brings them all together with other stakeholders.   The APL 
program will enable the Bank to provide regional financial support, yet financing can be tailored 
to the needs of individual countries to help them meet their commitments to SEEREM.   
 
The ongoing ESW 
1
 highlights that significant investments are required in power generation, 
transmission and distribution for a well-functioning power market.   The Bank would therefore 
be prepared to consider a broad range of investments for support under the APL program:  (a) the 
bulk of the projects is expected to be transmission links (lines and/or substations), system 
reinforcements and power system dispatch and communication system upgrades;  (b) in line with 
the Athens Memorandum, the Bank would also support generation plant rehabilitations in cases 
where the priority and cost-effectiveness of the renovations can be readily established.   Such 
projects offer one of the best approaches to provide ancillary services to power system operators, 
by restoring capacity and improving plant availability and ability to follow dispatch instructions 
from system operators; and (c) in power distribution, the Bank would consider support for 
                                                
 
1
  
World Bank Strategy for the Development of Regional Energy Trade in South East Europe (a 
draft report of this ongoing ESW was issued on Jan 13, 2004, for review meeting on Jan 23, 2004). 
Page  3
 
 
special programs, such as metering and/or telecommunications, which are designed to quickly 
enhance revenue realization and/or coordination and communications capabilities of distribution 
utilities so that they can more effectively participate in the regional power market.   Along with 
the investments, APL projects could finance a wide range of technical assistance, for 
institutional/systems development and project preparation and implementation.  TA needs are 
significant, particularly in the development of market operators and their systems. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The eight countries of South East Europe and Kosovo are all in principle eligible to participate in 
the SEEREM APL.   Projects for the APL1 have not yet been chosen.   It is currently expected 
that APL1 will include two projects in the following five countries – Albania, Macedonia, 
Romania, Serbia and Montenegro, and Turkey.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 
 
The Bank has supported individual countries of South East Europe in their efforts to rehabilitate 
and restructure their power sectors through policy dialogue, technical assistance and financing 
since the early 1990s (in some cases even earlier).   Substantial institutional capacity to 
implement the Bank’s safeguard policies has been developed.   Additional support will be 
provided as may be needed, based on assessments of the needs of each project and borrower. 
 
The Bank’s standard environmental requirements will apply to projects supported under the APL 
program.  An environmental management plan acceptable to the Bank would have to be finalized 
and disclosed in the country and submitted to the InfoShop prior to project appraisal of category 
B projects.   More comprehensive environmental impacts assessments would be required for 
category A projects.   Most projects to be financed under the program are expected to be 
category B projects, but some generation renovation projects might receive category A ratings.  
The APL instrument is in principle well suited to dealing with the uncertainties and delays that 
environmental management plans, assessments and consultations sometimes cause in Bank 
projects.   Unlike a regular multi-component investment project, which gets delayed if any of its 
components get delayed, under the APL program, other APL projects can proceed and only the 
one APL project that is delayed is affected.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01)   
 
An environmental management plan acceptable to the Bank would have to be 
finalized and disclosed in the country and submitted to the InfoShop prior to 
project appraisal of category B projects.   More comprehensive environmental 
impacts assessments would be required for category A projects.   Projects to be 
financed under the APL1 are expected to be category B projects.  
 
 
 
Page  4
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management
 (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples
 (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property
 (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared.     September 8, 2004 
 
B.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
2
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
An environmental management plan acceptable to the Bank would have to be finalized and 
disclosed in the country and submitted to the InfoShop prior to project appraisal of category B 
projects.   More comprehensive environmental impacts assessments would be required for 
category A projects.   Projects to be financed under the APL1 are expected to be category B 
projects.   
 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
2
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
Page  5
 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Kari J. Nyman 
March 4, 2004 
Approved by: 
  
  
 
 
Sector Manager: 
Henk Busz 
Date Approved 
March 8, 2004 
Approved 
 
