INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: AC94 1
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: August 18, 2004
I. BASIC INFOJRMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country: Gabon                           Project ID: P082812
Project Name: Pricrity Infrastructure and Local  Task Team Leader: Chantal Reliquet
Economic Develo ment
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 1, 2005  Estimated Board Date: April 5, 2005
Managing Unit: AFTU2                     Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan
Sector: General pulblic administration sector  Theme: Access to urban services for the poor
(20%);Sewerage (20%);0ther social services  (P);Infrastructure services for private sector
(20%);Sanitation (20%);Roads and highways  development (P);Municipal governance and
(20%)                                    institution building (P):Decentralization (P)
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Martha Jarosewich-Holder
Loan/Credit amournt ($m.):
IBRD: 16
Other financing amounts by source:                                     ($m)
B. Project Objectives
The proposed project development objective is to increase access by the population, especially the poor,
to basic infrastructure and services.
The project will work both (1) at the macroeconomic level, by developing the local private sector through
optimizing public investments in construction and public works; and (2) at the sector level, by improving
access to basic infrastructure through community-based upgrading of poorly-served urban areas. The
project will seek to achieve these objectives through:
> supporting the streamlining of Gabon's Public Investment Program by setting up a Priority
Investmen1 Program in Infrastructure (urban, municipal, health, and education) that could be
increasingly procured to local SMEs; and
> supporting priority urban investments involving community-based neighborhood upgrading.
The approach, which will not add a line of infrastructure works to the existing PIP, is suited to a country
where external funds only complement local public resources in the financing of the investment budget.
SMEs' involvement in public works execution will also be facilitated by a larger recourse to labor-based
technologies and appropriate procurement methods, as tested in the former LIL (Pilot Community
Infrastructure Works and Capacity Building, LN. 4387-GA): two critical factors for larger SMEs'
involvement in public works execution.
The project outputs will include: the development of local SMEs: improved access to basic infrastructure
and services by the poor; enhanced community participation at the neighborhood level; and capacity
building in the management of urban development at both the national and local/municipal levels.



C. Project Description
The Project is conceived and prepared as a key element of the forthcoming CAS. It is proposed that its
duration coincides with that of the CAS (four to five years, as suggested for the CAS). The financial
instrument proposed is either a Sector Investment Loan (SIL) or a Specific Investment Maintenance Loan
(SIML), more suited than an Adaptable Program Loan (APL) because the project will be based on the
findings of the LIL, where the concept of the operation has been identified and tested, and could
eventually develop into the core of a more comprehensive public expenditure program or a PRSC.
The Project will scale up and expand the transparent procurement methods tested under the LIL. These
methods have been labeled as -TIPPEE" because they promote enterprise development and employment
through public works (travaux d'intjrt puiblic pour lapromotioni de l'entreprise et de l'ernploi4.
On that basis, the Project will support (i) the design and preparation of a program of public works
accessible to SMEs, at the national budget level, i.e., a "national PIP-TIPPEE"'; (ii) capacity building
efforts specifically geared to enhance thie quality of preparation and implementation of "TIPPEE"
operations at the mrunicipal level; and (iii) financing of priority infrastructure and facilities accessible to
SMEs, through the "TIPPEE" methods. The contents of the three components are given below:
(a) Support to the management of the "TIPPEE" Program ($2 million):
> support to the Planning Ministry in the design., coordination, and monitoring of the
"TIPPEE" Program (technical secretariat);
> conitribution to the Project Unit's operating and training expenses;
> technical support to the Departments in charge of budget and local finances in the
implementation of the Program;
>  SIEs' training (technical, financial, and management);
>  conisultants' services (environmental, social and economic impact, monitoring and
evaluation, audits)
>  housing finance study (to be carried in collaboration with the banking sector) geared, in
part, to enhance the role of SMEs in the construction industry.
(b) Capacity building for the management of municipal "PIP-TIPPEE" ($3 million):
> information and community participation;
> support to local governments to enhance consultation/ participation on the definition of
invlestment priorities (preparation of municipal PIPs);
9 identification and feasibility studies of "TIPPEE" operations;
>  cointribution to operating costs as induced by the Project
>  training of municipal staff (managerial, technical, and financial).
(c)    Contribution to a three-year (revolving) infrastructure and equipment program accessible to
SMEs ($1 1 million):
> priority infrastructure and facilities investments as defined in the PIP of sector ministries
(primarily Health and Education);
This would include small urban infrastructure investments (secondary roads, drainage) as well as social facilities
(typically schools or classrooms, clinics) as defined in the PIP of the relevant sector ministries.
2



> secondary roads and drainage (Ministries of Public Works and Transport);
- local urban infrastructure (municipal investments, e.g. secondary and tertiary roads and
drainage, bus stations, slaughterhouses, markets, etc.) as defined in the municipal
investment programs;
>  support to the programming and implementation of micro-projects;
>  consultants' services (technical studies, monitoring and control).
D. Project location
Libreville, Port-Geritil, Franceville, and Oyem.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
Based on past experience in the previous LIL, the Borrower prepared and implemented successfully an
environmental assessment. The Bank has requested the Borrower to prepare the Environmental and
Social Management Framework as well as a Resettlement Policy Framework for the proposed project.
Based on the Bank's experiences in the previous LIL, the Bank is satisfied that the client has the requisite
skills to prepare these. Further, to ensure that the ESMF and the RPF are implemented and adhered to
throughout project implementation, the PfU will be requested to recruit and train a staff who will oversee
adherence and application of relevant safeguards. The Bank will ensure this staff receives the necessary
training to implemrent and monitor safeguard policies. This staff will benefit from training on Bank
policies.
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Applicable?  Safeguard Policy
PP________ *If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
[XI      Environmental Assessment (QP/BP 4.01)
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared, reviewed,
approved and disclosed in country and at the Infoshop prior to appraisal.
I l      Naltural Habitats (9P/BP 4.04)
I]       Pest Manaeement (OP 4.09)
[xI      Involuntary Resettlement (OP/IP 4.12)
A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared, reviewed, approved and
disclosed in country and at the Infoshop prior to appraisal.
I I      Indieenous Peoples (09 4.20)
Ill      Forests (QfIBP 4,36)
.        Sa fetv of Dams (P/BP 4.37)
lI    lCu]ltural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)
_Priects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)'
By supporting the prcposedproject, the Bank does not intend to prejudice thefinal determination oftheparties' claimns ont he
disputed areas
3



Proiects on International Waterways OP/BP/GP 7.50)
Environmental Assessment Category:
[ ] A  [X] B  j J C  [ ] FI [ J TBD (to be determined)
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that EA
category (mandatory):
III. SAFEGUARTD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would
be prepared: January,2005
B. N/A
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies: an Environmental and Social
Management Framework and a Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared at the time of pre-
appraisal (scheduled for November 2004) and disclosed prior to appraisal.
It was agreed that the project safeguards policies have been transferred to the Sector Manager.
IV. APPROVALS
Signed and submfitted by:            _-            _    .
Acting Task Team Leader:         Denise Vaudaine     G /o---           _    08/1812004
Approved by:
Regional Safeguards             Serigne Omar Fye                           08/18/2004
Coordinator:
Comments
Acting Sector M:anager:         Jaime M. Biderman              0   -       08/18/2004
Comments
4



