Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/11/2005 
Report No.:  AC1531
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Gambia, The 
Project ID:  P094281 
Project Name:  Poverty Alleviation & Municipal Development Capacity Bldg - 
Supplemental 
Task Team Leader:  Christian Diou 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 25, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2005 
Managing Unit:  AFTU2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General education sector (36%);Health (36%);General water, sanitation and 
flood protection sector (16%);Sub-national government administration (7%);Central 
government administration (5%) 
Theme:  Poverty strategy, analysis and monitoring (P);Access to urban services and 
housing (P);Other urban development (P);Municipal finance (S);Municipal governance 
and institution building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
4.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.20
0.20 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project's objective is to contribute to improved living conditions of the urban 
population, and the poor in particular: (i) Provision of public infrastructure and services 
based on demand and on fulfillment of clearly defined criteria; and: (ii) Implementation 
of a capacity building program aimed at improving the LGA's resource mobilization and 
management.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Supplemental Credit would finance:  
 
(a) Investments (US$3.25 million): The Project will finance a portfolio of the following 
six subprojects that were identified (but not implemented due to lack of funds) during the 
original Credit, and the rehabilitation of the Bakoteh dumpsite. Sub-projects that are 
proposed to be implemented under the Supplemental Credit are:  
 
(i) Upgrading of Kayupa Streeet in Serrakunda  
 
(ii) Rehabilitation of Brikama Carpark in Banjul  
Page  2
(iii) Construction of sheds for small scale enterprises in Basse  
 
(iv) Extension of water supply network in Kombo North  
 
(v) Extension of water supply in Brikama  
 
(vi) Extension of water supply in Gambissara  
 
(b) Capacity Building (US$0.25 million): The Credit will finance training activities for 
consultants, small-scale contractors and GAMWORKS staff.  
 
(c) Project administration and monitoring (US$0.50 million): The Credit would also 
finance GAMWORKS fees for this new portfolio, for an estimated amount of US$0.25 
million or 7% of the program delegated to the Agency, PCU operating costs as well as 
the cost of technical and financial audits and the final evaluation of the program.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Bakoteh dumpsite is located in Banjul, the capital city of The Gambia.  Once rehabilated, 
the landfill is aimed at serving the Greater Banjul Area (Kanifing Municipality, Banjul 
City) and Brikama.  
 
The six sub-projects proposed for the Supplemental Credit are located in Banjul, 
Kanifing, Brikama, Gambissara and Basse (in urban or suburban areas).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Ms Banumathi Setlur (ESDQC) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:  
 
The project is rated as EA category B and OP4.01 on Environmental Assessment is 
triggered.  The project will not result in any negative potential large scale significant or 
irreversible impacts.  Project intervention will result in positive impacts. Environmental 
impacts resulting from project interventions (both during construction and operation) are 
Page  3
minor and can be easily mitigated.  Any negative environmental impact as a result of the 
project are only temporary, during the construction / civil works phase such as: noise 
emission from construction vehicles; dust exhaust fumes from vehicles and equipment; 
road safety from construction vehicle movement.  On the contrary, following are some 
significant environmental impacts which currently exist in the Bakoteh dumpsite, and 
will be eliminated as a result of the Supplemental Credit: leachate from waste causing 
surface and ground water pollution; offensive odor from landfill gas emission; air 
pollution as a result of smoke from fires.  Mitigation measures are included as a matrix in 
the EMP that is contained in the EA report for Bakoteh dumpsite, dated August 2004.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP4.12) was marked as ?tbd? in the PCN stage ISDS.  
The appraisal mission confirmed that the Policy is not triggered and the project (both 
Bakoteh dumpsite component as well as the six sub-projects) will not result in land 
acquisition or involuntary resettlement, nor will result in loss of income.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area:  
 
Project interventions will not result in any negative direct or indirect long term impacts.  
Impacts resulting from completion of the project will be positive.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts.  
 
n/a   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.  
 
Environmental issues have been taken into consideration in the design of the relevant 
components of the Supplemental Credit.  The project does not involve involuntary 
resettlement or taking of land.  On the environment side, the six sub-projects have been 
screened by GAMWORKS, the Implementing Agency, and the absence of negative 
environmental impact is one of the eligibility criteria. During their implementation, the 
subprojects under the original credit were assessed according to the recommended 
environmental assessment guidelines developed by the Bank (Simplified Environmental 
Assessment) for small works carried out by Agetips and in accordance with the new 
Manual of Procedures, which was approved by the Bank in 2000.  No substantive 
changes have been made to this Manual.  The six sub-projects will be implemented 
according to the same manual of procedures and the recommendations from the 
environmental mitigation plans will be included in the final bidding documents. A guide 
for EA of Simple Projects is being finalized on the basis on an Ex-Post Environmental 
Page  4
Audit of the sub projects under the original credit and will be used for future simple sub-
projects.  The preliminary and detailed study for the improvement of the Bakoteh dump 
site includes a specific Environmental Impact Assessment and a Mitigation Plan.  The 
Bank appraisal mission reviewed the above report and minor revisions have been made.  
The report is acceptable to the Bank and will replace the existing draft reports at the 
World Bank Infoshop in Washington, as well as in The Gambia.  Additionally, the report 
was shared at a Stakeholders Forum that was held on April 26, 2005 in Banjul.The Bank 
appraisal mission confirmed that implementation of the Supplemental will not trigger the 
Involuntary Resettlement Policy.  
 
The Supplemental Credit will finance civil works at Bakoteh, for Banjul City Council 
(BCC), Kanifing Municipal Council (KMC) and Brikama Area Council.  Management of 
the landfill after completion of works is likely to be the responsibility of Kanifing 
Municipal Council (KMC) and will be decided before works are fully implemented.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.  
 
The key stakeholders include the communities living around the perimeter of the 
Bakoteh dumpsite, as well as the seasonal vegetable gardeners and scavengers.  The 
Bank?s intervention on upgrading the dumpsite to a landfill is a much-awaited and 
welcome proposition by the communities.  This dumpsite component as well as the six 
sub-projects were designed and appraised during the original credit, but were not 
implemented due to lack of funds.  The seasonal vegetable gardeners (around half a 
dozen) have agreed to willingly resort to alternative sources of income once the site is no 
longer available for gardening. The Bank?s appraisal mission consulted with some of 
them and they confirmed that they would voluntarily discontinue gardening activities in 
the landfill once works begin, and that the income generated from selling a fraction of the 
produce is not their primary source of income.  On the contrary, they stated their 
eagerness for the dumpsite to be cleaned up as their major complaints are the stench and 
smoke. They expressed their happiness stating that once the project is completed, the 
dumpsite will no longer be an eyesore.  
 
The EA report, EMP and mitigation plan has been disclosed in-country in relevant 
places that are accessible to local people, NGOs and other stakeholders.  Additionally, the 
report was reviewed at a Stakeholders Workshop which was held during the appraisal 
mission.  The workshop also addressed concerns that were raised by the participants.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/20/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/20/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/22/2005 
 
Page  5
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christian Diou 
05/11/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Banumathi Setlur 
05/11/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eustache Ouayoro 
 
Comments:   
