                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA1037
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Mar-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Mar-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Pakistan                          Project ID:    P132308
                            Project Name:      National Immunization Support Project (P132308)
                            Task Team          Robert Oelrichs
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          30-Mar-2015                       Estimated   28-May-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GHNDR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Health (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Health system performance (50%), Child health (25%), Other communicable
                                              diseases (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     170.00           Total Bank Financing:                 50.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        20.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               50.00
                              National Immunization Support Project                                                     80.00
                              Results-Based Financing                                                                   20.00
                              Total                                                                                    170.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to increase the equitable coverage of services for immunization
                           against vaccine preventable diseases (VPD), including poliomyelitis, for children between 0 and 23


                                                                       Page 1 of 6
                         months in Pakistan.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pakistan national Expanded Program on Immunization (EPI) aims to immunize all children between
                         0 and 23 months against eight vaccine preventable diseases. Children under two years of age in
                         Pakistan are to be the primary beneficiaries of NISP. In addition, children aged to 5 years are
                         targeted during Pakistan’s supplementary immunization activities (SIA) for polio and till 10 years for
                         measles. Children aged to 10 years are to be secondary beneficiaries under the project. Pakistan is
                         one of the last three countries globally in which polio is endemic. The eradication of this virus, for
                         which billions of dollars are being invested, will be heavily contingent upon an effective EPI
                         program. This project aims to strengthen EPI in Pakistan at the critical endgame stage of polio
                         eradication, and therefore its ultimate beneficiaries also include all children globally.

                         This project also focuses on building provincial level capacity for EPI implementation, while
                         supporting a limited set of competencies in coordination and reporting at the federal level. The first
                         three components take a results-based approach using Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs), while
                         the fourth finances the Federal EPI cell in national coordination, project management and analytic
                         capacities as well as Health System Strengthening (HSS) elements to catalyze the provincial
                         activities.

                         The proposed IDA Credit of US$50 million is expected to be financed through Investment Project
                         Financing, which will use a programmatic approach, focusing on results with well-defined qualitative
                         and quantitative targets for a five-year period. The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation have indicated
                         interest in financing up to US$25 million for a partial, conditional buy-down of the credit. The
                         contribution will be proportionately determined by the amount of disbursement against the same
                         DLIs. At the completion of the project, the credit would be partially bought down to the extent of the
                         total contribution – potentially cancelling the service charges and a portion of the principle and
                         thereby increasing the concessionality of the credit.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project will be co-financed with up to US$80 million grant through a Multi-Donor Trust Fund
                         with contributions, subject to their approval, from the GAVI Alliance, and potentially from other
                         development partners. In addition, US$20 million will be sought from the Health Results Innovation
                         Trust Fund (HRITF), in the second year of the project for the demand-side interventions.

                         Component 1: Strengthening Management, Governance and Stewardship Functions: This component
                         has the objective of addressing the fundamental systemic weaknesses that underlie the poor
                         performance and accountability of EPI in Pakistan: (i) Oversight, coordination and stewardship
                         functions, (ii) Robust monitoring & evaluation mechanisms, and (iii) Surveillance systems.

                         Component 2: Improving Service Delivery Performance: This component will increase equitable
                         access to EPI services at the UC level through improved planning, management of human resources
                         and strengthened supply chain management at the point of service delivery: (i) Enhanced planning
                         for performance, (ii) Availability and management of skilled human resources, (iii) Enhanced
                         planning for performance, and (iv) Availability and management of skilled human resources.

                         Component 3: Demand Generation: The objective of this component is to explore and expand
                         innovative strategies to empower communities to access immunization services and promote positive
                         behaviors for acceptance and seeking mobilization and community awareness, (ii) Conditional Cash
                         Transfer Scheme, (iii) Advocacy, and (iv) School Curriculum.


                                                                      Page 2 of 6
                         Component 4: Health Systems Strengthening: This component will support the national procurement
                         of cold rooms and ice lined refrigerators, expansion/maintenance of the vaccine logistics
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management information system, and other health systems strengthening. It will also support
                         provision of technical assistance by the World Health Organization and United Nations Children’s
                         Fund (UNICEF).

                         Component 5: Improving Capacity in Technical Areas for Increased Immunization Coverage: This
                         component will finance strengthening of national coordination, project management and analytic
                         capacities through (i) strengthening the capacity of Federal and Provincial EPI Cells, (ii)
                         support the national coordination of EPI Programs, and (iii) research and evaluation.of immunization
                         services.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented across the country.

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Javaid Afzal (GENDR)
                         Miki Terasawa (GSURR)
                         Salma Omar (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes           Inappropriate practices during vaccine administration and
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                    associated activities can potentially cause health and
                                                                   safety hazards. These include not using safe/sterilized
                                                                   syringes and needles, vaccinators not observing
                                                                   appropriate safety protocols and not disposing used
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   syringes and needles in a safe and environment-friendly
                                                                   manner. None of these impacts are however
                                                                   unprecedented and can be adequately mitigated with the
                                                                   help of appropriately designed and implemented
                                                                   mitigation and precautionary measures. Therefore, the
                                                                   project has been classified as Category B.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP     No
                          4.04
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36         No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09 No

                          Physical Cultural        No
                          Resources OP/BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/   No
                          BP 4.10
                          Involuntary Resettlement No
                          OP/BP 4.12



                                                                     Page 3 of 6
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project aims to improve childhood immunization against vaccine preventable diseases,
                              resulting in decreased prevalence of these diseases and thus having a positive impact on the public
                              health in the country. However, inappropriate practices during vaccine administration and
                              associated activities can potentially cause health and safety hazards for the vaccinators as well as
                              for children being vaccinated and also for the community at large. These include not using safe/
                              sterilized syringes and needles, vaccinators not observing appropriate safety protocols such as
                              wearing prick-proof gloves, and not disposing used syringes and needles in a safe and
                              environment-friendly manner. None of these impacts are however unprecedented and can be
                              adequately mitigated with the help of appropriately designed and implemented mitigation and
                              precautionary measures. Therefore the project has been classified as Category B in accordance
                              with the OP 4.01.

                              No land acquisition and resettlement is expected to take place. Therefore OP 4.12 is not triggered.
                              The Project supports provincial EPIs to develop province-specific advocacy plans to raise
                              awareness among beneficiary families, number of who are located in remote areas, speak local
Public Disclosure Copy




                              languages with low literacy. The plans will include production of simple pictorial posters and
                              pamphlets and dissemination strategy by engaging CSO, NGO, and private service providers.
                              This is expected to have a positive impact in reaching out to both women and men in households,
                              and marginalized and poor communities who are often unable to access health services.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              No indirect or long term adverse environmental impacts are expected to be associated with the
                              project interventions, primarily because of the distributed nature of small quantities of
                              immunization wastes to be disposed. On the other hand, a successful immunization initiative will
                              have positive and long term impacts on the key health indicators of the country. The long term
                              social impacts of the project are expected to be positive. It will contribute to a healthy society
                              unencumbered by the burden of common diseases
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              The only other alternative is ‘no-project’ option, which could have detrimental effects on the
                              childhood immunization in the country. The ‘no-project’ alternative would though avoid the
                              adverse environmental impacts associated with the immunization particularly waste disposal;
                              however, would also result in continued exposure of children to diseases that are preventable with
                              the help of appropriate and timely vaccination.



                                                                         Page 4 of 6
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           To address the potentially negative environmental impacts associated with vaccination, the GOP
Public Disclosure Copy




                           has prepared an environmental and social management plan (ESMP), in accordance with the
                           national regulatory requirements as well as World Bank OP 4.01. The ESMP identifies and
                           assesses the potentially negative environmental and social impacts of the project activities, and
                           proposes appropriate mitigation and precautionary measures, most of which are already practiced
                           by the EPI teams. It also describes institutional and monitoring mechanisms to ensure effective
                           implementation of the proposed mitigation and precautionary measures, and defines the associated
                           documentation and reporting requirements. Overall coordination and implementation of ESMP
                           will be the responsibility of National Program Manager, EPI who will designate an ESM Focal
                           Point (FP) to coordinate on his/her behalf. Provincial EPI Managers will also designate similar
                           ESM Focal Points at each province level, who will provide support to the federal level ESM FP.
                           Each partner hospital/tertiary healthcare units will also nominate a focal person to ensure
                           implementation of ESMP. The Provincial EPI Offices will ensure regular monitoring as well as
                           maintain record at the provincial hubs and tertiary healthcare units. Quarterly progress reports at
                           district, provincial, and national levels will capture the ESMP compliance of the project. Capacity
                           building for ESMP implementation will be integrated within the overall training program of the
                           EPI.

                           The federal and provincial EPI teams are well versed with most of the mitigation and
                           precautionary measures that are included in the ESMP. To ensure ESMP implementation, each
                           province will have an ESM focal point (FP), who will report to the federal level ESM FP. They
                           will coordinate additional awareness raising and capacity building for appropriate immunization
                           waste management. Capacity building will also take place to implement social aspects such as
                           Grievance Redress Mechanism and regular consultations with CSOs and other service providers.
                           An action plan and a training plan are included in the ESMP to address these capacity building
                           aspects
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Consultations have been carried out with key stakeholders, including federal and provincial EPI
                           cells, civil society organizations, and private service providers, while preparing the ESMP. Such
                           consultations will be continued during the project implementation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      18-Mar-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   27-Mar-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      ////
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Pakistan                                                         27-Mar-2015
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.


                                                                     Page 5 of 6
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Robert Oelrichs
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name:                                                 Date:
                            Practice Manager/    Name:                                                Date:
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 6 of 6
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
