INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA1037
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-May-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Jamaica                    Project ID:  P129633
Project Name: Improving Climate Data and Information Management (P129633)
Task Team       Enos E. Esikuri
Leader(s):
Estimated       04-May-2015                Estimated    24-Jul-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GENDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Public administration- Information and communications (100%)
Theme(s):       Climate change (80%), Natural disaster management (15%), Social Protection
and Labor Policy & Systems (5%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       7.48            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                    0.68
Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                6.80
Total                                                                       7.48
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project development objective is to improve the quality of climate related information for
effective planning and action at local and national levels.
3. Project Description
Component 1: Upgrading Hydro-Meteorological Data Collection, Processing and Forecasting
Page 1 of 5


﻿Systems. This component will support investments for upgrading and providing critically needed
new equipment, systems, and operator training for data collection, and processing for improved
hydro-meteorological and agro-meteorological forecasts in order to ultimately enhance the
availability and reliability of data for climate change scenario modelling, risk analysis and warning
O
U         systems, and knowledge sharing. The investments will include: (a) acquisition of sea-level
monitoring and hydro- and agro-meteorological equipment, including installation, spare parts and
training of MSJ, WRA and RADA staff; (b) replacing the outdated weather Doppler radar, including
rehabilitation of the Cooper's Hill station facility; (c) providing training and technical assistance to
improve hydro-meteorological data management and quality assurance of data collections and
processing.
Component 2: Climate Resilient Planning and Hydro-meteorological Information Services. This
component will provide technical assistance support to promote Jamaica's readiness for climate
events through: (a) updating statistically downscaled high resolution climate change scenarios to
prepare the State of Jamaica 2015 report and to develop training in sector specific climate resilient
planning based on said scenarios; (b) preparing national vulnerability assessments in selected priority
sectors; (c) preparing a detailed health sector vulnerability assessment and costed resilience
strengthening plan for climate-proofing Jamaica's health facilities and operations; (d) carrying out
community risk profiling and developing targeted early warning messaging for vulnerable groups; (e)
upgrading the multi-agency climate and natural risk data and information sharing system and
clearing-house with public access.
Component 3: Climate Change Education and Awareness towards Behavior Change. Component 3
will provide technical assistance support to (a) carrying out the climate change information,
education and communication (IECC) initiative, and (b) implementing targeted attitude and behavior
change campaigns to address climate change adaptation needs and influence behavioral change of
targeted groups, as part of the Communications Strategy Action Plan developed under the PPCR
Phase 1. Campaigns are aimed at influencing and bringing about changes in attitudes and behavioral
practices to assist targeted groups to adopt practical means of coping with severe weather events,
climate variability and climate change.
Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation. This component will provide
support to carrying out the Project, including overall technical management, financial management,
a        procurement, compliance with environmental and social safeguards, monitoring and evaluation of
data collection, supervision of works through the provision of consulting services and Operating
Costs.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project activities will be country-wide, helping to create the enabling conditions for building
climate resilience by improving the quality of climate related information throughout Jamaica.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Martin Henry Lenihan (GSURR)
Michael J. Darr (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         As the precise location of any new hydro-meteorological
Page 2 of 5


﻿Assessment OP/BP 4.01                equipment to be installed will only be known during
Project implementation, an Environmental Management
Framework (EMF) has been prepared, approved by the
Bank and disclosed by the Government as part of Project
preparation. The EMF includes an assessment of
potential impacts, screening and scoping mechanisms, and
an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) with model
contract clauses for works and activities with potential
environmental impacts.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           Impacts to natural habitat are not expected, since
4.04                                 hydromet stations (including radar) will be upgraded
using existing sites. Exclusion criteria for natural habitat
effects were included in the EMF as an additional
precaution.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           Projects activities will not include forest management or
result in changes to the utilization, or protection of any
forested areas. Therefore, this policy is not triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           The project will not support the procurement or use of
pesticides or other agricultural chemicals, or lead to the
increased use of such chemicals.
Physical Cultural       No           Effects on physical cultural resources are not expected,
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 since hydromet stations (including radar) will be upgraded
using existing sites. Exclusion criteria and a chance-find
procedure were included in the EMF as additional
precautions.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           Indigenous peoples with the four characteristics described
BP 4.10                              in the Policy are not present within the Project area.
Involuntary Resettlement No         This policy is not triggered. At most the project will only
OP/BP 4.12                           involve minor civil works associated with the installation
of weather recording equipment and refurbishment of
existing radar and tidal gauge equipment and structures.
During project preparation, the sites for project activities
were screened for potential resettlement impacts, and
none were identified.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project will not finance the construction of new, or
4.37                                 rehabilitation of existing, dams.
Projects on International  No        The project will not support activities which affect
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 international waterways as defined under the policy.
Projects in Disputed    No           The project will not be implemented in areas known to
Areas OP/BP 7.60                     involve disputed areas as defined in the policy.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Page 3 of 5


﻿Many of the activities funded are consultancy studies and technical assistance with minimal
adverse environmental impacts. Environmental concerns that may arise are related to the
installation of weather recording equipment under Component A - Upgrading Hydro-
Meteorological Data Collection, Processing and Forecasting Systems where the Project will
finance minor civil works associated with the installation of weather recording equipment and
refurbishment of existing radar and tidal gauge equipment and structures.
O
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The adverse environmental impacts associated with the small works are expected to be limited,
short lived and can either be avoided altogether through careful designs and good construction
practices, or reversed or otherwise effectively mitigated as they occur during construction by use
of environmental management plan provisions that will be attached to all works contracts.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Because the project will have minimal adverse impacts it was not necessary to consider alternative
designs, other than to prioritize the use of existing sites for hydromet station and radar upgrades.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been prepared, approved by the Bank and
disclosed by the Government as part of Project preparation. The EMF requires each sub-
component to undergo environmental screening of its location and type of activity, in order to
identify relevant environmental concerns and, as needed, to prepare environmental management
plans to be attached to all small works contracts. Exclusion criteria are also included in the EMF
to prevent effects on natural habitats or physical cultural resources. PIOJ managed the EMF
contracting and disclosure, and has extensive experience with World Bank environmental
requirements.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
During Project preparation, consultations took place with all of the implementing agencies
(generators of data and providers of information, principally WRA and MET) and the National
Environment and Planning Agency (NEPA). The EMF was disclosed and public consultations
a          held at the National Volunteer Center of the CVSS and at PIOJ. Participants included sector
representatives, community development agencies, community based groups, non-governmental
organizations, citizens of affected communities, statutory agencies of the GOJ, Parish Council, and
departments of the University of the West Indies. The final EMF was published on websites of
PIOJ, WRA and MET.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                30-Oct-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                             14-Nov-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Page 4 of 5


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Jamaica                                                  30-Oct-2014
Comments:
O
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
in the credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ x No[  NA
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X]  No[   NA
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Enos E. Esikuri
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Emilia Battaglini (PMGR)           Date: 07-May-2015
Manager:
Page 5 of 5


