Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1590 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/17/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ghana 
Project ID: P092986 
Project Name: GH-Economic Management Cap. Bldg. Proj. 
Task Team Leader: Antony Thompson 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 1, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: October 6, 2005 
Managing Unit: AFTFS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General finance sector (85%);General public administration sector (15%) 
Theme: Other financial and private sector development (P);Other public sector 
governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project aims at supporting the government to define and perform its role as a 
facilitator for economic development. The project seeks to establish a level playing field in the 
finance sector focusing upon outcomes rather than institutions, together with a clear policy to 
improve the efficiency of public sector management for an enhanced service delivery (where 
institutions respond to the incentives available to them under the project). The project, through 
support to FINSSP, will seek to catalyze the allocation of capital to Ghanaians and improve 
competitiveness and governance of long term savings institutions and markets. The project aims 
to strengthen the Public Sector Strategy through providing a framework for prioritization, 
consensus building and budgeting and to translate the strategy into detailed action plans 
supported by a thorough monitoring and evaluation mechanism. While this project might support 
future implementation of any action plan through collaboration with Development Partners, any 
more substantive engagement would be covered through a supplemental operation. As such, the 
objective of the Public Sector component would be to facilitate a reform initiative in the public 
sector which would be comparable to that achieved through FINSSP in the financial sector in 
recent years. In addition, it is proposed to design this project component with an open 
architecture to maximize the involvement of interested Development Partners (DPs).   
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project focus will be on knowledge transfer, capacity enhancement and the promotion of 
best practice on an incremental basis with the understanding that the MDBS should be the 
appropriate mechanism for the support of recurrent costs.  
 
Key potential areas aimed at improving service delivery capacity of the civil and public service 
may include: development of a professional HR framework, development of an effective 
performance related pay policy and reform of subvented agencies. However additional issues 
could be tackled, depending on the commitment of key stakeholders, including Development 
Partners.  
 
The project will also support the implementation of FINSSP in the areas of capital markets, 
improvement of financial institution legal and regulatory environment, insurance regulatory 
reform and microfinance regulation and supervision strengthening as these represent the areas of 
most need for external support.  
 
On the one side, this project will support the implementation of FINSSP in the areas of Capital 
Markets, Financial Institutions, Insurance and Credit Unions as these represent the areas of most 
need for external support. Policy related work will be supported through the PRSC and MDBS, 
while this project will focus on technical assistance, capacity building and investment within the 
FINSSP implementation process.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Major implementation tasks and agencies will be located in Accra. However certain project 
components will address issues and institutions across the country.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
No safeguard policies are triggered by this project. If the project is modified so that policies are 
triggered, a further review of borrower's institutional capacity shall be instigated.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
Page  3
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/20/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No study needed   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christopher Juan Costain 
05/16/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
05/16/2005 
Comments:  No assigned safeguards staff are required as long as the project remains as defined in the 
PCN and the ISDS. Should it later have components added that could involve 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Antony Thompson 
05/16/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
