                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                       CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                          Report No.: 105934
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:        03-Mar-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 A. Basic Project Data
 Country:                     Ghana                Project ID:               P150369
 Project Name:                Peri-urban Vegetable Value Chains for Poverty Reduction (P150369)
 Task Team Leader:            Kadir Osman Gyasi
 Estimated Board Date:        June. 25, 2016
 Managing Unit:               AFCW1
 Sector(s):                   General agriculture, (100%)
 Theme(s):                    Rural markets (60%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%), Other rural
                              development (20%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00             No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
 Financing (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:       3.655                    Total Bank (JSDF) Financing: 2.85
 Financing Gap:            0.805
     Financing Source                                                                         Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.805
     Japan Social Development Fund (JSDF)                                                         2.85
     Total                                                                                       3.655
 Environmental Category       B - Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred        No
 project?

 B. Project Objectives
 1.      to improve on the productivity and access to market by the beneficiary vegetable farmers in
 selected peri-urban communities in Ghana

 C. Project Description
 2.       The project results will be achieved through four project components: 1) Farmer Managed
 Irrigation Systems Development; 2) Farmer Capacity Development and Support to Productivity
 Improvement; 3) Improving Post-Harvest Handling and Access to Markets; and 4) Project Management,
Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge Dissemination

3.      Component 1: Farmer Managed Irrigation Systems Development (USD 720,456): The
objective of the component is to improve the existing small scale riverine irrigation systems for the
resource poor farmers in the selected farming communities which are bounded by perennial water
bodies with high potential for irrigation farming. The component will address the characteristic
seasonality of vegetable production and thus empower the resource poor farmers to improve their
productivity for increased earnings.

 4.      The component will cover the design and implementation of agriculture irrigation
infrastructure, based on the Semi-Californian technology. In particular, it will involve the construction
of a closed conduit irrigation systems all the way from the water source (tanks) to the farmers’ field. The
proposed model, unlike the open canal system which has faced challenges of over irrigation and soil
degradation, will enable farmers to have control over the water application and to also shut it off
immediately after each irrigation activity. The design will have a network of farms and perimeter roads
which will serve for tractor and other transport activities such as for push trucks. Pipes will be laid for
pond/tank filling and gravity water distribution from the ponds. This system also known as the
Semi-Califonian System has been deployed extensively in Burkina Faso with great success. The lessons
learnt from the deployment of the system in the Burkina Faso will be taken on-board while also
contextualizing the design to suit the local needs.

 5.      The component will further organized the farmers in each participating community into 2 or
more blocks of producer associations/water users (depending on the number of beneficiaries in each
community). Selected members of the Groups in each community will serve on the local project
management committee who will ensure fair field water distribution and overall responsibility for the
management of the irrigation infrastructure. The component will also develop the requisite capacity for
irrigation systems management and it will include organizational management, installation,
maintenance and repair of irrigation infrastructure etc.

 6.     The project will, at every participating community, install one Amiran Farmers Kit (AFK) to
demonstrate the technology to farmers. The AFK, which is greenhouse technology using drip irrigation,
has been proven to have high potential to improve on productivity and quality of produce and thus
increase in incomes. Due to the cost per kit vis-à-vis the cost per beneficiary however, the project will
not immediately introduce the technology on a mass scale to the farmers. It is expected however that as
the farmers profit margins increase, they will in themselves begin to invest in the technology to further
improve on their yields and hence incomes.

 7.     Project Component 2: Farmer Capacity Development and Support for Productivity
Improvement (5453,200): The aim of this component is to facilitate the adoption of modern and
improved production technologies through sustained farmer capacity development and other support
systems. The component will design and implement an intensive farmer capacity development program
to ensure that farmers have the know-how and adopt modern vegetable production and post-harvest
handling techniques to be able to improve their productivity and output. Both workshop based and field
based training including FAO’s Famer Field School approaches will be adopted for the farmer capacity
development. Training areas will include productivity improvement technologies, appropriate use of
chemicals and pesticides, agribusiness management, farm management and farm record keeping
accounting financial management, post-harvest handling etc. Relevant themes under the Ghana Good
Agricultural Practices (GHANA GAP) will be incorporated into the farmer training program.

8.      Capacity development for selected Agriculture Extension Agents (AEAs) in the beneficiary
communities who will be directly involved in field activity implementation will also be undertaken. This
is to ensure the technical know-how of the selected AEAs is upgraded to effectively provide extension
and other support services to the beneficiary farmers and communities. Depending on the number of
communities and/or farmers, between 2 to5 AEAs from each of the District Agriculture Development
Directorate of MOFA will be assigned to the project to provide extension support services to the farmers
and communities.

 9.      The grant will provide subsidized starter kits (improved seeds, fertilizers, weedicides, etc.) to
the farmer groups to help accelerate technology adoption and increase productivity. Each beneficiary
will receive start kit worth approximately US$70. Input Suppliers will be invited through a competitive
tendering based on criteria to be detailed in the bidding document. Supplier’s Profile, Legal Status,
Experience in execution of similar assignments and financial standing would be critically assessed to
assure prompt delivery. At the end of the growing season, the farmers will be required to repay the cost
of items supplied to them. The repayment amount will be agreed upon by the participating farmer groups
and the information relayed to the Vegetable Warehousing Centre (The end buyer of farmers produce)
who will make deductions at source before payment to the individual farmers is effected.

10.     Component 3: Improving Post-Harvest Handling and Market Access:(US$2,020,080): The
project grant will support farmers to enter into productive partnership arrangements with agriculture
entrepreneurs to establish and operate a Farmer Cooperative Vegetable Warehousing Systems with cold
storage, cleaning, packaging and labeling facilities. The Warehousing System which will be equipped
with refrigerated and cold chain transport system will be an essential off-take facility that guarantees
ready high value markets for the farmers’ produce. Multi-year supply-purchase agreements between the
farmer groups and the Warehousing Center will be facilitated and this will be supported with capacity
development for better understanding and adherence to the basic tenants and guiding principles of such
systems.

11.    The inclusion of the productive partnership entrepreneurs (B-Bovid Limited and Eden Tree
Limited) are for strategic reasons. These private enterprises are already well established in the market
and have market linkages with supermarkets and restaurants as well as the farmers. They will in addition
bring on board their managerial experience to enhance efficiency in the management of the
Warehousing System.

 12.     The farmer groups becoming shareholders in the Warehousing Systems is expected to
contribute to reducing and/or mitigating the risk of produce side-selling. It is also to enable the farmers
earn additional income to cater for the repair and maintenances of the irrigation infrastructure to be
established by project grant. As the profit margins of the Warehousing System improves and farmers
earn more income, they can use the additional incomes towards GLOBALGAP Certification to ensure
they have the competitive advantage on local vegetables market.

 13.     The ownership arrangement will be such that the farmer groups will have 37% shareholding
while the B-Bovid Ltd and Eden Tree Limited will together hold 63% equity shares. Profits accruing to
the farmers groups from their shareholdings will be paid into an dedicated account managed by the
executive of the farmer groups, of which withdrawals will be made as to when required to maintain the
irrigation infrastructure and to support such activities as the procurement of inputs for the farmers.

14.    The component will specifically co-finance i) the procurement of Vegetable Warehousing
Systems Equipment; and ii) training of technician operators.
 Component 4: Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge Dissemination and Project Management and
 Administration (147,580):
 15.    This component would support all activities necessary to ensure that the project is implemented
in accordance with the project implementation manual. This component will: (i) finance the incremental
expenses incurred by the Government in implementing the project and finance various monitoring and
evaluation roles.

Sub-Component A. Monitoring and Evaluation and Knowledge Dissemination

 16.     The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system will be in line with the implementation structure
and results measuring framework for the MESTASIP. A dedicated M&E team will put together to
ensure effective and timely monitoring of progress towards achieving the development objective as set
out in the Results Framework. The grant proposal will conduct a baseline survey on key parameters
within three to six months of project inception. This will form basis for monitoring of progress and
achievement of results. An independent evaluation will be conducted at the end of the project to capture
project achievements, experiences and lessons learnt for future guidance. Project Implementation
Progress reports will be generated quarterly which will be consolidated into annual reports to be shared
with all project stakeholders. The project will document the methodologies and processes,
achievements, experiences and lessons learnt and circulated it widely including the websites of MOFA,
the World Bank, JSDF and other project partners.

Sub-Component B. Project Management and Administration

 17.    The ministry of Food and Agriculture will establish a project office at the Crops Services
Directorate. A Senior Officer of the Directorate will be assigned to coordinate the day-to-day
administrative activities of the project. There will be a Project Steering Committee (PSC) comprising
the Directors of Crops Services Directorate, Directorate of Agriculture Extension Services, Women in
Agriculture Development Directorate, Ghana Irrigation Development Authority, Agriculture
Engineering Services Directorate of the Ministry as well as collaborating agencies i.e. Food and Drugs
Authority and Crops Research Institute. The PSC will meet semi-annually and will serve to provide the
overall policy direction to the project.

 18.     At the decentralized level, the District Agriculture Development Unit of the participating
communities will be responsible for field level implementation of activities and will provide agriculture
extension services, training and other support services to the beneficiary farmers. 2-5 AEAs and
Agriculture Officers in each of the District, depending on the number of farmers in a particular district,
will be assigned to provide required support services to the farmers. Staff (including the Regional Crops
Officer, Regional Extension Officer, Regional Engineering Officer etc.) from the Regional Directorates
of Agriculture in the Greater Accra, Eastern, Volta, Central and Western Regions will from time to
undertake backstopping and supervisory visits to farmers and communities under their respective
jurisdictions.


D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The proposed project will be implemented in The Greater Accra, Western and Volta regions of Ghana.
The planned irrigation infrastructure (in Volta region and Greater Accra) are all located in areas
downstream the dam although they would not be drawing water from the Volta river/dam. Water sources
for the pump irrigation systems are smaller streams within lower levels of the basin. The other two in the
Western region are going to be dugouts in lowlands. The interventions are taking place in communal
 lands already being cropped by the beneficiary farmers using traditional farmer managed irrigation
 systems including shallow wells and small motorized pumps. No lands will be acquired for the irrigation
 infrastructure but the existing informal irrigation systems would be remodeled into the semi-Californian
 type being practiced in Burkina Faso. Water would be pumped into tanks and released by gravity onto
 the irrigation perimeter through pressurized pipes, instead of open canals.

 E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
 The Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MoFA) has a formal set up that focusses on environmental and
 social (including gender) issues (Land and Water Management Department, and the Women and
 Agriculture Department (WIAD). The Land and Water Management Department usually collaborates
 with the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to implement environmental and social issues of the
 Ministry’s programs and projects. Moreover, the coordination Unit of the Ghana component of the West
 Africa Agricultural Productivity Program (WAAPP) which is going to coordination of the proposed
 grant support as well as the Ghana Commercial Agriculture Project (housed in the same building as
 WAAPP) have environmental and social safeguards teams who are expected to oversee the
 implementation of the ESMP. The institutional capacity for implementation of the safeguards is
 substantial but further support in environmental and social safeguards monitoring will be provided by
 the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

 F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

 Isabel Abreu (GEN01 )
 Demba Balde (GSU01)


II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY


 Safeguard Policies                      Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/BP          Yes             The project will support existing agricultural
 4.01                                                    production, and new marketing activities. The
                                                         possible use of production inputs as well as
                                                         construction of one or two warehouses may
                                                         generated adverse impacts which however are
                                                         expected to local and can be mitigated. An
                                                         ESMF will be prepared by appraisal.
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04             No              The project is not expected to impact on
                                                         natural habitats.
 Forests OP/BP 4.36                      No              The project is not related to forestry not
                                                         expected to impact on forests.
 Pest Management OP 4.09                 Yes             The project will support agricultural
                                                         production and marketing activities and the
                                                         possible use of production inputs (including
                                                         pesticides) triggers OP 4.09; a pest
                                                         management framework will be prepared by
                                                         appraisal.
 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP       No              The project is not expected to impact on
 4.11                                                physical cultural resources.
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         No            There are no indigenous peoples in the
                                                     project area.
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12   Yes           The project will support the development of
                                                     riverine irrigation systems (using pumps) on
                                                     existing agricultural land. The construction of
                                                     one or two warehouses (the location of which
                                                     is not yet known) may require some land
                                                     acquisition, but is unlikely that the project will
                                                     lead to physical displacement.
                                                     The GoG has been consistently committed to
                                                     addressing social and environmental
                                                     safeguards issues in previous operations in
                                                     agriculture and infrastructure. A resettlement
                                                     policy framework (RPF) will be prepared
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37             No            Dams will not be constructed, nor will the
                                                     project rely on dams. Semi-Californian
                                                     irrigation systems (taking sources from
                                                     streams downstream existing dams) and
                                                     dugouts, using pumps will be promoted.
 Projects on International Waterways   No            The project intervention areas exclude
 OP/BP 7.50                                          areas with water bodies that are
                                                     international waterways
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No            The project is not located in a disputed
                                                     area.

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A.   Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS:
     27-Feb-2015
B.   Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
     The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
     January - March 2015

IV. APPROVALS
 Task Team Leader:             Name: Kadir Osman Gyasi
 Approved By:
 Regional Safeguards           Name: Maman-Sani Issa                       Date: 05/15/2016
 Coordinator:
 Practice Manager/Manager:     Name: Simeon Ehui                           Date: 05/15/2016
1
  Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.
