INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: AC644
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: March 11, 2004
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country: Ghana                            Project ID: P085006
Project Name: Ghana - The Micro, Small and  Task Team Leader: Leila Webster
Medium Enterprise Project
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 12, 2004    Estimated Board Date: August 15, 2004
Managing Unit: AFTPS                      Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan
Sector: Micro- and SME finance (80%); Law  Theme: Small and Medium Enterprise Support
and Justice (20%)                         (P); Regulation and Competition policy (S)
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:
Loan/Credit amount ($26.5m.):
IFC: 15.0
IDA: 26.5
Govt of Ghana: 3.0
Total                                                             $44.5 million
B.     Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN]
1.     The proposed Project would support the Ghanaian government's objective of accelerating poverty
reduction by furthering sustainable, equitable economic growth. More specifically, this Project will: (i)
increase MSME access to medium term finance and to sustainable microfinance services; (ii) promote the
competitiveness of selected industries, including enhancing linkages and know-how transfer between
large businesses and SMEs and working within high potential value chains to alleviate critical bottlenecks
identified through careful supply chain analysis; (iii) deepen markets for business development services
needed by MSMEs but in short supply; and (iv) promote a conducive business environment for domestic
and foreign investment.
C.     Project Description [from section 4 of PCN]
2.     A summary of project components follows. Each builds on lessons learned from Bank Group
experience in Ghana and globally, as well as from the experience of others, namely: (i) adoption of a
commercial, market-based approach that focuses on stimulating demand and building capacity of mainly
private sector financial and non-financial services providers has strong potential to create sustainable
uptake of services for significant numbers of MSMEs; (ii) utilization of performance agreements with
partner service providers promotes commercial, results-based outcomes to project-funded activities; (iii)
addressing the full complement of services needed by SMEs, as well as an improved business
environment, has greater impact than focusing on a single area; (iv) a focus on resolving specific supply
chain bottlenecks can achieve high impact at the firm level because inputs are more targeted and tangible;
and (v) an impact assessment framework developed from inception of the project is important to measure
results and prompt mid-stream corrections.
(i)    Access to Finance Component (IDA $10.5 million and IFC indicative $7.5 million) will
focus on expanding access to short-term micro finance for micro enterprises and longer-term
finance for SMEs by: (i) transferring innovative MSME lending models and technologies,



2
systems, and skills to selected microfinance institutions (likely including several rural credit
unions with strong track records) that are ready to formalize their operations, expand into rural
areas, or upscale their products and services to include small enterprises; and to a small number
of carefully selected commercial banks that are committed to downscaling their services to reach
greater numbers of SMEs; and (ii) supporting establishment of a public-private equity fund that
will leverage IDA funds and engage private and institutional investors in the provision of risk
capital investments (mix of debt and equity) as well as provide technical assistance to investee
companies. IFC is now processing its investment in this Fund, and details will be available
pending Board consideration expected in April.  Additionally, the project could support
expansion of private micro leasing and a private sector credit reference bureau. Where feasible,
IFC would undertake supporting investments.
(ii)   Linkages and Subsector Development Component (IDA $6.0 million and IFC
indicative $7.5 million). The linkages work will involve building capacity of current and
potential SME suppliers and distributors of large firms (where feasible, IFC-invested), mainly
through provision of training, consulting and information services that would increase the value
or decrease the production costs of SME inputs but possibly also involving some financial
assistance as needed and feasible. In addition, a particular linkage program could involve support
for community-based, enterprise development programming of interest to a lead firm that would
co-finance this kind of initiative. Sectors that would likely be involved would build upon
APDF's current linkage work and could include agro-processing, mining, handicrafts, and
garment and textiles.
The subsector work would be grounded in careful analysis of industry value chains that would
pinpoint critical bottlenecks that can be alleviated or reduced by provision of targeted services.
Selection of industries for assistance would be based on their having demonstrated capacity for
strong growth, especially in export markets, and on the feasibility of the intervention, e.g., this
Project would not attempt to alleviate an infrastructure problem but would be well positioned to
address problems with technical skills.
(iii)  Business Development Services Component (IDA    $6.5 million) also would be
grounded in careful analysis of both demand and supply for needed services. Experience shows
that, besides ensuring that potential demand by MSMEs is well understood (and at times,
incentivized), programs should also build capacity among local service providers to deliver a
greater quantity of appropriate, affordable services. These could include general and technical
training, consulting, technology transfer, legal and information services. Initiatives could include
piloting and scaling up a BDS voucher program, a consultant development and accreditation
program, localization of an SME toolkit, and entrepreneurship development. The demand for
such services and the feasibility of this Project taking a hand in increasing the supply of them
would be explored further during project preparation.
(iv)   Investment Climate Component (Govt. of Ghana $3.0 million, IDA $1.0 million). This
component would include initiatives to: (i) reduce the time and cost of obtaining business
registration and licenses (probably in partnership with DANIDA's Business Sector Program
Support (BSPS); (ii) improve the regulatory framework for non-bank financial institutions; (iii)
develop the institutional capacity of selected business membership associations in the areas of
research and policy advocacy; and (iv) build institutional capacity of the Ministry of Private
Sector Development and Ministry of Trade, Industry and Presidential Special Initiatives to
engage in public/private partnerships in support of MSME development.
(v)    Implementation and Monitoring Component (IDA $2.5 million) to cover financing
requirements for the execution, reporting, review and monitoring of project components and
independent evaluations of selected issues.



3
D.     Implementation Arrangements
1.     A joint public/private steering committee with key government representatives and individuals
selected from the private sector will provide strategic guidance and address major problems affecting
project implementation. A selected Ministry will serve as the Government's executing agency, with
project oversight and monitoring/evaluation responsibilities. The Project Management Unit will be a
private sector firm, competitively selected, to oversee overall project implementation whether
subcontracted out or directly implemented by the PMU. These implementation arrangements still need to
be discussed at some length with the Government.
(i)    Project location (if known). The proposed program is assumed to be national in scope,
and any regional considerations would be examined during the pre-appraisal mission.
E.     Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies. We can expect that this capacity
should be significant, given the long history of donor programming in Ghana. The pre-appraisal mission
will gather more information on this point.
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policy
Applicable?  If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
[N I         Environmental Assessment (QP/BP 4.01)
[N I         Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
[N I         Pest Management (OP 4.09)
IM I         Involuntarv Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
[N           I Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)
[N           F Forests (2P/BP 4.36)
[N l         Safetv of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)
[N ]         Cultural Propertv (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)
[N]          Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/_P/GP 7.60)
[N ]         Proiects on International Waterways P/BP/(,P 7.50)
E.     Environmental Assessment Category:
[ ] A  []B  [X] C  [ ] FI [ ] TBD (to be determined)
4.       Although the project is not expected to present any specific environmental risk, IDA funds may
finance services for firms whose operations could have adverse environmental impact. In assessing
potential beneficiary financial and business service providers, the PMI will review the environmental
screening mechanisms of the applicants. Once service providers are selected as beneficiaries under this
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the disputed areas.



4
project, the PMU will make recommendations to build the their environmental screening and verification
capacity, and ability to support and provide technical advise on relevant environmental aspects o f their
clients' businesses and to link them with the appropriate Ministry and/or environmental protection agency.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
(a) Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would
be prepared. Target date is early to mid-May.
(b) For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS.
N/A
(c) Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The
specific studies and their timing' should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. N/A
IV. APPROVALS
Signed and submitted by:                          g   
|Task Team Leader:                Leila Webster(X    N()6t                  3/11/2004      l
Approved by:C)                                            e      1/      _
Regional Safeguards              ThomasWalton             4J                Date
Coordinator:                                      G
Comments
Sector Manager:                  DembaBa      7541     LKt\_                Date3//i/i
Comments
I Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ni) in-
country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.



