Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1671 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/06/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ghana 
Project ID: P074191 
Project Name: Ghana: Energy Development and Access Project 
Task Team Leader: Subramaniam V. Iyer 
GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID: P070970 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 14, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: July 18, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
80.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
70.00
80.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objectives for Ghana are to: (i) improve the transmission and distribution 
networks to enhance reliability and efficiency of power to existing customers;(ii) provide 
increased access to affordable, reliable and adequate electricity; and (iii) improve the efficiency 
and security of fuels such as LPG, wood, and charcoal.  
 
Global Objective: The Project will contribute to mitigating climate change through the 
reduction of greenhouse gas emissions in line with the United Nations Framework Convention 
on Climate Change and its Kyoto Protocol, to which Ghana is a Party (GEF OP 5 and 6).  
Moreover, the efficiency enhancing measures in the transmission and distribution sector are 
likely to generate additional greenhouse gas emission reductions for which carbon finance may 
be claimed.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The proposed project targets three key areas in Ghana's energy sector: transmission, distribution, 
and rural access. The aim of interventions in the transmission sector is to increase the reliability 
of the system.  Investments in the distribution sector will reduce system losses, increase overall 
efficiency of and strengthen the distribution network, and thereby improve ECG's financial 
position. The rural access component will provide increased access to electricity and improved 
efficiency and security of fuels.  
 
Component 1: Transmission. This component will be implemented by VRA.  The main thrust 
of this component is to reduce transmission losses and to enhance the reliability of supply. The 
transmissions network is currently also benefiting from a number of investments to be 
undertaken under a new regional World Bank project in the context of the WAPP, which are 
mainly in the area of transmission.  
 
Component 2: Distribution. This component will be implemented by ECG, and will build on the 
ongoing work under the Distribution System Upgrading Project(DSUP), which is part of the 
Thermal power Project (P000926).  Key investments focus on the improvement of energy service 
quality and resulting financial flows - rehabilitating the existing networks, enhancing the quality 
of service delivery, loss reduction measures and enhanced commercial capability.  
 
Component 3: Rural Access.  This component is proposed to be implemented by a Project 
Management Unit, initially under the Ministry of Energy. The component would complement the 
Government's efforts to achieve its electrification goals. This component would also support 
promotion of efficiency and security of fuels such as LPG, wood, and charcoal.  
 
Component 4: Capacity Building. Capacity building efforts will complement the efforts of the 
government to establish and operate robust, sustainable energy sector institutions and carry out 
informed policy making.  
 
Financing needs. The total project cost is estimated to be about US$160 million.  IDA funding 
of approximately US$80 million is potentially available.  It is expected that the GEF would 
contribute about US$7 million to the project in support of its policies on removal of barriers for 
renewable energy sources and energy efficiency.  This leaves a funding gap of approximately 
US$73 million.  Additional bilateral assistance will be sought.  If at appraisal the financing of the 
entire program should not be secured, the team will follow a strategy of scaling down program 
components.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project covers the entire country.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower is very experienced in following and implementing Bank Safeguard Policies. Both 
VRA and ECG dispose of specialized environmental departments. This capacity was proven 
again for the energy sector only recently for the West African Power Pool Project (P070970), 
which was approved by the World Bank Board on June 30, 2005. Moreover, a stringent 
environmental certifications process exists, which is administered by Ghana's Environmental 
Protection Agency. This is why this Project has been selected as a potential pilot for the use of 
Page  3
Ghana's environmental and social safeguards systems to meet the objectives of Bank safeguards 
policies as per OP/BP 4.00 of March 21, 2005.  If the results of the equivalence and acceptability 
assessments required by OP/BP 4.00 (and now in progress) are favorable, at least the 
environmental assessment and possibly all of the safeguards work for the preparation of this 
project will be carried out according to Ghanaian regulations and procedures.  As required under 
OP4. 00, the intent to use the country system will be disclosed in the Project's PID.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (AFTSD) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Significant impacts are unlikely, but subprojects will need to be screened for potential 
impacts, and the appropriate environmental management instrument prepared.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The proposed transmission line extension and certain other subprojects such as mini-hydro 
will need to be examined to determine whether any natural habitat conversion would occur.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
Since the specific sub-projects are yet to be identified, Cultural Property Impacts are not 
known at this point.  The framework will have provisions to identify impacts and prepare 
mitigation measures.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Land may be acquired for the transmission line extension ROW and for new substations.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
If dams are constructed for mini-hydro schemes, this policy requires that the design be 
certified by a qualified engineer.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/15/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
This project will involve the preparation of two frameworks: (i) an Environmental and Social 
Impact Management Framework (ESMF) to provide for screening, environmental analysis as 
necessary, and application of appropriate impact management instruments to subprojects; and 
(ii) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to guide the preparation of any resettlement 
action plans or compensation plans that may be needed.  Subject to confirmation by the 
equivalence and acceptability assessments to be completed in December, the ESMF will be 
prepared under Ghanaian regulations as provided for in OP/BP 4.00.  Whether the RPF can 
also be prepared using the country systems or must conform to OP 4.12 is less clear at this 
stage but will also be determined by December. The frameworks will be completed and 
disclosed prior to appraisal. Safeguards responsibility is not being transferred to the sector 
unit, because of the need for ASPEN to be actively engaged in country systems pilots.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
11/14/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
11/15/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Joel J. Maweni 
11/14/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
