Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC898 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/20/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Guatemala 
Project ID: P089898 
Project Name: EDUCATION QUALITY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION 
Task Team Leader: Joel E. Reyes 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 15, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 30, 2006 
Managing Unit: LCSHE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Secondary education (40%);Primary education (36%);Central government 
administration (10%);Sub-national government administration (10%);Other social 
services (4%) 
Theme: Education for all (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Indigenous peoples 
(P);Decentralization (S);Gender (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
80.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Objective of the Education Quality and Secondary Education Project is to improve primary 
education completion rates and increase access to a quality lower secondary education, for 
indigenous and non-indigenous low income students.  This should be achieved through: (i) 
improved primary education quality and efficiency; (ii) improved access to a quality lower 
secondary education through alternative, cost-effective, and appropriate modalities in rural and 
marginal urban areas; and (iii) consolidation of education management modernization and 
decentralization.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Preliminary project description. The proposed Project will support three inter-related 
components within a result-based design:  
 
Page  2
Component 1. Quality and Efficiency for Primary Education will support special strategies to 
increase promotion, retention and completion of primary education (especially focused on over-
age students), while contributing to quality Teacher Training and Development.  
 
A.1. Accelerated Primary Education Programs for Overage Students. Over 25% of students 
(300,000) from 3rd to 6th grade are at least two years overage for their grade?and they are at-risk 
of dropping out before completing primary education.  The subcomponent will support these 
students through three strategies: (i) accelerated primary school programs for students age 13-18, 
including flexible promotion and counseling on school retention; (ii) scholarships for low income 
students conditioned on completing 6th grade and enrolling in 7th grade; and (iii) strategic 
alliances with NGOs for alternative programs to finalize primary education and enroll in 7th 
grade.  
 
A.2. 
Teacher Training and Development Reform will support the reform of the system for pre-
service and in-service training of primary education teachers.  In-service training is provided at 
the upper secondary level. At present, in-service teachers do not have the minimum level of 
pedagogical competencies and subject-knowledge. The proposed pre-service training reform 
includes an upgraded curricula and program of studies?with two additional years of post-
secondary education?to be accredited at the university level (including experiential training in 
the classroom).  In-service training reform will include an integrated and incentive-based system 
for testing and development of pedagogical and subject knowledge.  
 
Component 2. Access and Quality of Lower Secondary Education will support integrated 
strategies to increase the access to, and quality of, lower secondary education (grades 7-9).  It 
will include pertinent supply and demand programs, targeted to indigenous and non-indigenous 
low-income students and regions.  
 
B.1 
Flexible delivery modalities to support secondary education completion will finance 
increased access in grades 7-9 through a variety of quality and pertinence-certified provision 
modalities: Guate-Telesecundaria, SAT (Sistema de Aprendizaje Tutorial), and N?cleos 
Familiares de Educaci?n, NUFED.  SAT and NUFED provide applied-learning methodologies in 
rural and cultural-appropriate context.  These service modalities are supported through various 
management models: (i) community-based (PRONADE), (iii) cooperative-based (tri-partite 
financing: Community-Municipality-Nation), (iii) private and NGO financing (such as Fe Y 
Alegr?a and Coffee/Sugar Producers Foundations); and (iv) central public provision (MOE).To 
monitor the education quality of these multiple service providers, the sub-component will 
support the development of an accreditation and results system.  
 
B.2  
Demand side subsidies for lower education students.   Two types of demand support 
programs are proposed for the indigenous and non-indigenous poor: (i) scholarships to defray the 
private and opportunity costs of continuing lower secondary education (especially in rural areas 
and for working youth)?conditioned on school promotion, performance and completion; and (ii) 
financing of school places in quality non-government schools for low-income urban students and 
immigrants from rural areas (private sector and NGOs provide 70% of secondary education 
nationwide).  A standardized per-student cost will be pre-determined based on a basket of quality 
education inputs (education materials, teacher, infrastructure maintenance, equipment, etc.).  
Page  3
B.3  
Feasibility studies and strategies for upper secondary education Curricula restructure and 
evaluation systems: will support the on-going feasibility studies for upper secondary education 
reform (grades 10-12) including the development of: (i) a graduate profile, (ii) competencies and 
knowledge standards, (iii) new curricula and studies programs, (iv) an appropriate grade 
structure, and (v) accountability and evaluation systems.  The analytical investments will 
contribute to future Government and Donors? support to this education level.  
 
Component 3. Consolidation of Education Management Modernization and Decentralization 
will support on-going institutional reforms. To-date the MOE has (i) decentralized its education 
system across central, departmental, school and community management units; (ii) improved its 
Management Information Systems; and (iii) initiated HR administration improvements. This 
component will consolidate this process through:  
 
C.1   Results Monitoring and Accountability will finance the development and implementation 
of a Quality Education Result-Based Monitoring System. The system seeks to integrate 
information from: standardized testing, teacher evaluations, school-based evaluations (including 
associated factors to learning), and institutional evaluation of central, decentralized education 
offices and school governments.  Project monitoring and evaluation systems will be improved 
(and budget will be allocated for the implementation of this Project's monitoring and evaluation).  
 
C.2 
Human Resource (HR) Administration will strengthen the HR management system, 
including professional standards for identification, selection, administration, 
performance/incentive evaluations, and on-going professional development.  It will finance the 
MOE?s HR module implementation, integrated to the public sector administration system 
(SIAF)?in collaboration with the Ministry of Finance and the Bank?s LSCPR sector.  
 
C.3 
Education Sector Administrative Efficiency: will support modernizing and decentralizing 
fiduciary management at the Central, Departmental and School Government levels.  
Administrative reforms will focus on cost-efficiency an equitable allocation of resources. It will 
support the expansion and consolidation of the MOE fiduciary improvement pilot?supported by 
the public sector administration reforms (and the Bank?s CPAR and CFAA)?strengthening 
result-based budgeting, annual operation plans, financial management and procurement.  The 
component will contribute to a gradual utilization of country systems, facilitating the 
administration of external financing and harmonized investments for the education sector.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nationwide.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
N/A.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
X
The importance of the Indigenous Peoples Plan for the Project was raised during the 
Meeting.  The Task Team mentioned that two experts (a Social Assessment Specialist and an 
Indigenous Education Specialist) were in Guatemala supporting the MOE in defining the action 
plan for the preparation of the Indigenous Plan within the Project.   The Vice-ministry of 
Intercultural and Bilingual Education is leading the preparation of the Plan, and the design team 
(MOE and Bank) are meeting with various local organization to support the data collection, 
analysis and strategy for the Indigenous Plan. The Plan will guarantee that the Project is 
contextualized; targets; and guarantees impact on the indigenous population of Guatemala (52% 
of the population).   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/30/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
It will be confirmed at PAD-stage ISDS.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Joel E. Reyes 
07/05/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
07/14/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
07/05/2005 
Comments:   
