                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA17868
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-May-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Guatemala                          Project ID:    P143495
                            Project Name:      GT Urban Infrastructure (P143495)
                            Task Team          Augustin Maria
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          09-May-2016                        Estimated   08-Sep-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSU10                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Sub-national government administration (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Urban services and housing for the poor (70%), Other social development (30%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         45.00               Total Bank Financing:         45.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                      0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                        45.00
                              Total                                                                                        45.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project's Development Objective (PDO) is to increase access to basic urban infrastructure and
                           services and to mitigate key risk factors of crime and violence in selected communities.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed Project aims to support increased access to basic infrastructure and social services that
                           will contribute to improvements in quality of life, and to reduction of risk factors for crime and

                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                         violence in precarious urban areas within the municipalities that comprise the Mancomunidad Gran
                         Ciudad del Sur (MGCS). The MGCS includes the municipalities of Mixco, Amatitlán, Villa Nueva,
                         San Miguel Petapa, Santa Catarina Pinula, and Villa Canales. The Project envisages investing both in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         'hard' infrastructure upgrades and 'soft' activities that would reduce risk factors to crime and violence,
                         as well as improve quality of services accessible to citizens. The total amount of the Project will be
                         US$45 million, to be implemented over a 6 year period.

                         To achieve the PDO, the Project outlines eligibility criteria to identify the neighborhoods to be
                         targeted by the Project; such criteria includes economic and social indicators, among others. The
                         Project will be implemented in two phases. An inception phase will focus on implementing a pilot
                         sub-project in each municipality and carrying out a comprehensive data gathering exercise that will
                         enhance the ability of the Fondo Social de Solidaridad (FSS) to carry out the Project, in coordination
                         with the MGCS and Ministerio de Gobernación (MINGOB). The second or main implementation
                         phase will carry out the additional sub-projects through a demand-driven approach with significant
                         community participation. Eligible neighborhoods will prepare proposals for financing on the basis of
                         community-driven diagnosis to identify infrastructure needs and priorities as well as the main drivers
                         of vulnerability. Proposals to be financed will be selected competitively and further developed with
                         the FSS, MGCS and the relevant municipality to ensure consistency with municipal and regional
                         development plans. The agreed neighborhood proposals - or neighborhood plans - which will
                         include a combination of infrastructure works and social interventions for Project financing will be
                         the main unit of analysis for costing and for safeguards assessment. The list of infrastructure works
                         in each neighborhood plan will be packaged to be procured under one contract to simplify
                         implementation, which should occur with community supervision and monitoring. Social and
                         capacity building interventions would be provided in coordination with the infrastructure works and
                         other agencies and/or ministries.

                         The Project will finance three components:

                         Component 1 : Integrated Package of Small-Scale Urban Infrastructure and Crime & Violence
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Prevention Interventions (US$36 million): This component will finance integrated packages of
                         small-scale infrastructure and crime & violence prevention activities for selected communities.

                         Component 2 : Technical Assistance for Capacity Building (US$4.39 million): This component will
                         finance technical assistance to strengthen institutional capacity of the municipalities, MGCS and the
                         National Government.

                         Component 3 : Support for Project Operations, including Monitoring & Evaluation (US$4.5 million):
                         This component will support program management.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The sub-projects will be located in the 6 Municipalities of the MGCS, but the exact locations will not
                         be known at the time of the approval. The Project design includes eligibility criteria for
                         neighborhood participation, and proposals to be financed under Component 1 will be selected during
                         implementation. However, because the Project will focus on rehabilitating infrastructure in poor
                         urban areas, the communities targeted by the Project will likely be characterized by the informal
                         occupation of public land and encroachment of private structures on the right of way of infrastructure
                         subject to rehabilitation. Similarly there are risks of potential environmental and social impacts
                         related to location of targeted neighborhoods in areas that can be prone to natural disasters


                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                         (landslides, flooding, erosion, etc.), protected or critical areas, or not suitable to sub-project
                         development due to slopes, geological characteristics of the area, etc.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez (GEN04)
                         Martin Henry Lenihan (GSU04)

                         6. Safeguard Policies         Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental                 Yes             This policy was triggered because of the type of works to
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                         be financed under Component 1 of the Project. The
                                                                       magnitude of the works and their negative impact are not
                                                                       significant, and can be easily prevented, mitigated and/or
                                                                       compensated with standard readily available measures.
                                                                       Following the Bank's Operational Policy the Project was
                                                                       classified "Category B".

                                                                       An Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                                       (ESMF) has been developed to ensure adequate
                                                                       environmental and social management during Project
                                                                       implementation since the specific location of the sub-
                                                                       projects (works) to be developed are not presently known.
                                                                       A draft of this framework document was consulted upon
                                                                       prior to appraisal, and includes a summary of
                                                                       consultations with stakeholders. The ESMF includes 3
                                                                       main instruments: a) Environmental Management
                                                                       Guidelines; b) Resettlement and Land Acquisition
                                                                       Guidelines; and c) Participatory Planning for Vulnerable
                                                                       Groups and Indigenous People Guidelines. The ESMF
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       was prepared by the Fondo Social de Solidaridad (FSS)
                                                                       and the Mancomunidad Gran Ciudad del Sur (MGCS),
                                                                       with the support of the Bank's environmental and social
                                                                       specialists. The preparation of the ESMF was also
                                                                       coordinated with the Ministry of Environment and Natural
                                                                       Resources (MARN) to help facilitate the process to obtain
                                                                       the regulatory environmental permits required for the sub-
                                                                       projects.

                                                                       The environmental management during implementation
                                                                       will include community consultations, communicating
                                                                       with non-literate and non-Spanish speaking groups,
                                                                       ensuring vulnerable groups (women, youth, and ethnic
                                                                       minorities) are engaged in community consultation, and
                                                                       resolving complaints and conflicts surrounding sub-
                                                                       project selection and implementation. The participatory
                                                                       planning guidelines of the ESMF deal comprehensively
                                                                       with these issues.

                                                                       The responsibility of ESMF implementation lies with the


                                                                         Page 3 of 8
                                                        FSS as the implementing agency for the Project, in
                                                        coordination with the MGCS. The Project Implementation
                                                        Unit of the FSS will include an Environmental specialist
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        and a Social specialist.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No    This policy is not triggered. The majority of infrastructure
                         4.04                           investments will be in urban areas or peri-urban areas.
                                                        Negative impacts to ecologically critical or sensitive areas
                                                        are not anticipated.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    This policy is not triggered. The Project will not result in
                                                        changes to the management, utilization, or protection of
                                                        any forest areas. Thus, this policy is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     This policy is not triggered. The Project will not support
                                                        the procurement or use of pesticides or other agricultural
                                                        chemicals, or lead to the increased use of such chemicals.
                                                        Thus, this policy is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural        Yes   This policy is triggered because of the potential impact on
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           cultural resources during construction, especially during
                                                        movement of material. The ESMF includes Chance Find
                                                        Procedures (CFP) as well as measures to screen for and
                                                        manage potential impacts on cultural heritage or property
                                                        that could be affected by neighborhood development
                                                        plans.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   This policy is triggered. Although the zones of
                         BP 4.10                        intervention are highly urbanized, there is one indigenous
                                                        community that has been incorporated into the urban
                                                        space of the municipality of Mixco. The policy is
                                                        triggered because traditional institutions continue
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        tooperate in the community, members of the community
                                                        self-identify as indigenous, the traditional language is still
                                                        in use, and there is a collective attachment to the territory
                                                        by members of the community.

                                                        As part of the ESMF, Participatory Planning Guidelines
                                                        for Vulnerable Groups and Indigenous Communities were
                                                        prepared, disclosed, and consulted with community
                                                        representatives in order to comply with the Bank's
                                                        requirements. This instrument is appropriate as the exact
                                                        location of communities that will benefit from the project,
                                                        will not be known prior to Project approval. Accordingly,
                                                        these guidelines will serve as the indigenous peoples
                                                        planning framework for the Project.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   This policy is triggered because the sub-projects to be
                         OP/BP 4.12                     financed by the Project may involve minor land
                                                        acquisition or the removal of private assets encroaching
                                                        on public land where sub-projects will be located. In
                                                        participating Municipalities, target communities are likely



                                                         Page 4 of 8
                                                                        to be informally settled with unclear property boundaries
                                                                        and possible encroachment on infrastructure rights of
                                                                        way. Therefore, even if the Project does not require land
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        acquisition or the displacement of residential households,
                                                                        it is possible that civil works will affect private structures
                                                                        encroaching or occupying public land.
                                                                        Disaster risk reduction measures will be limited to small-
                                                                        scale structural and non-structural measures, but will not
                                                                        include any significant collective resettlement.

                                                                        As part of the ESMF, Resettlement and Land Acquisition
                                                                        Guidelines have been prepared, disclosed and consulted
                                                                        with community representatives. The instrument includes
                                                                        robust criteria to screen for and manage voluntary land
                                                                        donations.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No              This policy is not triggered. This Project will not finance
                            4.37                                        the construction of new, or rehabilitation of existing,
                                                                        dams. Thus, this policy is not triggered.
                            Projects on International   No              This policy is not triggered. The Project will not finance
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                        activities that related to international waterways as
                                                                        defined in the policy. Thus, this policy is not triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed        No              This policy is not triggered. The Project will not finance
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                            any activities in areas subject to international disputes.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The sub-projects to be supported under this Project will have a small physical footprint and no
                              significant environmental negative impacts are anticipated. However, the zones of intervention are
                              characterized by densely populated informal settlements, with potentially structures occupying the
                              right of way to be used for linear infrastructure. It is also possible that the some sub-projects (e.g.
                              community centers) may require the purchase or donation of land. Similarly, although the zones of
                              intervention are highly urbanized, there is one indigenous community that has been incorporated
                              into the urban space of the municipality of Mixco, where traditional authorities continue to
                              operate. Given the small scale of these impacts, and the demand driven nature of the project, no
                              large scale, significant or irreversible impacts are anticipated. The appropriate prevention,
                              mitigation and/or compensation measures will nevertheless be put in place through the specific
                              Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) or related instruments developed as part of the ESMF
                              implementation, Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), and Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs) at the
                              level of sub-projects as needed.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Given the small physical footprint of the sub-projects and activities to be financed, and the
                              demand driven approach taken by the Project, there are no significant indirect or long term
                              negative impacts anticipated.


                                                                          Page 5 of 8
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Project alternatives will be considered during the evaluation of sub-projects at implementation
Public Disclosure Copy




                           stage.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The implementing agency FSS has prepared an ESMF, including environmental management
                           guidelines, resettlement policy guidelines, and participatory planning guidelines, which will also
                           serve as indigenous peoples planning guidelines where necessary (these last guidelines specify
                           adaptations to the planning process in the case of indigenous peoples groups). Overall, the
                           capacity of the FSS to implement these guidelines is limited, and it will be necessary to hire a
                           dedicated Social Specialist and an Environmental Specialist to ensure effective environmental and
                           social management during implementation. During Project preparation, the FSS has been
                           supported by environmental and social specialists from the municipalities that are part of the
                           MGCS. Training and capacity building workshops will be organized as part of Component 3 of the
                           Project to ensure the MGCS' understanding of the application of the safeguards instruments. At the
                           municipal level, implementation capacity is mixed, with the larger municipalities - Villa Nueva
                           and Mixco - having a large environment and community development team, and a well-developed
                           network of community participation councils (known as COCODES). However, some of the
                           smaller municipalities will not have access to sufficient staff, so the Environment and Social
                           Specialists of the FSS will provide additional guidance and support to these municipalities as
                           needed during implementation.
                           One issue that municipalities will face is financing constraints to pay for compensation for
                           expropriation and associated resettlement costs. Therefore, it will be necessary to use funds from
                           the Project to cover these costs. This has been incorporated into the Project design.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Key stakeholders include the MGCS, its six member municipalities, the beneficiary community
                           organizations, as well as the MARN as the environmental authority. Current mechanisms for
                           consultation include Municipal Development Councils (COMUDES) which include
                           representatives of community and civil society organizations, as well as Community Development
                           Councils (COCODES). Safeguards instruments were disclosed in a multi-stakeholder workshop at
                           the local level. During the consultation workshop, participants asked questions about the process
                           of eligibility and selection of communities and sub-projects, as well as the timing of
                           implementation. No comments/questions that required changes in the ESMF and its Guidelines
                           were made. Participants included representatives of COCODES from the six member
                           Municipalities.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                        08-May-2016
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                     10-May-2016
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                    Page 6 of 8
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Guatemala                                                        08-May-2016
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      06-May-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-May-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Guatemala                                                        06-May-2016
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      06-May-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-May-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Guatemala                                                        06-May-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?


                                                                      Page 7 of 8
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [    ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Augustin Maria
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Niels B. Holm-Nielsen (PMGR)                   Date: 12-May-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 8 of 8
