Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC887 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: August 10, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Guinea 
Project ID: P070878 
Project Name: Coastal Marine and 
Biodiversity Management 
Task Team Leader: Dirk Nicolaas Prevoo 
GEF Focal Area:  OP 2 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 23, 
2004 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2005 
Managing Unit: AFTS4 
Lending Instrument: Grant from the Global 
Environment Trust Facility 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and 
forestry sector (65%);Sub-national 
government administration (20%);Other 
social services (10%);Central government 
administration (5%) 
Theme: Environmental policies and 
institutions (P);Biodiversity 
(P);Participation and civic engagement 
(P);Decentralization (P);Rural non-farm 
income generation (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  Yves Prévost, John Buursink 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
GEFI: 7 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY 
5 
FOREIGN MULTILATERAL INSTITUTIONS (UNIDENTIFIED) 
4.5 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project’s overall 
development objective
 is to promote rational management of Guinea’s 
coastal biodiversity for both conservation and sustainable development ends, with a particular 
emphasis on assisting communities in and around these priority areas to plan, implement and 
maintain environmentally sustainable and socially inclusive alternative livelihoods options. 
 
The project’s 
global environmental objective
 is to strengthen the conservation of globally and 
nationally significant habitats and species in Guinea’s Coastal Zone. The project will work with 
national and regional partners to promote and implement an integrated approach to the 
conservation and sustainable use of globally important biological resources in Guinea’s coastal 
zone. 
 
The project’s development and global environmental objectives should be viewed within the 
context of a longer term (eight year) effort that:  (a) assists Government in developing a 
Page  2
comprehensive vision for Guinea’s coastal zone; (b) develops and establishes Coastal 
Conservation Areas (CCA) incorporating coastal zone Ramsar sites of high global importance in 
support of Government’s biodiversity protection strategy and international commitments and (c) 
identifies and implements with communities selected strategic activities that would strengthen 
sustainable use of the resources contained within these sites and in bufferzones.  The project will 
be implemented in close collaboration with the IDA supported Village Communities Support 
Program (
Programme d’Appui aux Communautés Villageoises
,
PACV) and other donor funded 
national and regional activities. 
 
C.  Project Description  
 
To achieve its objectives, the project will build on and closely collaborate with the PACV, which 
would be the baseline program. Other main associated institutions and initiatives include the 
Ministry of Fisheries through its National Center for Fisheries Research in Boussoura (
Centre 
National des Sciences Halieutiques – Bousssoura
,
CNSH-B), the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Livestock through its National Directorate for Forestry and Water (
Direction Nationale des Eaux 
et Forets
,
DNEF), the Ministry of Plan, the Guinea Coastal Zone Observatory (
Observatoire de 
la Guinée Maritime
,
OGM), the Support Program for the Integrated Management of Natural 
Resources of the Niger and Gambia Watersheds (
Appui à la gestion intégrée des ressources 
naturelles des bassins du Niger et de la Gambie
,
AGIR) and international NGOs working on the 
sub-region on coastal and marine biodiversity issues. 
Phasing: 
The project is being jointly prepared with the second phase of the PACV (PACV II), which will 
be implemented from 2005 
–
2009.
The second phase of the project is planned to coincide with 
the third phase of the PACV. 
 
Project Components: 
 
The project has five closely inter-linked components.  Three of these will provide incremental 
support to three components of the PACV.
 
Component 1: Protection and conservation of coastal Ramsar sites    
This is the first of the two additional components, which does not have an equivalent in PACV. 
 
The project, through this component, aims to provide the necessary strategic and operational 
tools and experiences to establish at least one CCA through a participatory approach with 
concerned communities. This component will use lessons learned from other countries and 
initiatives in the sub-region to adapt them to the country and site-specific context. 
 
It will have 2 sub-components:  (i) Protected areas:  This sub-component aims to establish at 
least one CC; and (ii) Impact Monitoring and Evaluation. 
 
Component 2: Institutional strengthening for integrated coastal zone management 
This is the second additional component, which does not have an equivalent in PACV.   
 
Page  3
The weak capacity of the institutions at national and regional level to sustainably plan, manage 
and monitor the area’s natural resources and coastal ecosystems is a barrier to the effective 
protection of coastal biodiversity in Guinea. Targeted capacity building will be provided for 
stakeholders at national and local level to establish an integrated coastal zone management action 
plan and legislation and to support the establishment of a coastal zone stakeholder information 
mechanism). The specific objective of this component therefore seeks to build a framework for 
integrated coastal zone management and the establishment of a  CCA network at the national and 
sub-regional level.  It will have 2 sub-components:  (i) Framework for sustainable coastal zone 
management; and (ii) Guinea Coastal Zone Knowledge and Communication. 
 
Component 3:  The Local Investment Fund. 
 
The LIF component of the PACV aims to stimulate local development by transferring grants 
directly to CRDs. The project would provide financial resources for CRDs around selected 
Ramsar sites in the coastal regions and the to be established CCA. The GEF project will fund 
incremental activities aim at stopping and where possible reversing the destruction of habitats of 
local ecological, economical and globally important biodiversity, which is mainly related to the 
unsustainable practices for artisanal fishery, mining, farming and livestock.  
 
Component 4:  Support for Local Development
.
The objective of this component is to rationalize and operationalize the regulatory and 
institutional environment for local development.  The component supports the following 
activities:  (a) strengthen the capacity of CRDs to manage local development programs; (b) 
sensitizing and training elected local officials and CRD administrative and technical staff in the 
areas of local development government, planning, and financial management.  
Component 5:  Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation. 
The objective of this component is to ensure cost-effective, efficient and streamlined project 
implementation of the four other components.  The project would provide incremental funding 
only to the implementing agencies. 
 
Monitoring and Evaluation
.
The objective of the projects performance monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E) system is to respond to the internal management and supervision needs of all 
the project's stakeholders, including the executing agencies responsible for implementing the 
different project components, CRDs for the microprojects, the Steering Committee (SC), and 
donors, including the Government. The monitoring system is organized as a network with each 
executing agency in charge of a component reporting its activities to the SC, which maintains a 
consolidated system. In order to avoid having to build a separate system, use will be made of 
existing project supported Monitoring and Evaluation Units in the PACV, CNSH-B and the 
OGM. 
 
The mid-term review and an evaluation at the end of the project will be conducted jointly by the 
Government of Guinea and interested co-financiers of the project. These reviews will be based in 
part on the results and recommendations of the evaluations indicated above and will help make 
adjustments resulting in a more efficient implementation of the project. 
 
Page  4
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project is located in the Coastal Zone of Guinea and will cover approximately 20-25 of the 
CRDs in this zone (out of 303 total in the country).  The project will start in two CRDs close to 
the first area identified as a potential CCA and from there gradually expand as experience is 
gained. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
The first phase of the PACV has achieved excellent results in building capacity for safeguard 
policy, particularly regarding the EA and actions plans for mircroprojects and rural roads.  This 
project will further develop the expertise in safeguards of the PACV as it relates to the specific 
activities under this project. In addition, substantial expertise exists also under the other 
implementing agencies as it concerns the CCAs. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
[X] 
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
[
]
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
[X] 
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
[
]
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
[
]
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
[
]
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
[
]
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
[
]
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[
]
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[
]
A
[X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that 
EA category (mandatory): 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared.  This project started processing prior to the new guidelines and is passed 
the former PCD stage.  A QER may be organized prior to appraisal.  The appraisal decision 
meeting is likely for October 2004. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
Time frame for these studies is July through October 2004. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Dirk Nicolaas Prevoo 
08/10/2004 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Thomas E. Walton 
08/10/2004 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Mary A. Barton-Dock 
08/10/2004 
Comments 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
