                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                          APPRAISAL STAGE
.
                                                                    Report No.: 95537
.
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 4/2/2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                   Guyana              Project ID:              P132408
    Project Name:              Cunha Canal Rehabilitation Project
    Task Team Leader(s):       Armando Guzman
    Estimated Board Date:      April 2015
    Managing Unit:             GSURR
    Sector(s):                 Flood protection (100%)
    Theme(s):                  Natural disaster management
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00 No
    (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
    Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:     US$3.27M                Total GRIF Financing: US$3.00
    Financing Gap:          US$0.27
        Financing Source                                                   Amount
        Recipient                                                          0.27
        Guyana REDD+ Investment Fund (GRIF)                                3.00
        Total                                                              3.27
    Environmental Category: B
    Is this a Repeater project? No
    Is this a Transferred      Yes
    project?
.
.
    2. Project Development Objective(s)

The Project Development Objective is to increase the capacity of the Cunha Canal to drain the East
Demerara Water Conservancy and local agricultural areas in the Recipient’s territory.
3. Project Description
The proposed project is composed of three components including carrying out civil works to rehabilitate the
Cunha Canal, compensation under the resettlement plan and project management.

Component 1. Cunha Canal Rehabilitation Works (US$ 1.91 million from GRIF; US$ 0.27 million in
parallel co-financing from GoG, total US$ 2.18 million).

This consists of three main activities:

    (a) Rehabilitation of the drainage channel. The channel will be re-routed along its original alignment,
        widened and excavated to remove the earth fill and weeds and allow for a straight flow into the
        Demerara River that eliminates hydraulic restrictions. This will be undertaken by the GoG
        through parallel co-financing.

    (b) Rehabilitation of sluices. This would cover rehabilitation of: (i) sluice at the outlet of the EDWC to
        fix the gate and upgrade the sluice; and (ii) the rehabilitation of the sluice at the outlet of the Cunha
        Canal at the Demerara. The first sluice will serve as a regulator for water releases from the
        conservancy and the second will control the discharge of water and to prevent water from the
        Demerara River from entering the canal during high tide.

    (c) Construction of a bridge on the EBD Public Road. A new bridge will be constructed at the point
        where the canal will intercept the EBD Public Road to allow vehicular traffic to traverse the area.

Component 2. Resettlement (US$ 0.57 million from GRIF). The proposed civil works require the use of
a portion of land currently occupied by the Barama Company Limited (BCL) and the relocation of certain
assets. Compensation will be paid to Barama for the fair market value of: (i) Relocation of assets. Assets to
be relocated include a log bridge, a steel bridge, a moulding shed, a dust silo, equipment, a fence and guard
hut. To ensure it does not affect construction schedules, BCL will be responsible for resettlement of their
displaced assets within an agreed period of three months. (ii) Provision of other resettlement assistance.
During the relocation period operations will be affected. Compensation for this cost will be provided by the
Project under this Component.

Component 3. Project Management (US$ 0.52 million from GRIF). The Project will finance
consultancies and operational costs to manage the project including procurement, financial management
and technical staff. It will also fund consultancies for supervision of the project works including
safeguards related supervision. It will also fund monitoring equipment to better understand the impacts of
the works on the water flows in the Badarima Creek, Cunha Canal and Sarah Johanna Canal and drainage of
the Conservancy and the nearby agricultural areas.

4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
The Project will focus on activities in Region 4, the most populated region of the country. Ninety percent of
Guyana's inhabitants live on the narrow coastal plain, which represents 10 percent of the country's area. This is an
area of reclaimed lands, much of which lies below sea level, situated between a water storage basin and a
protective seawall complex. The coastal zone is transected by a dense network of drainage and irrigation canals,
which links up with several water conservancies, including the East Demerara Water Conservancy (EDWC), a
water storage system that provides regional agricultural lands and urban areas with irrigation and drinking water.

Located to the south of Georgetown in Administrative Region 4, the EDWC is estimated to have a total
catchment area of 582 km2. The conservancy is formed by an embankment of approximately 60 km long and
    rests on poor ground conditions in some areas. The areas most affected by the EDWC are along the East Coast
    Demara, in particular Mahaica.

    The Cunha Canal works are located within Guyana's Coastal Plain at Land of Canaan in Administrative Region
    4. This area is downstream of the EDWC dam and EDWC system. Land of Canaan is located on the right bank of
    the Demerara River, approximately 20 kilometers upstream from the mouth of the river. The Cunha Canal is
    located on the western side of the EDWC, between the Conservancy Dam and the Demerara River, and
    discharges into the Demerara River. The entire project area has been heavily modified by human activity and
    consists largely of an old field environment.

    The present pattern of land use in the vicinity of the canal is a combination of residential, industrial and
    commercial uses. The nearby EBD Public Road facilitates a high volume of traffic. These include traffic to and
    from the international airport, local towns and the interior locations of Guyana. Given that most residential areas
    are not in close proximity to the road, pedestrian traffic is low. Project activities are not likely to result in any loss
    of livelihood sources, as few residents currently use the canal for these purposes and they will not be prevented
    from doing so once the Cunha Canal has been widened and rehabilitated.

    Immediately south of the Canal are lands owned by the Barama Company Limited (BCL). Currently, most
    of these lands east of the Public Road are not being utilized and are utilized characterized as vacant fields.
    Housing facilities for the employees of BCL, as well as a plywood retailing outlet, are located in close
    proximity to the East Bank Demerara (EBD) Public Road. North of the Canal and closer to the Conservancy
    are lands covered with secondary vegetation followed by a private residential housing scheme.

    5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
    Noreen Beg, Senior Environmental Specialist (GENDR)
    M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong, Senior Social Development Specialist (GSURR)
.
    6. Safeguard Policies                           Triggered?         Explanation (Optional)
    Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes                            The Project is a category B - Partial Assessment
                                                                       -assigned to projects that are likely to have
                                                                       localized, limited and reversible environmental
                                                                       impacts. Overall the Project will have a largely
                                                                       positive social and environmental (health and
                                                                       safety) impact through its role in reducing
                                                                       vulnerability to flooding.
                                                                       Physical interventions resulting from the
                                                                       implementation of investments could have low
                                                                       to moderate negative environmental impacts.
                                                                       Impacts to the biophysical and socio-economic
                                                                       environments are expected to be limited in
                                                                       nature, as the Cunha Canal is located in an area
                                                                       that has been subjected to significant human
                                                                       interventions. The embankment along the canal
                                                                       after widening will be rehabilitated and
                                                                       re-vegetated with native shrubs and trees after
                                                                       works are completed.
                                                                       Given that Component 1(c) may affect the road
                                             during construction, road safety measures and
                                             traffic diversion plans will be adopted, and any
                                             construction waste will be disposed of
                                             appropriately
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           Yes    A portion of the Project activities takes place
                                             within the East Demerara Water Conservancy.
                                             Although the EDWC is not a Protected Area,
                                             nor a critical natural habitat, it serves as habitat
                                             to caiman, giant otters, and bats. Numerous
                                             species of birds also nest in or migrate through
                                             the EDWC, including Muscovy Ducks,
                                             Blue-winged       Teal, Pied-billed           Grebes,
                                             Cormorants, Stripe-backed Bitterns, Egrets,
                                             Vultures, Snail Kites, and Great Kiskadees.
                                             Nevertheless, given the vast area of the
                                             uninhabited EDWC, the localized and short –
                                             term works proposed will not significantly
                                             affect fauna and avi-fauna, as there is adequate
                                             refuge for these species away from project
                                             works.
                                             Moreover, the proposed project will not result in
                                             significant degradation or conversion of natural
                                             habitats, given that the works are limited to the
                                             upgrade and rehabilitation of existing structures. The
                                             Guyana Amazon Tropical Birds Society and the
                                             Environmental Protection Agency confirmed
                                             during preparation that, in their opinion, the
                                             EDWC has been sustainably managed. At the
                                             same time, by improving the drainage capacity
                                             of the EDWC and assessing, the weak portion of
                                             the EDWC Dam, the works aim to ensure that
                                             this    natural      habitat      remains       intact.
                                             Rehabilitation works for the Cunha Canal will
                                             be confined entirely to lands already disturbed
                                             by human activity.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No     This policy is not triggered given that the project
                                             will not finance activities that affect forests.
                                             While a forest borders the southern portion of
                                             the EDWC, investments will be made nowhere
                                             in the proximity of the forest, and the Project
                                             will have neither negative nor positive impacts
                                             on it.
Pest Management OP 4.09               No     This policy is not triggered given that the project
                                             will not finance the purchase or use of
                                             pesticides. Pesticides will not be used under the
                                             Project, as NDIA - the agency in charge of
                                             maintaining the canal- uses mechanical means
                                             of weed control.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes   The policy was triggered as a precautionary
                                            measure in case cultural resources are
                                            encountered as part of the environmental
                                            assessment process or during construction.
                                            While activities to be carried out under the
                                            Project are not expected to impact any known
                                            cultural heritage sites, technical specifications
                                            for works will include "chance find procedures"
                                            to be followed in the event that culturally
                                            significant materials are discovered during the
                                            execution of civil works. Chance finds
                                            procedures will be incorporated into EMPs and
                                            construction contracts.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         No    This policy is not triggered given that given that
                                            there are no indigenous peoples present in the
                                            project areas.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12   Yes   Some land acquisition from a lumber company
                                            will be necessary to expand the right of way for
                                            the Cunha Canal. An MoU has been signed with
                                            the Barama Lumber Company giving their
                                            support for implementation of the project and an
                                            Abbreviated Resettlement Plan (ARP) has been
                                            prepared that describes the valuation of affected
                                            assets and income sources, consultations with
                                            the Barama company over acceptable design
                                            and compensation alternatives, institutional
                                            arrangements for preparing and implementing
                                            the ARP, compensation to be provided, and a
                                            timetable and budget. This ARP was disclosed
                                            by the Grantee and the World Bank before
                                            Appraisal and revised and re-disclosed in
                                            country and at the Bank on April 2, 2015. The
                                            ARP can be accessed on the GRIF website at the
                                            following address:
                                            http://guyanareddfund.org/images/stories/pdffiles/arp_
                                            cunha_canal_project.pdf
                                            The ARP will be implemented before
                                            commencing any civil works that require
                                            acquisition of land and/or associated assets.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37             Yes   The Project triggers Safety of Dams (OPIBP
                                            4.37), as the EDWC is bordered to the north by a
                                            30 mile long earthen dam constructed some 150
                                            years ago. As defined under Bank policy, this is
                                            an existing small dam (under 15 meters height).
                                            While no civil works are to be conducted on the
                                            dam, a detailed engineering assessment of the
                                            dam and its associated drainage structures is
                                            being completed under the IDA-financed
                                            Project currently under implementation
                                            (Guyana Flood Risk Management P147250).
    Projects on International Waterways No                       This policy is not triggered given that the project
    OP/BP 7.50                                                   will not affect international waterways as
                                                                 defined under the policy.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60       No               This policy is not triggered given that the project
                                                                 will not affect disputed areas as defined under
                                                                 the policy.
.

    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
    describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    The Project is considered a category B investment under World Bank Operational Policy 4.01. Civil Works
    funded under this Project include the widening of the Cunha outlet structure. The Cunha Canal leads
    directly to the Demerara River. Its only function is to provide relief capacity to the EDWC system to protect
    the EDWC dam during the two rainy annual seasons. This canal is not associated with the irrigation or
    potable water supply functions of the EDWC system. The canal is for relief purposes only and will not
    impact the water use activities of the conservancy. Impacts to the biophysical and socio-economic
    environments are expected to be minimal, as the canal is in a disturbed area which is currently used to
    deposit lumber waste. The canal therefore does not contribute to deforestation and does not drain coastal
    lowlands. As a relief canal, the Cunha also serves to limit risk of dam failure, and its rehabilitation
    contributes to the preservation of the Conservancy as it currently functions.

    Environmental impacts expected from the rehabilitation of the canal are related only to the need to construct
    a bridge in the main road from the capital to the northern interior area of the country, and the impacts
    associated with excavation activities in the Cunha Canal area. These works will be contracted using
    appropriate environmental management clauses to assure contactor compliance with accepted
    environmental practices. A formal Environmental Assessment was produced for the project and includes an
    environmental management plan to be executed by the contractor under GoG supervision. Although there
    will be major disruption to vehicular and pedestrian traffic, the location of the bridge will be easily bypassed
    with a temporary road cut around the construction site, which would be a gravel road diversion of
    approximately 100 meters. The construction activity will be limited to the existing ditch right-of-way
    alignment.

    The EA for the project requires that once the detailed works for the Cunha Canal rehabilitation are
    identified, a site-specific Environmental Assessment Management Plan (EMP) be developed in accordance
    with World Bank policies and that the findings of this assessment be incorporated into final designs. The
    GoG accordingly developed the draft design and an EMP was prepared specifically addressing the
    reconstruction of the Cuhna Canal and associated bridge works. This document, which included a detailed
    evaluation of the impacts and mitigation measures was formalized in March 2010 under the Conservancy
    Adaptation Project (CAP - P103539), implemented from 2007 to 2014. The CAP initially included the
    Cunha Canal Rehabilitation works. However, following a 2011 restructuring, the Cunha Canal
    rehabilitation was withdrawn from the CAP and became as a stand-alone project. The EA and EMP were
    disclosed in Infoshop and in Guyana through the Ministry of Agriculture's website before Appraisal in July
    2012. A revised EA, including an EMP, was prepared and disclosed at the Bank on March 30, 2015 and in
    country on April 2, 2015.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
No negative long term impacts are expected to materialize as a result of the Project. By improving the
drainage capacity of the EDWC, the Project aims to improve management response time to rising waters
within the conservancy improving capacity to protect the dam and reduce the need for using eastern
discharges which contribute to flooding along the Mahaica River.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
During engagements with BCL and other stakeholders various design alternatives were studied with the
intention of minimizing adverse impacts. During this study three options for the project layout were
identified and evaluated. The option agreed on allows for a more efficient conveyance as it provides a
straight alignment. The other options consisted of curves in the alignment which reduces the hydraulic
efficiency and would result in the erosion of the earthen embankments.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The works to be funded by the proposed Project are common in Guyana and well within the experience and
capacity of the implementing agencies; moreover, they involve manageable social, environmental and technical
risks. The National Irrigation and Drainage Authority (NDIA) and Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) are deemed to
have sufficient capacity to plan and implement the measures described in the EMP due to their pre-existing
familiarity with World Bank environmental safeguard instruments under the CAP program. Indeed, the
implementing agency (ASDU) has successfully implemented the CAP EA and has the responsible for safeguards
under the IDA-financed project currently under implementation. ASDU has also updated the Cunha Canal EA,
which included the Environmental Management Plan (EMP). Involuntary Resettlement questions are being
addressed by the MoA and World Bank safeguards teams as part of Project preparation. An Abbreviated
Resettlement Plan (ARP) has been prepared that documents: (a) the assessment of impacts, (b) the consultation
process and agreements reached with BCL, and (c) the amount, budget source, and time line for compensating
BCL for the impacts on its assets, access to assets, and loss of income.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The stakeholders directly impacted by the works under the proposed co-financing are the Barama Company
Limited (BCL) through whose property the canal will traverse, and the users of the public road that will
experience delays during construction. As documented in the ARP, numerous consultations took place
between 2010 and 2014 between the MoA and BCL. A workshop was also held in Georgetown on
November 19, 2012 with local NGOs, academics and donors to discuss the proposed design and
implementation arrangements. Additionally, the Ministry of Public Works and Communications will be
closely involved with any constructions associated with the north-south roadway.

Primary stakeholders include the coastal communities (including the capital Georgetown) north of the EDWC
system. These communities will directly benefit from the Cunha Canal Rehabilitation Project through an
improved ability to manage the Conservancy for flood protection and irrigation. The Bank team will implement a
communications strategy to coordinate and regularly inform stakeholders (including other donors and
Government agencies) of the progress of this Project.
    B. Disclosure Requirements
    Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                                         January 23, 2015
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                                      March 30, 2015
    For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
    EA to the Executive Directors
    "In country" Disclosure April 2, 2015
    http://guyanareddfund.org/images/stories/pdffiles/cunha_eia_final_jan_23_2015.pdf


    If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
    respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or
    EMP.
    If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


.
    C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
    OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [X ] No [                ] NA [ ]
    If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager Yes [ X ] No [ ]              NA [ ]
    (PM) review and approve the EA report?
    Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the Yes [ X ] No [ ]           NA [ ]
    credit/loan?
    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [X ] No [ ]                NA [ ]
    Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place Yes [ X ] No [ ]             NA [ ]
    in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to
    project-affected groups and local NGOs?
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional Yes [ X ] No [ ]                      NA [ ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the Yes [ X ] No [ ]            NA [     ]
    project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include Yes [ X ] No [ ]                NA [     ]
    the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
    safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with Yes [ X ] No [ ]                  NA [     ]
    the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
    legal documents?
    III. APPROVALS
.
    Task Team Leader(s):        Name: Armando Guzman
    Approved By:
    Practice Manager/Manager:   Name: Anna Wellenstein   Date: 4/3/2015
