                             INTEGRATED           SAFEGUARDS           DATA SHEET
                                          RESTRUCTUlUNGSTAGE
              Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring

                                                                              Report No.: ISDSRl1744

Date ISDS PreparediUpdated:                  22-Dec-2015
I.   BASIC INFORMATION
     1. Basic Project Data
     Country:                        Haiti                  I Project ID:                IP123974
     Project Name:                   Haiti Business Development and Investment Project (P123974)
     Task Team Leader(s):            Maria Deborah Kim
     Estimated Board Date:           21-May-2013
     Managing Unit:                  GTC04
     Sector(s):                      Public administration- Industry and trade (41 %), General industry and
                                     trade sector (38%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (18%), Other
                                     social services (3%)
     Theme(s):                       Regulation and competition policy (57%), Micro, Small and Medium
                                     Enterprise support (41 %), Natural disaster management (2%)
     Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                        No
     (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                     Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
     Total Project Cost:          20.00                       Total Bank Financing:        120.00
     Financing Gap:               0.00
         Financing Source                                                                                    Amount
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                     0.00
         IDA Grant                                                                                             20.00
         Total                                                                                                 20.00
     Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
     Is this a Repeater project? No
     Is this a Transferred           No
     project?


     2. Current Project Development Objectives
     The objective of the Project is to assist the Recipient in: (a) improving the conditions for private sector
     investment and inclusive growth; and (b) improving its capacity to respond promptly and effectively to
     an Eligible Emergency.
· Proposed   New PDO (from Restructuring         Paper)



3. Project Description
Component 1: Business Environment and Investment Generation (USD 2.0 million)

1.1. Business Environment Reform (USD 2.0 million) - There are no changes to Subcomponent 1.1.
This subcomponent will contribute to the design and implementation of economy-wide business
environment reforms, as an improved business environment is correlated with higher private sector
growth. The activities comprise:
(a)       Assisting the Recipient in the design and implementation of economy-wide business
environment reforms to improve the business enviromnent through: (i) the implementation of a
detailed action plan to: (A) revise the regulatory framework for secured lending; establish an
electronic collateral registry; and provide training to enhance the capacity of registry staff and
financial market clients; (B) improve the insolvency framework by updating the regulatory
framework; building awareness and enhancing the capacity of the judiciary; and support the
establishment of a regulatory framework and oversight mechanisms for insolvency administrators; and
(C) carry out the regulatory and administrative business reforms covered by the said action plan; and
(ii) the improvement of the licensing and inspection regimes in selected industries, all through the
provision of goods, technical assistance, training and operating costs.
(b)       Provision and support to MCI for: (i) conducting a competition assessment and scoping review
of the existing constraints and barriers to competitive markets in selected sectors; and (ii) identifying
the legal and institutional changes required for fostering greater opening of markets to competition and
addressing constraints specific to such sectors, all through the provision of goods, technical assistance,
and training.
(c)       Provision of support to: (i) the entity under the auspices of the MCI, responsible for the legal
reform related to the business environment; and (ii) the coordinating entities to be designated by the
Recipient to improve the business environment, all through the provision of goods, technical
assistance and training.
(d) Provision of support to the CCAH for: (i) strengthening its institutional capacity, internal
procedures, operations and governance; (ii) developing and implementing training and sensitization
programs for, inter alia, arbitrators, mediators, judges and the private sector; and (iii) reviewing
relevant laws and policies pertaining to arbitration.

1.2 Investment Generation (USD 0.01 million) - There will be no further activities under this
subcomponent. This subcomponent remains in the Project because of USD 13,597 in expenses were
incurred prior to restructuring for some work on Integrated Economic Zone legal framework.

2.0 Business Development Services for MSMEs (USD 15 million)

This Component will continue to strengthen MSMEs' links to value chains through Business
Development Services (BDS), but as requested by the Recipient will expand support from 1 regional
Department to all 10, and will also focus BDS and Matching Grants on groups of MSMEs in value
chains, instead of individual MSMEs. The expansion of support from I to 10 Departments will allow
for the development of 20 value chains over the duration of the project, which will increase
opportunities for investment and also ensure inclusive growth by providing services in the poorest
regions of the country. Component 2 will continue to provide support for: sector-specific value-chain
diagnostics; preparation of the Matching grants manual; provision of training to MSMEs on business
improvement; provision of technical assistance to assist MSMEs in preparing business improvement
plans (but at the cluster level, not on an individual finn level); provision of Matching Grants to
Beneficiaries to carry out Subprojects; and, enhancement of the capacity of regional offices of MCl for
the management, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the above services (though expanded
from I regional office to all 10 regional offices).

With the reallocation of USD 8 million from Component 1, Component 2 will increase from USD 7
million to USD 15 million. The USD 15 million will be broken down as follows: Subcomponent 2.1
Support for value chain improvement (USD 2 million); Subcomponent 2.2 Matching Grants for
MSMEs (8 million); and Subcomponent 2.3 Support for 10 MCl regional offices (5 million). The
original BDS and Matching Grants to individual beneficiaries would not be sufficient to correct certain
market failures, as such, the Restructuring aggregates the Matching Grants to benefit groups of
MSMEs and local producers in particular value chains, instead of individual MSMEs. As the original
Matching Grants were for individual MSMEs, they could not exceed USD 25,000 per Beneficiary but
as matching grants will be given to groups of beneficiaries, the limit for matching grants is being
raised. There will be two types of matching grants: (1) Matching Grants for Business Improvement
Plans for a particular value chain, with a matching component up to USD 100,000 per regional office
(for a minimum of 4 beneficiary MSMEs) and (2) Matching Grants for Common Services at national
level, to overcome key bottlenecks in several of the selected value chains, with a matching component
up to USD 1,500,000 (for a minimum of 60 beneficiary MSMEs). This higher level of aggregation has
been estimated to encourage the development of logistical and other services that require economies of
scale. It is anticipated that there will be 4-6 large common services subprojects over the course of the
project.

Component 3 - Project implementation, evaluation and monitoring (USD 2.5 million) - There are no
changes to this component. This component will continue to support project management, monitoring
and evaluation through the:
1.      Provision of support to MEF and MCI for the Project management, monitoring and evaluation,
through the provision of goods, technical assistance, training and operating costs.
2.      Provision of technical assistance to MCI for conducting a series of workshops for public
awareness and consultation on the progress of Project.

Component 4 - Immediate Response Mechanism (USD 0.5 million) - The objective of this component
is the provision of support to respond to an Eligible Emergency. There are no changes to Component
4.

The Safeguards rating of the project is Satisfactory, as there have been no safeguards issues to date.

4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The Project will be carried out in all 10 regional Departments of the country, with Matching Grants to
be provided for all 10 Departments.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Asli Gurkan ( GSURR )
Nicolas Kotschoubey ( GEN04 )

6. Safeguard Policies                          Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Enviromnental Assessment OP/BP 4.01            Yes             The Environmental Assessment (OP/BP
    ~   4.01) policy is triggered due to the
        potential for adverse environmental
        impacts under the matching grants
        supported under Component 2. The
        restructured Project, as the original, is
        Category B (Partial Assessment).

        Component 2 of the restructured project
        will provide matching grants to MSMEs
        to finance training, small works and
        technical assistance. The main difference
        between the original project and the
        restructured project is that the
        restructuring proposes provide Matching
        Grants solely to benefit a group of
        Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
        (MSMEs) instead of indi vidual MSMEs
        and increasing the total envelope for
        Matching Grants from USD 4 to USD 8
        million. This change will reduce the
        number of matching grants and increase
        their value, in order to increase their
        impact and reduce transaction costs.

        Potential beneficiaries will be MSMEs
        involved in value chain initiatives
-       supported by the Ministry of Commerce
        and Industry's regional offices.
        Investments which would normally be
        considered as A-type investments will
        not be eligible for project financing.

        The ESMF will be updated and finalized
        by January 30,2016 and will be publicly
        disclosed by February 15,2016.
        However, many of the instruments (e.g.
        screening tool) created in the original
        ESMF will remain, although perhaps
        slightly modified to reflect the change in
        project design. The original ESMF also
        included: (i) eligibility criteria and a
        process for subproject screening and for
        determining the appropriate safeguard
        instrument to apply to each subproject;
        (ii) a matrix of potential impacts and
        mitigation measures; (iii) a monitoring
        and evaluation section for determining
        responsibilities for supervising the
        implementation of any mitigation
        measures; (iv) implementation
                                     arrangements for safeguards; (v) cost
                                     implications; (vi) capacity building
                                     required to ensure implementation and
                                     supervision of the ESMF.


Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes    This policy was triggered because the
                                     original project included environmental
                                     impact assessment studies for the
                                     Integrated Economic Zones (IEZs). The
                                     IEZ subcomponent is being cancelled
                                     through the restructuring.

                                      Under Component 2 the project will not
                                      finance matching grants that affect
                                      natural habitats as defined under the
                                      policy. The ESMF will include screening
                                      criteria to ensure that any matching grant
                                      to an MSME that is thought to impact
                                      these areas will not be eligible for
                                    . financing.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes    The policy was triggered because the
                                     original project included environmental
                                     impact assessment studies for the IEZs to
                                     evaluate the potential impacts and risks
                                     at each proposed site with regard to the
                                     quality or management of forests. The
                                     IEZ subcomponent is being cancelled
                                     through the restructuring.

                                     Under Component 2 the project will not
                                     finance matching grants that affect the
                                     quality or management of forests as
                                     defined under the policy. The ESMF will
                                     include screening criteria to ensure that
                                     any matching grant to an MSME that is
                                     thought to impact these areas will not be
                                     eligible for financing. This policy is not
                                     triggered because the project will not
                                     intervene in forest areas.
Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes    The policy was triggered as a precaution
                                     because although the project does not
                                     intend to finance the procurement of
                                     pesticides, nor will it lead to the
                                     increased use of pesticides in the project
                                     area, there may be investment in
                                     activities related to agriculture that may
                                     already use pesticides (prior investment).
                                     Activities or studies that could involve
                                     the agribusiness sector would consider
                                               aspects of pest management, pesticide
                                               use, as well as protection of worker and
                                               consumer health and safety within the
                                               context of value chain assessments and
                                               quality and management of produce for
                                               export or internal markets if included
                                               within the project components. A
                                               pesticide plan is not required at this stage
                                               but the assessment of preexisting and
                                               current pesticide use in an MSME will
                                               determine if the MSME will be financed.
                                               MSMEs that are using unapproved
                                               pesticides (WHO) cannot be financed.
                                               Others may be considered if an approved
                                               pesticide plan is in place.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes   The policy is triggered because the
                                               environmental and social impact
                                               assessment studies for the IEZs would
                                               have evaluated the potential impacts and
                                               risks at each proposed site with regard to
                                               the quality or management of Physical
                                               Cultural Resources (PCR). The IEZ
                                               subcomponent is being cancelled
                                               through the restructuring.

                                               Under Component 2 there will be no
                                               substantial civil works, i.e. construction
                                               of roads that are likely to go beyond the
                                               subsurface strata. The ESMF will
                                               include screening procedures to ensure
                                               that proposal which impacts PCR will
                                               not be eligible for financing. The ESMF
                                               will include procedures for chance finds.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No    The policy is not triggered since there
                                               are no indigenous people as defined
                                               under the policy present in the project
                                               area.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes   The policy was triggered under the
                                               original project given the likelihood that
                                               IEZ development would involve the
                                               acquisition of land, possibly involving
                                               the use of eminent domain, and may
                                               have led to economic displacement of
                                               people living at or near the site. The IEZ
                                               subcomponent is being cancelled
                                               through the restructuring.

                                               A screening tool will be used in the
                                               selection of MSME to ensure that
                                                              MSME projects that would involve
                                                              resettlement are not selected.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                     No              The policy is not triggered since project
                                                              will not invest in dams nor will any
                                                              project activities rely on the operations
                                                              of existing dams.
Projects on International   Waterways OP/BP   No              The policy is not triggered since project
7.50                                                          activities will not affect any known
                                                              International Waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60         No              The policy is not triggered since project
                                                              activities will not affect any known
                                                              disputed areas.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
This is a level 2 restructuring and no new safeguard policies are triggered through the restructuring of
this project. Anticipated social and environmental safeguards issues or impacts associated with the
Restructured project have been reduced substantially as the feasibility studies for Integrated Economic
Zones (IEZ) development are no longer included.

For the MSME matching grants, the safeguard implications are not considered significant or
irreversible. Infrastructure works to be financed is limited to component 2, under the Matching Grants
(as per the original Financing Agreement). There are no changes in expenditure categories, only
reallocations between. Through the restructuring matching grants will now be aggregated and only
benefit groups of MSMEs, not individual MSMEs. This will reduce the number of Matching Grants
which will be granted over the duration of the project. However, some investments will be on a larger
scale than the original project. A screening tool will be used in the review of Matching Grant
proposals (as per the Matching Grant Manual) which will ensure that enviromnentally sensitive
projects (Category A) or projects involving resettlement or Physical Cultural Resources are not
selected. The project currently has an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF),
which will be updated immediately after the project Restructuring is cleared by Country Director. The
estimated date for the updating of the ESMF is February 1, 2016.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
The project focuses on nurturing private sector investments by improving the conditions for
investments. In particular, the project will focus more on supporting value chains, primarily
agricultural, but also light manufacturing.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Client capacity is weak in Haiti in terms of environmental management. The Ministry of Commerce
and Industry is the responsible agency, coordinating the activities of all involved public and private
entities. An existing PIO under the Ministry of Economy and Finance - the UCP - will be initially
responsible for the project's safeguard supervision until the MCI has established its own fiduciary
capacity in a manner acceptable to IDA. UCP, and later MCI, will recruit a part time social and
environmental specialist who will manage environmental and social safeguards aspects of the project,
particularly in relation to the matching grant project screening (the PIO will assess whether one or two
positions will be necessary based on the local market offering). This person will be responsible for the
environmental and social aspects of the project and will be recruited following the clearance of the
restructuring.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Stakeholder consultation is a very important aspect of this project. Local populations and the
international community (IOCN, UN, NGOs, etc.) as well as various branches of Govemment have
been consulted in the preparation of the project and the ESMF. The feedback garnered over the
consultation process was important in modifying the project's design. Public consultations will
continue throughout the project by the MCl's regional offices.

B. Disclosure Requirements
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
The original ESMF for the project was disclosed on March 18, 2013. The revised ESMF will
be ready by January 30, 2016 and will be disclosed by February 15, 2016.

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure ofInformation
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the W orId Yes [X 1 No        [   1   NA [    1
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [Xl       No [    1   NA [    1
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional            Yes [X   1 No [     1   NA [    1
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in      Yes [X 1 No [       1   NA [    1
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include      Yes [X 1 No [       1   NA [    1
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with        Yes [X   1 No [     1   NA [    1
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?
III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader(s):
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:         Name: Svend E. Jensb -   Date: December 18, 2015
Practice Manager/Manager:   Name: Marialisa Motta    Date: December 21, 2015
