                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                             APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                         Report No: 93078
.




Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:               November 5, 2015

I. BASIC INFORMATION

    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                      Haiti                    Project ID:             P145468
    Project Name:                 Improving Access to Social Services and Employment Opportunities for
                                  Persons with Disabilities Project
    Task Team Leader:             Lucy Basset
    Estimated Board Date:         N/A
    Managing Unit:                GSPDR
    Sector(s):                    Social Protection (100%)
    Theme(s):                     Social safety nets, social inclusion, vulnerability assessment and
                                  monitoring
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00               No
    (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                  Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:      2,294,320                     Total Bank Financing:
    Financing Gap:
         Financing Source PHRD Trust Fund                                                              Amount
         Borrower
         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
         Total USD 2,294,320
    Environmental Category:             C - not required
    Is this a Repeater project?         No
    Is this a Transferred project?      No
.


.




    2. Project Development Objective
    The development objective is to increase PwD (Persons with Disabilities) access to social
    services and employment opportunities. This would be achieved through the development of a
    Registry of Persons with Disabilities and the reinforcement of a job placement service for PwD.
    .




         3. Project Description
         The proposed Project would finance tools, training, and capacity building to increase access to
         services and employment opportunities for PwD in Haiti. The Project includes three
         components, as follows:

         A. Project Components

         Component 1: Registration of persons with disabilities (US$709,000). The objective of this
         Component is to provide reliable data on PwD in Haiti and to design a mechanism to support
         the targeting of social programs and benefits to these PwD. Haiti is in the process of developing
         a national social registry; however, the social registry is not likely to adequately capture persons
         with disabilities. Due to the stigma they face, families and communities tend to hide PwD and
         not report them to authorities, who then lack reliable information on disability and have no
         means to appropriately target programs for PwD. This Component will support communication
         efforts to inform PwD about the registration campaign and ensure they are included in the
         national social registry. For those people identified as possibly having a disability, the
         component will also support the application of an additional disability-specific survey,
         containing information on their type and degree of functional limitations. It is estimated that
         100,000 PwD will be registered over three years throughout the country. Activities will be
         carried out in coordination with key social ministries and other public bodies. In particular, this
         component will fund the following three sub-components:

                 (a) Sub-component 1.1: Development of registration system for PwD

                      i. Development of a context-adapted tool for the registration of PwD: This sub-
                         component will support the development of a context-adapted tool to assess
                         persons with disabilities who will be included in the registry, based on
                         socioeconomic and health criteria, in line with a bio-psychosocial view of
                         disability. The tool will be developed in French and Creole and will be based on
                         the Washington Group questionnaire, which adopts an International
                         Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF)-based approach1 to
                         disability and covers six functional domains or basic actions: seeing, hearing,
                         mobility, cognition, self-care, and communication.

                       ii. Establishment of a dedicated information system: This sub-component will
                           finance the purchase of the necessary hardware and the adaptation of the existing
                           software to set up an information system for the disability registry. The set-up
                           of the information management system will mostly consist of the acquisition of
                           hardware and services for data backup, tablets to be used by the certification
                           teams, geo-localization hardware and software, cell phones, internet equipment
                           and associated subscriptions. Training for BSEIPH staff in charge of providing
                           IT support, and operating costs to guarantee IT support to BSEIPH regional
                           offices will also be funded under this component.


1
        World Bank and WHO. 2011. World Report on Disability, p. 26.
           iii. Provision of a disability card to registered PwD: Registration of eligible PwD
                will prove particularly difficult in the Haiti context due to the high number of
                persons who do not have an official identification document, including children
                for whom no official identification is currently available. This sub-component
                will therefore provide beneficiaries with a disability cards, including financing
                of the design and printing of the cards.

       (b) Sub-component 1.2: Identification and registration of persons with disabilities

             i. Implementation of communication strategies to invite PwD to register: This sub-
                Component will support the design of communication strategies to reach the
                highest possible number of persons with disabilities and orient them on how to
                register. The campaign will promote a positive vision of disability and
                encourage the identification and registration of PwD. Communication strategies
                will include not only the use of local media but also the development of contacts
                and partnership with local disabled people organizations (DPOs), ward-level
                elected people, civil society organizations (CSOs) and NGOs working with
                PwD, community agents (e.g., community health workers) and, if possible,
                traditional healers.

            ii. Location and assessment of PwD: The Project will work closely with DPOs and
                will use their help and outreach capacity to locate people at risk of experiencing
                functional limitations and possibly having a disability. DPO personnel will
                receive training (and incentives in the form of basic inputs for their work and
                assistive devices for PwD) to be able to more effectively identify persons who
                have a disability and communicate clearly the scope and objective of the
                registration process. The list of the “at risk? population will then be passed to
                the enumerators, who will administer a dedicated survey to assess the kind and
                degree of functional limitation experienced by the persons in question. Efforts
                will be put in place to reach PwD living in rural areas and occasional registration
                missions will be organized to reach this goal. Additionally, the BSEIPH team
                will promote cooperation with the National Office of Identification (ONI for its
                acronym in French), which will provide identification cards to PwD.

To sum up, this component will fund the set-up of a disability social registry, the registration of
approximately 100,000 PwD, as well as the training of the human resources staff in charge of
locating PwD.

Component 2: Piloting and promoting a model to increase labor market access for PwD
(US$1,138,700). This component will finance the reinforcement of the job placement service
for PwD recently initiated by the BSEIPH. The job placement service will serve as a mechanism
to link potential beneficiaries with disabilities to job opportunities in the formal sector through
skills training, counseling, and job fairs. Under the recent law for the integration of persons
with disabilities, companies must satisfy a quota of two percent of PwD. Therefore, this
component will help both PwD to have better employment opportunities and companies to
comply with existing regulations. The Project is expecting to train around 500 PwD.
Additionally, all PwD reaching out to the service will be advised on available job offers,
identified through consultation and meetings with local employers.

This sub-component will also work with employers (approximately 100) and train them to raise
their awareness on disability and help them identify the actions needed to be able to employ
PwD. Counseling will be provided to employers to help them comply with the existing
disability law at an affordable cost. Lastly, the Project will provide some assistive devices in
order to favor the accessibility of training centers and companies hiring PwD.

This model would start at a small scale in Port-au-Prince, building on the BSEIPH’s ongoing
efforts to support employment opportunities for PwD. Lessons learned will be used to inform
future scale-up of the model. This component will also support a management information
system (MIS) for the job placement service, linked to the registry of PwD, the purchase of a
computer and of other necessary office equipment as well as the creation of communication
material to raise the visibility of the service. Six job fairs will also be funded in order to facilitate
contacts between PwD and employers.

To sum up, this component will fund: the reinforcement of a job placement service that will
serve approximately 1,000 PwD and engage approximately 100 employers.

Component 3: Project Management, monitoring & evaluation, and knowledge dissemination
(US$ 446,620). This Component aims to strengthen the BSEIPH’s capacity for effective
outreach and communication, as well as monitoring and quality control of the registry. To this
end, this project component will support the following actions:

(a) Sub-component 3.1: Project Management. This sub-component will support the
    BSEIPH’s ability to supervise and monitor the registration and job placement service. A
    national part-time procurement specialist and a part time FM specialist will be hired to
    support the BSEIPH and be trained, in part by Bank’s staff and in part by external experts,
    to increase their ability to perform high-quality daily management of project activities and
    increase their fiduciary and procurement capacity. An accounting software will also be
    purchased as part of the institutional strengthening of the BSEIPH. The Component will
    also support fiduciary tasks related to implementation (audits, etc.).

(b) Sub-component 3.2: Monitoring & evaluation. This sub-component will support data
    collection, the monitoring of output and outcome indicators, as well as an end-of-project
    report (ICR), that will be conducted by a dedicated consultant. The registry of persons with
    disabilities and the MIS of the job-placement service will be used as main sources of data
    to inform the study and assess outcomes at the end of the project.

(c) Sub-component 3.3: Knowledge dissemination. The component will fund a training to
    increase the communication skills of BSEIPH’s staff (at least 10 people will be trained in
    order to boost their abilities to effectively communicate the purpose and the result of the
    Project) and support the implementation of a communication strategy to raise awareness
    of disability among the general population, in order to disseminate the results of the Project
    and to start changing how disability is perceived in the Haitian society. Communication
        efforts will include media and social media campaigns, as well as the organization of at
        least 5 awareness raising events. Visibility will be given to employers hiring PwD, in order
        to encourage other companies to follow their examples.

    4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
    (if known)
    The project will be implemented in several departments of Haiti, which will be decided based
    on where the IDA-financed project “Improving Maternal and Child Health and Nutrition
    through Integrated Social Services? (P123706) will collect data, and that is yet to be determined.
    The job placement service will be operated in Port-au-Prince.
.




    5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
    The team will periodically consult with a Social Specialist that will support the carry out of
    periodic vulnerability assessment and help to guarantee that the project reaches the intended
    beneficiaries.
.




    6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered?        Explanation (Optional)
    Environmental Assessment       No                The Project will not have environmental impacts;
    OP/BP 4.01                                       there are no civil works expected under the Grant.
                                                     Project’s environmental rating is a Category C.
    Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No                Project activities will not involve the conversion or
                                                     degradation of critical natural habitats. No civil
                                                     work, building construction or extension will be
                                                     supported by the Project. Thus, no land or water
                                                     where native plants and animal species predominate
                                                     will be affected and this policy will not be triggered
                                                     as defined by the Bank Operational Policies.
    Forests OP/BP 4.36             No                Project activities will not have any negative impact
                                                     on the health or quality of forest, on people’s
                                                     interaction with forests or affect people’s rights,
                                                     welfare or level of dependence with forests. The
                                                     Project does not aim to bring changes on forests’
                                                     management or protection. Thus, this policy will
                                                     not be triggered as defined by the Bank Operational
                                                     Policies.
    Pest Management OP 4.09        No                The Project will not procure pesticides or pesticide
                                                     application equipment and its implementation will
                                                     not lead to any increase in pesticide use. Thus, this
                                                     policy will not be triggered as defined by the Bank
                                                     Operational Policies.
    Physical Cultural Resources    No                Project activities will not be located in or in the
    OP/BP 4.11                                       vicinity of recognized physical or cultural heritage
                                                     sites. Thus, this policy will not be triggered as
                                                     defined by the Bank Operational Policies.
    Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No                 Indigenous peoples are not present in Haiti.
    Involuntary Resettlement          No                 The Project will not involve physical relocation,
    OP/BP 4.12                                           any involuntary loss of land, property or other
                                                         assets resulting in loss of income or means of
                                                         livelihood. Thus, this policy will not be triggered as
                                                         defined by the Bank Operational Policies.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No                 This policy is not triggered given that the Project
                                                         will not support the construction or rehabilitation of
                                                         dams, nor will support other investments that rely
                                                         on the services of existing dams.
    Projects on International         No                 This policy is not triggered given that the Project
    Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 will not affect international waterways as defined
                                                         under the policy.
    Projects in Disputed Areas        No                 This policy is not triggered given that the Project
    OP/BP 7.60                                           will not affect disputed areas as defined under the
                                                         policy.
.




    II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
    describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    The project is rated category C as it is not expected to have any significant, large scale or irreversible
    adverse environmental or social impact. On the contrary, the Project is expected to have a positive
    impact on the inclusion of PwD.
    2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
    the project area:
    The expected impacts are improved social inclusion of PwD and improved life conditions for them and
    their families. There are no indirect and/or long term adverse impacts as a result of future activities
    expected for this project.
    3. Describe any project alternatives considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
    No alternatives were deemed necessary to avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
    4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
    assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
    n/a
    5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
    safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
    No disclosure on safeguards policies will be needed as no safeguard will be triggered by the project.
    However, to ensure a broader positive social impact, consultations with disabled people’s organizations
    will be carried out during project implementation.
.
    B. Disclosure Requirements
    Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 N/A
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                              N/A
    For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the N/A
    EA to the Executive Directors
    "In country" Disclosure
    Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 N/A
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                              N/A
    "In country" Disclosure
    Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 N/A
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                              N/A
    If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
    respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
    Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
    If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
    N/A
.




    C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
    OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [ ]       No [ ]       NA [ X ]
    OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
    Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural             Yes [ ]   No [     ]   NA [ X ]
    property?
    Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the           Yes [ ]   No [     ]   NA [ X ]
    potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
    OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
    Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as         Yes [ ]   No [     ]   NA [ X ]
    appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
    Indigenous Peoples?
    If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or      Yes [ ]   No [     ]   NA [ X ]
    Sector Manager review the plan?
    If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been   Yes [ ]   No [     ]   NA [ X ]
    reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit
    or Sector Manager?
    OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
    Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [ ]         No [   ]   NA [ X]
    framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
    If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or    Yes [     ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
    Sector Manager review the plan?
    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [ ]         No [   ]   NA [ X ]
    Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [ ]       No [   ]   NA [ X ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional          Yes [ ]       No [   ]   NA [ X ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in    Yes [ ]       No [   ]   NA [ X ]
    the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include    Yes [ ]       No [   ]   NA [ X ]
    the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
    safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with Yes [ ]            No [   ]   NA [ X ]
    the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
    legal documents?
.
.




    III. APPROVALS

.




    Task Team Leader:               Name: Lucy Bassett
    Approved By:
    Regional Safeguards Advisor: Name: Francis Fragano                      Date: November 9, 2015
    Sector Manager:                 Name: Margaret Grosh                    Date: November 9, 2015
