Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/14/2005 
Report No.:  AC1257
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Honduras 
Project ID:  P082242 
Project Name:  Nutrition and Social Protection project 
Task Team Leader:  Manuel Salazar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 11, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: July 5, 2005 
Managing Unit:  LCSHS-DPT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (50%);Vocational training (50%) 
Theme:  Child health (P);Social safety nets (P);Other social protection and risk 
management (P);Other human development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK - AL AQSA FUND 
0.00 
 
GERMANY: KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU (KFW) 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to improve Honduras'social safety net for children 
and youth. This would be achieved by (i) improving nutritional and basic health status of 
young children through and expanding the successful AIN-C program, and (ii) increasing 
employability of disadvantaged youth through piloting a First Employment program. The 
coordinated implementation of these interventions constitutes the first step towards 
consolidating the government's institutional and technical capacity to formulate, 
coordinate, and monitor a comprehensive social safety net. This objective supports 
government's strategy of fostering human capital investment among poor families in the 
poorest municipalities of the country to reduce poverty.  
 
The project represents the initial phase of a concerted effort to improve Honduras'social 
safety net. With its emphasis on improving the institutional framework for the two 
program interventions, the project will help to: (i) create conditions to further expand 
such programs based on sound policies and strategies and accurate information from 
monitoring and evaluation mechanisms; (ii) enhance the GOH's capacity to include 
Page  2
additional vulnerable groups and interventions gradually as part of the process to 
consolidate a national social protection structure, and (iii) improve and consolidate a 
monitoring and evaluation system for social protection programs.  
 
Preliminary output and outcome indicators include:  
 
The expected main outputs in each component are summarized as follows:  
 
Component 1: (i) an institutional structure capable of administering, coordinating and 
monitoring public social safety net interventions, initially focused on children and youth; 
(ii) instruments to supervise and monitor these interventions, and mechanisms to improve 
inter-institutional coordination; (iii) as part of a national social protection strategy, a draft 
policy in the areas of children and youth and its three year implementation plan which 
defines roles, responsibilities and products of each participating institution.  
 
Component 2: (i) 1,000 new communities will be participating in AIN-C by the first 
quarter of 2008, covering 35,000 children younger than 2 years of age; (ii) 90 percent of 
the children less than 24 months of age in target communities will be registered and 
participating in AIN-C; (iii) three years after the program has begun implementation, 
child malnutrition rates among children less than 24 months of age in the newly 
participating communities will be 20% less than in the 2005 baseline.  
 
Component 3:  (i) 7,000 15-19 year old youth participating in the program; (ii) 80 
percent of the training beneficiaries will have their first formal labor market experience 
via program training internships;  (iii) 40 percent of training beneficiaries will be 
employed 12 months after completing training and internship, whether in paid jobs or in 
competitive self-employment.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project consists of three components.  
 
Component 1: Institutional Strengthening of the social protection framework for 
children and youth (US$ 1 million).  
 
This component seeks to improve government capacity to protect and improve the 
human capital of poor infants, children, and youth in Honduras, as the first stage to 
consolidate a comprehensive social safety net.  
 
This component will support the Government in the following activities: (i) social 
protection policy formulation and coordination; (ii) instruments to improve the 
effectiveness of social protection expenditures; (iii) support to the Ministry of the 
Presidency as coordinator of Social Protection Policy, and coordinator of this Project; and  
(iv) social Audit of Social Protection programs.  
 
Component 2:  Consolidation and Expansion of the AIN-C program (US$ 11.5 million).  
Page  3
The objective of this component is to prevent chronic early childhood malnutrition by 
strengthening the institutional base and expanding coverage of a community-based 
program of growth promotion and basic health activities.  
 
This component includes: (i) coverage expansion of the AIN-C model; (ii) institutional 
strengthening of the MOH central and local levels; and (iii) implementation of a 
Communications Plan.  
 
Component 3:  First Employment Program for Youth at Risk (US$ 7.5 million).  
 
This component aims to promote the labor market insertion of approximately 7,000 poor 
urban youth who have abandoned the conventional education system, and who do not 
work or who work in very low return informal activities.  
 
The main activities included in this component:  (i) targeting and selection of 
beneficiaries; (ii) training services and preparation for the world of work; (iii) promotion, 
dissemination, and support for labor market insertion; and (iv) program Management and 
Evaluation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
N/A.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSHS-DPT) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The O.D. 4.20 is triggered by the presence of indigenous peoples in the project areas. A 
social assessment was carried out by two teams of local consultants led by the Ministries 
of Labor and Health, with technical assistance of the Bank in the Departments of Copan, 
Intibuca, Lempira and La Paz (for AIN-C) and the Metropolitan Regions of MDC (which 
includes Tegucigalpa), San Pedro Sula and La Ceiba.  
 
Page  4
We do not expect any significant impact on the communities affected by the project. 
However, careful attention has been paid to ensure the culturally differentiated groups of 
the population, such as the Chorti and the Lenca which account for 40 percent of the 
affected population, and the peasants of Lenca tradition in the project area which account 
for another 40 percent, benefit with the AIN-C project in a culturally-adequate manner.  
 
A
pro-active approach has been taken for the "First Employment" component, to ensure 
indigenous and Afro-descendant youth living in the MDC, San Pedro Sula and La Ceiba 
regions are identified and informed about the opportunity to register in the 
EDUCATODOS lists in order to become eligible for project benefits. The indigenous 
federations have agreed to mobilize their social networks to guide ethnic youth in 
vulnerable situation to sign-up at the registration centers.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The AIN-C component has a significant short and long term impact for (a) creating a 
platform for discussion of traditional preventive and curative approaches which may be 
affecting the health of children 0-5 years old positively, or negatively; (b) educating the 
community-based traditional health network in safe preventive and basic curative 
practices; and (c) strengthening the community-based rural health networks.  
 
The "First Employment" component also has potential for significant impact in 
providing youth who have migrated from ethnic rural areas and who may be target of 
crime and violence schemes, to seek training and access temporary employment 
(internship) in the formal sector, while more permanent sources of income are sought.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Both Ministries had an important protagonistic role in the informed consultations with 
beneficiaries, stakeholders and service providers. Therefore, they are committed to 
incorporate the recommendations of the assessment and to implement the IPDP for both 
components. Some of the measures taken to include indigenous and afro-descendant 
peoples in a culturally-adequate manner are:  
 
(a) The variables of ethnicity, gender and age should be included in the baselines, in all 
databases and monitoring systems. This will help in monitoring and measuring social 
impact on children and youths.  
 
(b) Provide an intercultural health and social protection approach to reinforce the 
intercultural identity of the country.  
 
(c) All promotional campaigns should have an intercultural and gender strategy.  
 
(d) Use the community as both, the main target and the protagonist of services delivered 
by AIN-C. The framework of the project should be the "community-based health 
networks" and the pillars should be the Monitors (trained local volunteers), midwives, 
Page  5
healers, Elders. The only permanent institution is the community; therefore, focus the 
training on the "community-based health networks" led by the Monitors.  
 
(e) The indigenous and afro-descendant federations and their social networks will 
participate in project implementation to ensure that the poorest villages which at the 
moment do not have health service providers, be included in the list of new villages for 
intervention of AIN-C. Likewise, the federations will assist "First Employment" in the 
promotional stages to identify and guide vulnerable ethnic youth to sign-up at 
EDUCATODOS to become eligible to participate in the project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders of AIN-C are: (a) beneficiary communities presently receiving 
AIN-C, and new communities to be included in the project; (b) community-based health 
networks (Monitors, midwives, healers); (c) MOH providers such as health units 
(CESAMOS and CESAR); (d) Municipalities; (e) NGOs presently providing services in 
target regions; (e) MOH at the central level (Primary Health Care, Nutrition, Indigenous 
Health Department); (f) Indigenous federations such as ONILH, MILL, FONDIL, CGL 
(Lencas), and CONIMCCH (Chorti).  
 
The key stakeholders of "First Employment" are: (a) youth 15-19 years old living in 
Metropolitan areas of MDC and San Pedro Sula, and La Ceiba; (b) Education services 
providers (inc. EDUCATODOS, PRALEBHA, etc.); (c) Firms willing to provide job 
opportunities to youth; (d) Ministry of Labor and of the Presidency; (e) Fourteen 
indigenous federations.  
 
All of the above, except for potential employers (which will be assessed in the next 2 
weeks) have been interviewed, and their views are reflected in the recommendations of 
the social assessment and IPDP.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/25/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/11/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/08/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  6
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OD 4.20 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in 
consultation with the Indigenous People? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit? 
No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Manuel Salazar 
04/08/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo 
04/08/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
04/12/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Suzana Nagele de Campos Abbott 
04/14/2005 
Comments:  Approved by Acting Sector Leader: Suzana Abbott. 
