         The World Bank
         HN Supporting Cost of Living Measurements




                           Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                         Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)

                      Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Nov-2017 | Report No: ISDSC23081




Nov 07, 2017                                                                                            Page 1 of 7
         The World Bank
         HN Supporting Cost of Living Measurements



 BASIC INFORMATION

  A. Basic Project Data

  Project ID                      Project Name                   Environmental Category      Country
                                  HN Supporting Cost of
  P165218                                                        C - Not Required            Honduras
                                  Living Measurements
  Team Leader(s)                  Estimated Date of Approval     Managing Unit               Financing Instrument
  Liliana Do Couto Sousa, Ewa                                                                Investment Project
                                                                 GPV04
  Joanna Korczyc                                                                             Financing




 Financing (in USD Million)

  SUMMARY             -NewFin1




  Total Project Cost                                                                                                     0.74
  Total Financing                                                                                                        0.74
  Financing Gap                                                                                                          0.00


  DETAILS  -NewFin2




  Total Government Contribution                                                                                          0.25


  B. Project Development Objective(s)
  To support the production of inclusive and high quality socioeconomic indicators through innovative strategies for
  collection of household income and expenditure data and improvements to the household survey life cycle.

  C. Project Description
  The proposed activities are classified into three components as follows:

  Component 1: Implementing cost-effective and high quality surveys [$270,817]

  This trust fund will support pre-collection activities (training and the pilot survey), technical support, equipment, and
  data quality monitoring for the ENIGH-2018 with the aim of identifying and implementing cost-effective approaches
  that enhance quality. Strengthened institutional capacity, including new equipment, included in this component are
  expected to benefit other surveys collected by the CBH and INE. This support will complement the technical assistance
  being provided by the World Bank supporting sampling, questionnaire, and survey design. This technical
  assistance includes the improvement of employment measurements, especially with regards to female rural economic



Nov 07, 2017                                                                                                        Page 2 of 7
         The World Bank
         HN Supporting Cost of Living Measurements



  activity. The following activities are included in this component:

        1. Pilot survey: The pilot survey is an opportunity to test alternative approaches to improve the cost-
             effectiveness and quality of the survey. These include testing of alternative visit lengths, distribution and order
             of modules, and collection methodologies (such as online vs paper recall diaries) since the ENIGH 2018 requires
             multiple visits to each household over the course of a week. In addition, some questions in the questionnaire
             will be tested, including labor questions that may potentially undercount informal female economic activity.
             Finally, the use of tablets rather than paper questionnaires will be tested.
        2.   Training of field staff: Proper training of enumerators and supervisors is integral to a successful survey. The
             trust fund will support costs associated with these trainings.
        3.   Principal consultant: The principal consultant will provide overall logistical and technical support and is
             expected to visit the project team and assess progress at least three times throughout the survey. As with the
             other consultancies supported by this TF, the terms of reference for this consultancy will include reports
             identifying quality and efficiency gains made for the ENIGH 2018, the extent to which these can be replicated in
             other official surveys, and specific suggestions for further enhancements.
        4.   Survey collection and data processing equipment: All surveys collected by INE and the CBH use paper
             questionnaires. However, using computer-assisted personal interviewing (CAPI) techniques has been shown to
             increase quality of data collection in a cost-effective manner by increasing monitoring and facilitating
             consistency checks. The ENIGH team has agreed to test the use of CAPI instruments during the pilot to evaluate
             its possible use for the ENIGH. If the authorities decide to use CAPI for the collection of the ENIGH, this TF will
             support the necessary programming and purchase of equipment. If the decision is to use paper questionnaires,
             this TF will support on-field data entry, the development of a data entry program implementing automatic
             checks, and reporting quality statistics to headquarters (when internet access is available) allowing for
             improved monitoring. Since the survey will be collected during repeated visits, on-field data entry will help
             identify inconsistencies that can be addressed by the survey team in already-planned follow-up interviews.
             Previous surveys have relied on on-field visual inspection by a designated team member. The TF will also
             support the purchase of Stata and SPSS licenses for INE to improve data processing of the ENIGH and other
             surveys.
        5.   Data quality supervision and testing: Quality control supervisors will be on the field throughout the period of
             survey collection. The per diem costs associated with this field supervision comprise a significant portion of the
             support provided by this TF. This TF will also support the hiring of a programmer to help the ENIGH team
             develop comprehensive data quality tests, to validate data entry and identify responses that may require
             follow-up investigation. If the ENIGH is collected using CAPI, this consultant will support the codification of the
             survey to CAPI.

  Component 2: Supporting inclusion through measurement [$172,800]

  This trust fund will cover the costs of including in the survey two isolated departments primarily populated by ethnic
  minorities that are excluded from all poverty and CPI measurements: Gracias a Dios, an underdeveloped region
  populated primarily by Indigenous Peoples (IP), and Islas de la Bahía, tourist destination islands populated primarily by
  Afro-Hondurans. Because of the high costs of transportation to these areas and the difficulty of traveling within Gracias
  a Dios, there are no recent representative socioeconomic data for these two regions beyond the 2013 population
  census. While it is cost-prohibitive to survey these departments annually, including them in the ENIGH would provide
  key indicators every five years. In particular, the 2018 ENIGH would allow for analysis on the appropriateness of the CPI
  and official poverty basket methodology (based on the rest of the country) for these regions. This information is


Nov 07, 2017                                                                                                           Page 3 of 7
         The World Bank
         HN Supporting Cost of Living Measurements



  particularly important for identifying the challenges faced by IP and Afro-Hondurans, groups overrepresented in these
  regions.

  The TF will also support hiring local translators for the inclusion of non-Spanish speaking IP households. It will also
  support consultations with national IP and Afro-Honduran organizations to review the questionnaire and interview
  strategies.

  Component 3: Supporting a culture of data transparency [$47,060]

  To encourage a culture of transparency and accountability, as well as to increase public knowledge about the survey
  and its results, funds will be used to support pre-survey outreach efforts, post-survey analysis, a financial audit of the
  project, and the publication and dissemination of results from this survey. This support will include the development of
  a data transparency and dissemination guideline including components of an SDSS assessment, a dissemination
  timeline and methods to increase access to data, such as anonymization. The TF will support the hiring of an
  international consultant to assist INE and CBH on the data analysis and tabulation of the results from the survey,
  culminating in a training workshop on data analysis and report writing. This component will also support the
  production of metadata and documentation meeting international standards




  SAFEGUARDS


 D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
 analysis (if known)
 This grant will finance several components of this nationally-representative survey, including improving methodologies
 for survey design and data collection. Component 2 supports efforts to include the remote areas of Gracias a Dios and
 Islas de la Bahia within the survey sample. According to the 2013 census, 8.6 of the population is Indigenous (IP) or
 Afro-descendant (Afro). The large majority, or 80 percent, of the Indigenous population live in their traditional lands in
 rural areas whereas it is estimated that 20 percent live in urban areas. The levels of preservation of cultural practices
 and use of traditional languages and governance systems varies among the different IP groups. There are nine ethnic
 groups or peoples that including the following: the Lenca (453,672) that live primarily in the departments of Intibucá,
 La Paz, Lempira, Ocotepeque y Santa Bárbara;the Maya Chortí (population: 33,256) that live in Copán and Ocotopeque;
 the Tolupán (population: 19,033) that live in Yoro and Francisco Morazán; the Garifuna (population: 43,111) that live in
 Cortés and Gracias a Dios; the Nahua (population: 6,339) that live in Olancho; the Pech (population: 6,024) that live in
 Colón, Olancho and Gracias a Dios; the Tawahka (population: 2,690) that live in Olancho, Colón and Gracias a Dios; the
 Miskito (population: 80,007) that live in Gracias a Dios; and Afro-descendants who speak English (negro de habla
 inglesa) (population: 12,337) that live in Islas de la Bahia, Cortés, Atlántida, and Colón. Each Indigenous people or

Nov 07, 2017                                                                                                         Page 4 of 7
         The World Bank
         HN Supporting Cost of Living Measurements



 group are represented by one or more federations or organizations at local, regional and national levels. Given the
 grant’s national scope, as well as the targeted efforts to reach Gracias a Dios home to IP population meeting the four
 criteria of OP/BP 4.10, the Project triggers the Indigenous peoples’ policy. Given the lack of socioeconomic information
 for this part of the country, this grant is highly relevant for IP populations as it could serve to improve the reliability and
 visibility of IP and Afro populations in national policy making, public investments, and planning processes. The grant
 will support methodologies critical to reach and effectively collect data from IP and Afro populations, including those
 living in remote areas and with cultural, organizational, and linguistic variances from the non-indigenous Honduran
 population.




 E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
 This is a Statistical Capacity Building project coordinated with the Central Bank of Honduras and National Institute of
 Statistics. Potential environmental impacts are limited due to the scope of activities. The activity to be funded by the
 project are limited to capacity building, data production, and dissemination. It will not fund any civil work that could
 have environmental impacts. In regards to capacity for engaging with and collecting data with IP and Afro
 communities, INE undertook consultations with national organizations representing Honduran IP and AD communities
 in the context of designing and collecting the 2013 population census. The grant will finance technical assistance aimed
 directly at improving the capacity of the Institute to effectively reach and capture the realities of IP and Afro
 communities in its scope of activities. It will do this both through establishing tailored methodologies that are designed
 together with IP and Afro organizations and will be documented in the operations manual, and through partnering
 with IP and Afro organizations to facilitate the local field work of surveyors.




 F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Dianna M. Pizarro, Social Safeguards Specialist
 Robert H. Montgomery, Environmental Safeguards Specialist


 G. Policies that might apply
 Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project                 Triggered?                     Explanation (Optional)
                                                                                 This policy is not triggered as the proposed
                                                                                 project activities do not involve physical
 Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                   No                        interventions with foreseeable impacts on
                                                                                 environment or natural, physical or cultural
                                                                                 resources.
                                                                                 This policy is not triggered as project
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                           No
                                                                                 activities will not affect natural habitats.
                                                                                 This policy is not triggered as no forests will
 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                    No
                                                                                 be affected by project activities.
                                                                                 This policy is not to triggered given that the
 Pest Management OP 4.09                               No                        project activities will not involve the
                                                                                 purchase or use of pesticides.

Nov 07, 2017                                                                                                             Page 5 of 7
         The World Bank
         HN Supporting Cost of Living Measurements



                                                                   This policy is not triggered as no impacts to
 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11              No
                                                                   physical cultural resources are expected.
                                                                   This scope of the TA to be carried out is
                                                                   national, and thus includes IP communities
                                                                   that meet the four criteria of this policy.
                                                                   Gracias a Dios is included within the pilot
                                                                   survey and has a significant IP population.
                                                                   The grant will support the design of tailored
                                                                   methodologies to effectively reach and
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                       Yes
                                                                   capture reliable data from these
                                                                   communities, and thus will apply the policy
                                                                   through a TA approach where the scope
                                                                   and implementation of the work carried
                                                                   out will be fully aligned with the
                                                                   requirements of the Policy and will be
                                                                   documented in the Operations Manual.
                                                                   This policy is not triggered given that no
                                                                   involuntary taking of land leading to
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                 No            relocation or loss of assets, and no
                                                                   restrictions of access to protected areas,
                                                                   are expected under this project.
                                                                   This policy is not triggered given that the
                                                                   project will not support the construction or
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                           No            rehabilitation of dams nor will support
                                                                   other investments which rely on the
                                                                   services of existing dams.
                                                                   This policy is not triggered as the project
 Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50      No            will not affect international waterways as
                                                                   defined under the policy.
                                                                   This policy is not triggered as the proposed
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60               No            project will not affect disputed areas as
                                                                   defined under the policy.


 H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

 Appraisal stage ISDS required? No


  APPROVALS

  Team Leader(s):                         Liliana Do Couto Sousa




Nov 07, 2017                                                                                             Page 6 of 7
          The World Bank
          HN Supporting Cost of Living Measurements




     Approved By

     Safeguards Advisor:                             Noreen Beg                                        31-Oct-2017

     Practice Manager/Manager:                       Oscar Calvo-Gonzalez                              02-Nov-2017


 1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
 by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.




Nov 07, 2017                                                                                                                              Page 7 of 7
