INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCI 187
,2   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-May-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Madagascar                 Project ID:   P151469
Project Name:    Madagascar Agriculture Rural Growth and Land Management Project
(P 151469)
Task Team Jan Joost Nijhoff,Andre Teyssier
Leader(s):
Estimated        21-Sep-2015                Estimated      17-Dec-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFADR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (70%), Agro-industry,
marketing, and trade (30%)
Theme(s):        Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Land administration and management
(30%), Rural policies and institutions (30%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      40.00             Total Bank Financing:    40.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
O
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                      40.00
Total                                                            40.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The proposed project development objective is to increase farmer incomes, agricultural productivity,
and value addition through the facilitation of linkages between the private sector and rural
communities and through improved land tenure security.
C. Project Description


﻿The new Malagasy Government is committed to investing in the agriculture sector and facilitating
private sector activity. The proposed project aims to support the Government of Madagascar (GoM)
in the implementation of its new development strategies through 5 major components, namely: (1)
Investment facilitation and support to local land management (2) Agribusiness value chain support;
(3) Irrigation and Watershed Management; (4) Infrastructure rehabilitation and maintenance; and (5)
Project coordination and management.
o
Component 1 will support the development and scaling up of out-grower and contract farming
*       schemes, and facilitation of other business models by which farmers and agribusiness companies are
linked. This support could occur through various schemes such as:
(i)       Training, product aggre gation: In most value chains, the development of production,
product quality and quantity, and aggregation capacity depends on the existence of well-organized
producer groups;
(ii)   Government services: For a number of value chains, the provision of Government services is
of critical importance to facilitate trade in perishable and non-perishable commodities.
(iii)  Finance and risk management: Madagascar has a country-wide network of microfinance
institutions that may have the potential to stimulate value chain development.
Component 2 will support the existing institutions in charge of the land management at the local (i.e.
the local land offices and regional land administration services) and at the central level (national land
administration system and land reform Coordination Unit) by developing specific capacity to
facilitate inclusive agribusiness investment. It will also facilitate the responsible gathering and flow
of agribusiness investments that would encourage and foster community-driven activities. It
will include activities such as:
(i)       Community capacity development and developing local-level investor-community
protocol: Using the UN Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land,
Fisheries and Forests, and the Principles for Responsible Agricultural Investments as a basis, the
project would aim to develop socially inclusive approaches for private investments in the agricultural
sector that will not deprive rural households and communities of their property rights and will allow
O
to connect them to markets and increase their incomes. The project will identify supply and demand
for land for agribusiness investment for consideration by communities, and in support of local land
use planning. This process would not only identify opportunities for investors and rural communities,
but also create the necessary transparency and support to stakeholders in negotiations. In
collaboration with local institutions, a local-level investor-community protocol would be developed
that includes a consultation and participation process, benefit sharing arrangements, and a grievance
redress mechanism. Using the protocol, the project would make a contribution to the planning of
Agricultural Investment Areas, a new Government initiative.
(ii)   Support to the Local Land Offices: Starting with communes in the project's agribusiness
value chain catchment areas, the aim would be to achieve maximum coverage of secure land and
improve the sustainability of local land offices.
(iii)  Linkages to Local Land Use Mapping (PLOF) and local development plans: In targeted
project areas and communes, pro-active land use planning would identify potentially valuable land
for investment, and identify opportunities for linking farmers, farmer organizations and investors.
The key outcomes are new (i) agricultural investment areas that will be negotiated with local
populations and will be free of any risk of claims and (ii) a catalog of land offers by municipalities
and fokontany, which will be made available to potential investors. It will include two key activities:
a.     Support to the Regional Land Administration Offices (Cirdoma & Cirtopo): This activity
aims at (a) improving the current land information system, in particular the information exchange


﻿between the State land services and the municipal land offices, and (ii) establishing or improving
Local Land Use Mapping (PLOFs) aiming the preparation of local development plans, including the
delimitation of investment areas.
b.     Support to Local Land Use Planning: New investment areas and land available identified by
O
U       rural communities (see Component 3) will be designed in line with development plans made at the
municipal level with the concerned rural communities
(iv)   Safeguards implementation capacity development: The project aims to foster a socially and
environmentally friendly vision that would ensure that all potential risks and impacts are anticipated
and adequately dealt with. Implementation of project activities is likely to raise some concerns on the
way social and environmental aspects are complied with. The project will support safeguards
capacity building activities for central and local government agencies, private sector, and farmers. A
partnership will be established with the Academia, with the development of a center of excellence on
social and environmental safeguards, precisely with the University of Madagascar.
Component 3 will support key infrastructure that have the potential of boosting the development of
local agribusiness opportunities in the country; precisely:
(i)       Feeder roads maintenance: Deficient rural infrastructure is the second largest constraint
identified by private sector operators. Rehabilitation and maintenance of specific feeder roads in
value chain catchment areas would have the potential to significantly expand the coverage of out-
grower and contract farming schemes and would form an important project sub-component.
(ii)   Rehabilitation of other infrastructure with unlocking potential: A number of geographical
areas can be identified as currently being disconnected from key agribusiness hubs, due to an
impassable main road or a bridge that was damaged during a recent natural disaster and since never
repaired.
(iii)  Development/Rehabilitation of storage facilities: Construction/rehabilitation of professional
warehousing would support the development of inventory credit arrangements and a possible
warehouse receipt system that would further sustain the agribusiness sector in Madagascar.
Component 4 is a Contingency emergency fund, a disaster recovery contingency fund that could be
triggered in the event of a natural disaster through formal declaration of a national or regional state of
emergency, or upon a formal request from the Government of Madagascar in the wake of a disaster.
In that case, funds from other project components could be reallocated to Component 5 to facilitate
rapid financing of a positive list of goods and services related to Components 1, 2, 3 and 4. Eligible
activities would include clearing and rehabilitating road and irrigation infrastructure, purchasing
construction materials, agricultural inputs, or contribute to pest/plague control (e.g. locust control).
Component 5 will support the establishment, through an innovative and multi-disciplinary
implementation approach, a multi-ministry oversight committee to prepare, organize and implement
the proposed project activities.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project has a country-wide perspective although it would primarily be implemented in selected
areas which are to be confirmed.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Borrower has a strong and proven experience and expertise to implement World Bank funded
operations. Experience gained under the previous and recent agriculture operations such as BVPI
(Bassin Versants et Perimetres Irrigues) as well as many others sectoral operations in Madagascar


﻿have given the country in general, key line ministries in particular a fairly good commend on how to
adequately deal with safeguards issues. This project will build upon to ensure adequate handling of
safeguards issues throughout the project lifecycle.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Q
Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSURR)
Marie Diop (GCFDR)
Paul-Jean Feno (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment     Yes         The project proposed activities in component 2, 3
OP/BP 4.01                               and 4 may likely lead to some social and
environmental impacts that would require the
establishment of appropriate mitigation measures to
set up the way forward. The next preparation mission
will further assess the risks involved and suggest
adequate advice on safeguards compliance. Given
the low scale size of the potential social and
environmental risks and impacts, and the site specific
nature of the foreseen project activities, the
environmental and social category of the project will
be B. Moreover, at this very stage, since the exact
locations of these infrastructure investments and
activities cannot be determined prior to project
appraisal, the Borrower will prepare an
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) that includes an Environmental and Social
Management Plan (ESMP). The ESMF/ESMP
outlines an environmental and social screening
process for future sub-projects to ensure that they are
environmentally and socially sound and sustainably
implementable. The ESMF report will be publicly
disclosed both in - country and at the World Bank
Infoshop prior to project appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  TBD          Extension of agribusiness services may occur on
sensitive areas. The upcoming preparation mission
will advise.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           TBD         Likewise, extension of agribusiness services may
require the clearing of forest areas. This will be
better assessed during next mission.
Pest Management OP 4.09      Yes         Extension of agribusiness services may lead to the
extensive use of pesticides to boost agriculture
productivity. The extent to which such usage will
occur will be further captured during next mission.
To ensure safe pest management, the project will


﻿prepare a Past Management Plan for Sub-projects,
building on recent experience. The PMP will be
prepared as a separate instrument and publicly
disclosed both in-country and at the World Bank
Infoshop prior to project appraisal.
Physical Cultural Resources   TBD          Component 2, 3 and 4 may lead to the discovery of
OP/BP 4.11                                 new physical cultural resources that would require
adequate mitigation measures. The likelihood of such
occurrence will be better assessed during the
upcoming preparation mission.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes          The social and environmental category of the
BP 4.12                                    proposed project is B due to the low size and site
specific nature of its foreseen social and
environmental risks and impacts. Project activities in
components 2, 3 and 4 may lead to the acquisition of
land, loss of assets and/or means of livelihood that
could result in the involuntary resettlement of people.
Since the exact locations of these infrastructure
investments cannot be determined at this very
juncture, the Borrower will prepare a Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF) that sets forth the basic
principles and procedures that both the Borrower and
the World Bank must follow to mitigate any potential
adverse social impacts once the physical locations of
the proposed activities are known. The RPF report
will be publicly disclosed both in-country and at the
World Bank Infoshop prior to project appraisal.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     TBD          Components 2, 3 and 5 activities may lead to the use
of existing dams that would require appropriate
mitigation measures. The upcoming mission will
advise on the likelihood of such need.
Projects on International     No           The project does not involve international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No          N/A
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 17-Jun-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The Borrower will likely jumpstart the preparation of the above-mentioned social and
environmental safeguards documents, namely ESMF, PMP and RPF by June, 2015. These
documents will be submitted for review and approval to the World Bank. Once cleared, the ESMF
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿(including its ESMP), PMP and RPF will be publicly disclosed both in-country and at the World
Bank Infoshop prior to the project appraisal.
IV. APPROVALS
O
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Jan Joost Nijhoff,Andre Teyssier
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (SA)            Date: 08-May-2015
o       Practice Manager/    Name: Severin L. Kodderitzsch (PMGR)         Date: 21-May-2015
Manager:


