Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/03/2005 
Report No.:  AC1611
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Hungary 
Project ID:  P074971 
Project Name:  Nutrient Reduction GEF Project 
Task Team Leader:  Xavier Chauvot De Beauche 
GEF Focal Area: International waters 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 4, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: December 8, 2005 
Managing Unit:  ECSIE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sewerage (50%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (50%) 
Theme:  Biodiversity (P);Pollution management and environmental health (P);Other 
environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
12.50 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
19.47
19.47 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project's higher-level objectives are to assist national and local authorities in 
Hungary in the implementation of top priority investments in the wastewater sector and 
to support the Government's commitments under the Danube Conventions and other 
international agreements for the protection of the Danube River and the Black Sea.  
 
The key development objectives of the Project are: (i) to reduce Budapest's discharge of 
nutrients (nitrogen and phosphorus) into the Danube River, and consequently into the 
Black Sea; (ii) to enhance the nutrient trapping capacity of Gemenc and Beda-Karapancsa 
wetlands situated in the lower Hungarian part of the Danube River; and (iii) to serve as a 
model for similar nutrient reduction initiatives in Hungary and other Danube basin 
countries. These objectives will be achieved through: (i) the development of tertiary 
treatment (nutrient removal) at the North Budapest Wastewater Treatment Plant 
(NBWWTP); (ii) the rehabilitation of wetlands in the Gemenc and Beda-Karapancsa 
areas of the Duna-Drava National Park (DDNP); and (iii) the establishment of a 
comprehensive Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system for water quality and 
environmental health allowing to measure the reduction of nutrients and contributing to 
the development of an impact evaluation methodology. The Project will also finance 
Page  2
dissemination activities to foster replication in Hungary or in other parts of the Danube 
River basin.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project's cost of US$32 million would be partially financed by a full-sized GEF 
Grant in the amount of US$12.5 million. The Grant will be complemented by a 
reallocation in the amount of EUR5.9 million (US$7.7 million equivalent) from the 
Bank's Loan 4512-HU to the MOB for the HMWP, and additional counterpart funding of 
about US$10.4 million from MOB, and US$1.4 million from the Ministry of 
Environment and Water (MOEW).  
 
The Project will assist the Government of Hungary (GoH) in developing advanced 
wastewater treatment of domestic discharges and to restore high priority wetlands to 
work as nutrient traps, while increasing their internationally recognized ecological values. 
It will enable comparison of two different forms of intervention to reduce discharges of 
nutrients from point and non-point sources, and evaluation of their impacts in terms of 
global benefits in relation to their respective investment and operation costs. It is thus 
expected to have an important demonstration role in Hungary and within the region to 
help develop technically and financially sound solutions, allowing for best use of scarce 
resources. Furthermore, the Project is expected to strengthen the institutions involved, 
build capacity of local staff in efficient development and operation of wetlands for 
nutrient trapping, and raise awareness of the ecological benefits of wetland rehabilitation 
and their impacts on biodiversity. The Project has three components:   
 
Component 1 - Development of nutrient removal at the NBWWTP (Budapest).  
 
This component, hereafter referred to as MOB- or Budapest- component, will finance 
works and equipment to upgrade the NBWWTP to the tertiary level of treatment for N 
and P removal. The technology for such treatment is highly specific and likely to be 
protected by patents. From a procurement standpoint, specifying the technical 
solution/process would give an unfair advantage to a given supplier. Therefore, the 
procurement will be based on a set of precisely defined performance requirements (to be 
detailed in the technical specifications of the bidding documents), with evaluation based 
on technical and financial efficiency in attaining the specified outcomes.  
 
Component 2 - Wetland Restoration in the Duna-Drava National Park (DDNP 
component).  
 
This component will finance the rehabilitation of about 10,000 hectares of wetlands to 
develop their nutrient trapping capacity within two identified areas, Gemenc and Beda-
Karapancsa, located within the DDNP, directly along the course of the Danube River. It 
will also provide funds to design and install a M&E system for the evaluation of Project 
impacts in terms of reduction of N and P. Parameters to be included in the M&E system 
will be determined on the basis of the baseline survey to be carried out at the first stage of 
the Project. This rehabilitation will be implemented in stages, with the establishment of 
one pilot in each of the two areas for a period of one year. A comprehensive study will be 
carried out at the beginning of the Project to assess the areas' environmental quality, to 
determine the precise location of the two pilots, and to provide recommendations on the 
Page  3
design and development of the M&E system. Building on the results and lessons learned 
from the pilots, the rehabilitation will then be scaled up. Early in the process, an Experts 
Panel will be convened by the MOEW to assess and assist the Southtransdanubian 
Environmental and Water Authority (WA) and the DDNP authorities in the selection and 
monitoring of the planned interventions. In parallel, the component will develop a 
methodology of impact evaluation, using local research organizations and universities. It 
will also include the development of a DDNP Special Area Management Plan, and 
limited funding for incremental Project management costs for the DDNP. Works to be 
carried out in the wetlands include clearing, dredging and construction or installation of 
regulating water structures. This component will be implemented by the WA, acting as an 
implementing agency on behalf of the DDNP.  
 
Component 3 - Dissemination and Replication.  
 
This component will finance consultant services to carry out a comprehensive end-of-
project impact evaluation and results analysis study of the two interventions (tertiary 
treatment and wetlands restoration), including a cost-benefit analysis. It will also finance 
dissemination, public awareness and replication activities, such as workshop and public 
communication campaigns, that will be prepared on the basis of the impact evaluation 
study. The Project will also provide limited funds to finance a Project launch workshop; 
auditing services; and training to strengthen WA for project implementation and to build 
capacity of DDNP staff for the efficient development and operation of wetlands for 
nutrient trapping.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
As indicated above, the Project will be implemented in the NBWWTP of the city of 
Budapest (component 1) and in 10,000 hectares of wetlands in the DDNP, which covers 
50,000 hectares.  Tertiary treatment facilities to be financed under the Project in the 
NBWWTP will be entirely located within the current plant's area and would not represent 
a
modification to the plant's physical characteristics relevant to the safeguards analysis.  
The interventions to be financed by the Project in the DDNP will be located in the 
Gemenc and Beda-Karapancsa areas, which represent 27,800 hectares, of which about 
19,500 hectares acts as a floodplain and is thus involved, at least during flood events, in 
trapping part of the nutrients carried by the Danube.  
 
Once these interventions are completed, it is expected that these areas would be subject 
to longer submergence periods, increasing the surface of permanent wetlands to a 
situation that more closely resembles their natural conditions.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Manuel G. Marino (ECSIE) 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (ECSSD) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01).  
 
The MOB completed the environmental assessment report for its component and got 
Government's approval. The WA, on behalf of the DDNP, completed an EIA for the 
DDNP component. As the process for its approval is rather lengthy in Hungary, the 
Project provides for late implementation for the DDNP component once the 
Government's approval for this EIA is obtained.  
 
The EIAs and other studies carried out during preparation clearly indicate that no 
significant negative impact on the environment is expected as a result of the Project's 
implementation. For the Budapest component, potential impacts are exclusively limited 
to those that could occur during the construction phase (noise, etc.) which will be 
adequately controlled (the EMP includes measures to this end). For the DDNP 
component, the EIA has identified potential environmental negative impacts associated to 
dredging, changes in the local hydrology, disposal of dredge materials, and increased 
flow of pollutants into the wetland. The EIA concludes that no significant negative 
impacts are expected if the precautions (see next paragraph and PAD for details) foreseen 
under the EMP are followed. Moreover, the rehabilitation of the wetlands is expected to 
improve the ecological conditions of the ecosystem and increase biodiversity, as new 
valuable habitats will be created. Positive ecological impacts are in particular expected 
with the creation of additional habitats for a number of migratory bird species of global 
importance.  As indicated above, the Ministry of Environment will convene an Experts 
Panel to assist the WA and DDNP authorities in the assessment and monitoring of the 
proposed interventions.  
 
Environmental Management Plans have been prepared for each of the aforementioned 
components, and mitigation measures have been proposed. In particular, for the DDNP 
component, possible options for the handling and disposal of the dredged material have 
been considered and will be thoroughly examined as part of the detailed design. These 
measures include testing materials to be dredged for potential contamination, physically 
Page  5
isolate area during dredging and until sedimentation, reuse dredged material where 
practicable if of acceptable quality, dispose of dredged material to an appropriate site 
according to its quality and concentrate the dredging and construction work during 
ecologically less sensitive periods of the year. Contractors will be responsible to 
implement these precautions and measures and their implementation will be supervised 
by the WA, the DDNP and the MOEW. These EMPs will be incorporated in the Project 
Operational Manual and its implementation will be monitored as part of Bank follow-up 
visits.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)  
 
On the basis of the conclusions of the EIAs, the Project is not expected to have any 
significant conversion (loss) or degradation of natural habitats, particularly in the DDNP. 
The DDNP is currently flooded periodically (several times a year) by the Danube River. 
The Project will increase water retention and expand the areas of permanent wetlands. 
Specific provisions have been included in the EMP to ensure that these works are carried 
out taking into consideration the functioning of these habitats so as to avoid disturbing 
migratory species or reduce biodiversity. Populations of selected endangered species will 
be monitored during and beyond the Project life as part of the Park monitoring system to 
be established. Consistent with the Safeguards meeting and comments received, the 
Project Team took all necessary measures to comply with the OP/BP.  
 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03), Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20), Involuntary 
Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)  
 
The investments financed by the Project will not affect any known archeological or 
historical site, nor will it affect indigenous people or require resettlement or purchase of 
land.  
 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)  
 
No dams higher than 15 meters are located within the Project area and no upstream dam 
infrastructure failure could impact the planned investments.  
 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50).  
 
The Project is expected to have a positive impact on the water quality of the Danube, 
which is an international waterway. In addition, riparian countries which are signatory 
members of the Danube convention have been informed of and have discussed the 
Project within the scope of the Danube Commission, which has included it in the priority 
list of the Joint Action Program. Therefore notification to the riparian countries as part of 
OP7.50 has been waived for this Project via Memo from the ECA RVP dated March 18, 
2005.  
 
No other Safeguard Policy is triggered.   
 
Page  6
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No significant negative impact on the environment is expected as a result of Project 
implementation. Given the nature of the investments, the Project has been classified as 
environmental category "B".   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
As indicated above, the impacts of the Project are expected to be positive. For each 
component, the EIAs studied different alternatives to maximize the positive impacts, in 
terms of nutrient reduction, but also in terms of biodiversity and ecological balance.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental Management Plans (EMP) were prepared for components 1 and 2 
separately. The Mitigation Plan prepared under each EMP identifies and addresses all 
relevant parameters, impacts and mitigation measures, both during the construction and 
operation periods, and identifies the agency with designated responsibility for its 
implementation and for its enforcement. In particular, for the DDNP component, it 
includes specific measures in regard to the handling and disposal of dredged material. 
The distribution of responsibilities for the implementation and monitoring of these EMPs 
will be incorporated in the four-party agreement between the MOEW, the MOB, the WA 
and the DDNP. Additionally, these EMPs will be incorporated in the Project Operational 
Manual and its implementation will be monitored as part of Bank supervision missions.  
 
For the MOB component, the municipality has shown satisfactory capacity during 
preparation and implementation of the ongoing Municipal Wastewater Project, financed 
by loan 4512 HU, which has a more complex structure and larger requirements.  
 
Despite being technically strong institutions and with experience in dealing with the 
Hungarian regulations in the matter, the Implementing Team of the WA and the DDNP 
do not have yet experience in dealing with the World Bank Safeguards Policies. To 
address this lack of experience, the Project provides for a Project launch workshop, 
coaching from MOB to WA and DDNP and assistance from specialized consultants. 
Therefore, the Project will build capacity of both WA and DDNP in regard to World 
Bank's Safeguard Policies requirements.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key project stakeholders are the institutions involved in its implementation, the 
ecological associations of the DDNP and the public at large.  For Component 1, on June 
1, 2005, the Bank received confirmation that a summary of the Budapest-Component EIA 
was disclosed to the public in Hungarian and in English on the website of the 
Municipality. For component 2, the WA, on behalf of the DDNP, completed the Park 
Component's EIA and presented it in a public forum on March 2005. This Component's 
EAI, as well as the EMP, were also made available to the public for consultation at the 
Page  7
public service office of the South-Transdanubian Environment Protection and Water 
Management Directorate from June 1 to June 8, 2005. The project's EIAs and EMPs were 
submitted to the Infoshop on June 7, 2005.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/15/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/01/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/07/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Page  8
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Xavier Chauvot De Beauchene 
06/04/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Manuel G. Marino 
06/07/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody 
08/10/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Cristobal Felix Diaz Morejon 
06/14/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
08/25/2005 
Comments:  Marjory-Anne Bromhead (Acting Regional Safeguard Coordinator) 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Sumter Lee Travers 
09/29/2005 
Comments:   
