Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (ISDS)        ReportNo.AC1059
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: January 18, 2005
A. Basic Project Data
A. 1. Project Statistics                                                   l
Country: India                        Project ID: P086414
Project: Power Grid System Development  TTL: Sunil Khosla
and Support Project
Total project cost (estimate): ($m): 1060
Appraisal Date: January 2005          IBRD Amount ($m): 400
Board Date: May 2005                  POWERGRID ($m): 660
Managing Unit: SASEI                  Sector: Energy (100%)
Lending Instruments: Regular Investment
Loan
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency recovery)?     No
Environmental Category: A             Safeguard Classification: S1
A.2. Project Objectives
The objective of the Project is to strengthen the transmission system in order to increase
reliable power exchanges between the regions and states.
A.3. Project Description
The Project would support POWERGRID's investment program of system strengthening
in the various regions and developing inter-regional transmission links to enhance the
power exchange capacities, eventually helping enhance the national power grid.
Component A: Transmission system strengthening schemes - This component will
include strengthening of the intra and inter-regional transmission systems for greater
energy security, system reliability and to enhance inter-regional power exchanges.
Technical assistance may include support for enhancing inter-regional power exchange
capacities, building a data base of the system and in the areas where POWERGRID may
need to strengthen for further defining and implementing its role under the new
environment of the Electricity Act 2003. These will be firmed up during project
implementation, depending upon availability of alternative grant finances.
Component B: Completion of balance works of the PSDP-II project - This component
will finance the completion of projects financed by Power System Development Project -
II loan (4603-IN) after its closing date.
B. Check Environmental Category A [X], B [], C [],FI []
Comments:
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Yes No



Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)        [X]  I I
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                [X]  [ I
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                    []  Ž[XI
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03 -)  [XI  [1 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)        [XI  I I
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                 [X]   I I
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                         [X]  [I 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                 [1    [X]
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)"     []   [XI
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)  [ ]  [X]
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues.
D.1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project would finance investment in system strengthening such as power
transmission lines and sub stations. A corporate environmental and social management
framework titled, 'Environment and Social Policy Procedure (ESPP)' has been prepared,
which is based on key principles of 'Avoidance, Minimization and Mitigation'. The
ESPP has been prepared based on national and regional level consultation workshops
involving stakeholders, general public, representatives from Ministry of Power, Ministry
of Environment and Forests, Central Electricity Authority, State Electricity Boards, allied
organizations, academia, NGOs, multilateral funding agencies and Affected Persons
(PAPs) from sub-projects. The ESPP is planned to be implemented in all
POWERGRID's projects, regardless of funding source.
The ESPP will serve as an important tool to mainstream and upstream environmental and
social aspects of operations and activities for POWERGRID, particularly to plan,
design, implement, monitor and manage key environmental and social interventions for
all its sub-projects.
Some of the potential environment and social issues that would be mitigated using the
ESPP framework include the following:
* Mitigating Opening up of canopy in natural forests; lopping of trees; habitat loss,
vegetation damage and fragmentation
* Avoid increased access to wild lands, Paths/Access roads;
* Avoid run off and sedimentation from grading of access roads;
* Avoid chemical contamination from chemical maintenance techniques;
* Ensure that there is no PCBs in electrical equipment;
* Mitigate the impact as a result of change in land use and population relocation due to
towers, substations and induced secondary development during construction;
* Minimizing avian hazards from transmission lines and towers, Air craft hazards from
transmission lines and towers;
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice thefinal determination of the parties'
claims on the disputed areas



* Avoid impairment of cultural and aesthetic resources/, health and safety, fire
hazards and pollution
* Prevent loss of agriculture/community land - by avoiding physical displacement of
population
* Avoid, if not minimize, displacement of population and ensure that the livelihood of
those affected is improved or restored
D.2 Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.
Not anticipated
D.3. Describe the treatment of alternatives (if relevant).
When identifying the transmission system, the process of route selection is done using
several alternatives in order to avoid the forest area involvement completely or to keep it
to the barest minimum. However, whenever the acquisition of forest land becomes
unavoidable due to the geography of terrain or cost, different alternative options are
considered such as different route alignment (using GIS/GPS techniques) or design of
extra high towers to avoid the forest, National park, sanctuaries etc. Through out the
process of identifying transmission lines and location for grid substations, local
population is involved and consulted to finalize alternatives to ensure that there is
minimum disturbance to the local population.
D.4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Following are the key mitigation plans highlighted in the ESPP:
Route selection: POWERGRID will enhance the use of tools such as GIS/GPS for route
alignment and finalization, which will be based the principle of avoiding human
rehabilitation, and impacts on natural resources such as national park, biosphere, eco-
sensitive zones etc. Also POWERGRID will continue to adopt innovative tower design
like multi-circuit and very tall towers to protect wildlife, trees in ecologically sensitive
areas, and reduced the number of trees required for stringing and impact on flora and
fauna.
Management System: POWERGRID will fully implement a comprehensive "Integrated
Management System" (IMS) comprising of International Management System viz.
ISO:14001 for Environment Management, ISO:18001 for Occupational Health & Safety
and ISO 9001 for Quality management, which will enhance the effectiveness of ESPP
implementation. The IMS will be regularly audited and certified by an independent and
internationally accredited third party for its effectiveness
Other Environmental Issues: POWERGRID will not use chemicals for forest clearance/
ROW maintenance to avoid chemical contamination from chemical maintenance



techniques. Also POWERGRID does not procure any electrical equipment that uses
PCB's (Poly Chlorinated Biphenyls).
Land Management: POWERGRID will continue to follow practice to minimize the land
requirement to the barest minimum and to ensure that, particularly, indigenous (Tribal)
people do not suffer adversely and receive culturally compatible social and economic
benefits.
Total avoidance of physical displacement of the population due to project interventions.
As far as possible, acquisition of private land is kept as the last alternative to get land for
grid sub-station
Resettlement: POWERGRID will strictly adhere to the basic principles of avoiding
Resettlement and Rehabilitation (R&R) in all its projects by siting substations on
government land as far as possible. In case R&R is inevitable, POWERGRID addresses
R&R issues arising due to land acquisition through its Social Entitlement Framework and
provides for complete rehabilitation of all affected families.
The flexibility of route selection of transmission lines enables POWERGRID to avoid
adverse social impacts through undertaking measures that include (i) avoidance of the
transmission route involving any human displacement; (ii) making certain that the route
does not threat create any threat to the survival of any community with particular
reference to tribal groups; and (iii) ensuring that the proposed route does not adversely
affect public utility services.
Tribal development: POWERGRID will ensure that the transmission route does not
threaten the survival of any community with particular reference to tribal groups. If initial
preliminary assessment concludes that tribal groups will be affected by the proposed
interventions at the subproject level, a detailed social assessment will be undertaken to
identify issues and concerns and prepare a Tribal Development Plan using the tribal
development strategy included in ESPP.
Implementation arrangement
The environmental and social mitigation measures are integrated with the main scheme
cycle and will be implemented at various stages of scheme during preplanning, planning,
implementation, and post implementation.
At the corporate level, POWERGRID has established a strong Environment and Social
Management Division (ESMD) headed by a General Manager and supported by seven
environment and social specialists under the over all control of an Executive Director
(Corporate Planning). ESMD has been involved in undertaking regular environmental
monitoring, supervision and reporting of progress on implementation of environment and
social action plans. At each of the seven regions of POWERGRID, there is one person
assigned with a responsibility to manage social and environmental issues and ensure
coordination with ESMD in the corporate office. ESMD will continue to work closely
with other functional divisions within POWERGRID to mainstream most environmental
and social issues into the design and planning process, with particular reference to route



alignment and construction of grid substations, in order to mitigate environmental and
social impacts. For grid substations involving significant land acquisition, POWERGRID
undertakes social assessment with the help of Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs)
and they are also involved in the implementation of resettlement action plans..
POWERGRID as part of its regular plan will also periodically assess the capacity of its
ESMD (to identify, plan, implement, monitor and manage environmental and social
aspects) and identify areas for further capacity building. POWERGRID will continue
monitoring of social issues through its monitoring mechanism established at the
corporate, regional and sub-project levels. Evaluation of social action plans will be
undertaken through external M&E agencies.
D.5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The preparation of ESPP has been done based on regional level consultation with the
stakeholders including affected community, NGOs, people's representatives and others.
A national level consultation workshop was also organized to discuss the draft ESPP.
Power Grid has also disclosed the ESPP in public including their web site and locations
of their regional offices.
E. Safeguards Classification (select one)
[ X] S . -The project has significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; where there
are significant potential impacts related to several safeguard policies.
[] S2 - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited to their
impact and are technically and institutionally manageable.
[]S3. - No safeguard issues
[]SF. - Financial intermediary projects
F. Disclosure Requirements                   Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
Date of receipt by the Bank                 12/15/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure             01/06/2005
Date of submission to InfoShop              01/06/2005
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the
Executive Directors                         01/05/2005
Resettlement Action Plan/FrameworkIPolicy Process:
Date of receipt by the Bank                12/15/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure            01/06/2005
Date of submission to InfoShop             01/06/2005
Pest Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank               Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure          Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop            Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank               Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure           Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop            Not Applicable



If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain
why.
Section III - Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment: Triggered
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?
The PSDP III follows a framework approach outlined in the ESPP, which outlines a
procedures for risk identification and preparation of an EA for sub projects. A stand alone
EA for the sub projects planned for the first year will be made available for review before
their appraisal. Most other sub projects including their size, design, locations etc, will be
identified during the course of project and a stand alone EA would be prepared as they
are planned.
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats: Triggered
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural
habitats? No
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical)
natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
The ESPP includes mitigation measures to address issues relating to natural habitats.
OP 4.09 - Pest Management: Not triggered
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? POWERGRID does not
use any technique using chemicals or pesticides for clearance of right of way.
Is a separate PMP required?
If yes, are PMP requirements included in project design?
Draft OP 4.11 (OPN 11.03) - Cultural Property: Triggered
Does the EA include adequate measures? There is very low probability of possible
impact on cultural properties during project implementation. Also POWERGRID will
take all the measures during screening process to systematically avoid any impacts on
cultural properties.
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on
physical cultural resources?
OD 4.20 - Indigenous Peoples: Triggered
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in consultation with
the Indigenous People?
POWERGRID will ensure that the transmission route does not threat the survival of any
community with particular reference to indigenous people (referred as tribal groups in
India). If initial preliminary assessment concludes that tribal groups will be affected by
the proposed interventions at the subproject level, a detailed social assessment will be
undertaken to identify issues and concerns and prepare a Tribal Development Plan. A
tribal development strategy has been prepared and included in ESPP which provides
guidelines on avoiding/minimizing adverse impact on tribal and to enhance project
benefits at par with others.
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and approved
by the Regional Social Development Unit?



OP/IBP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement: Triggered
Has a resettlement action plan, policy framework or policy process been prepared?
The PSDP III follows a framework approach outlined in the ESPP, which defines
procedures for addressing resettlement issues at sub project level. A social impact
assessment, including census of affected families has been completed for the sub projects
planned for the first year and the Resettlement Action Plans (RAP), have been prepared
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve the plan /
policy framework / policy process? The ESPP and the RAPs for the first year activities
are yet to be reviewed by the Regional Social Development Unit
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests: Trigerred
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints been
carried out? Yes
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these constraints?
Yes
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for
certification system? No
ESPP provides adequate procedures and safeguards to address forestry issues, if
encountered during the project.
OP/BP 4.37- Safety of Dams: Not triggered
Have dam safety plans been prepared?
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts (POE) been
reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements been made
for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways: Not triggered
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification requirement, then has
this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and
sent?
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain:..............................
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas: Not triggered
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the international aspects of the
project, including the procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for dealing
with the issue, been prepared, cleared with the Legal Department and sent to the RVP?
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the OP?
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure:
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?
Yes ( on January 6,2005)
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and
language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local
NGOs?    Document placed on the web site of POWERGRID on January 6,2005.



All Safeguard Policies:
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared
for the implementation of the safeguard measures? Yes
Have safeguard measures costs been included in project cost? Yes
Will the safeguard measures costs be funded as part of project implementation? Yes
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of
safeguard impacts and measures? Yes
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the
samne been adequately reflected in the project legaldocuments? Yes
Signed and submitted by:
Task Team Leader:               Name: Sunil Khosla    Date: 01/18/2005
Project Safeguards Specialist 1:  Name: M Hasan       Date: 01/18/2005
Project Safeguards Specialist 2:  Name: Aanjay Srivastava Date: 01/18/2005
Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator Name:  r   c    Brusberg             Date:
Comments
Acting Sector Manager Name:           Vladislav Vucetic             Date:
Comments



