Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1781 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/12/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P095114 
Project Name: Rampur Hydropower Project 
Task Team Leader: Judith K. Plummer 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 1, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 15, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Renewable energy (50%);Power (50%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
400.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
125.00
125.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the project is for SJVN to develop the Rampur hydropower project 
to provide 1800 million units of electricity per year in an economically, environmentally and 
socially sustainable manner.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Rampur hydro-electric power project (RHPP) site is on the Sutlej River in the State of Himachal 
Pradesh.  It is planned as a 412 MW power plant consisting of a 15 km transfer tunnel bringing 
water from the outlet (tailrace) of the Nathpa Jhakri Hydroelectric power plant (NJHP) to a 
surface powerhouse some 15 km from Rampur town.  Thus RHPP will in effect be operated as a 
cascade station to the NJHP run of the river power plant, which was constructed with IBRD 
financing and has been in operation for about two years (first unit commissioned in October, 
2003 and the last or sixth unit commissioned in May, 2004).  Since Rampur hydro project will 
take water from the NJHP tailrace, it will require neither a dam nor any new reservoir capacity or 
land inundation.  No additional desilting chambers will be required as the water will already have 
been desilted within the NJHP plant.  The intake arrangement is part of the NJHP scheme.  
Rampur will be developed by SJVN, a joint venture between Government of Himachal Pradesh 
Page  2
and Government of India.  The project will generate more than 1,800 million units (in a 90% 
dependable year as regards hydrology); and the power will be used in the states of the Northern 
Region of India.  The project will also contribute to the development of the state of Himachal 
Pradesh which will receive a royalty of 12% of the power generated (approx $10m pa) in return 
for the use of its environmental assets in addition to its share in the power station dividends (as 
an equity partner).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Rampur Hydro-electric Project is located on River Sutlej, near the town of Rampur in 
Shimla and Kullu districts of State of Himachal Pradesh.  The project area is enclosed by 
latitudes 77o35'N and 77o43'; and longitudes 31o23'E and 31o30'E.  The project is designed to 
divert water from the tail race of Nathpa-Jhakri Power Project (located near village Jhakri on the 
right bank of the Sutlej) through a 15 km head race tunnel to a surface power station (located 
near village Bael on the right bank of the Sutlej). Various sites of the Project will be approached 
by project roads connected to National Highway-22 on the left bank of the river. This run-of 
river project will be located between 2 run-of-river projects: the 1,500 MW Nathpa-Jhakri 
project, upstream and operating; and the proposed 425 MW Luhri project downstream.  
 
River Sutlej rises in Tibetan Plateau (Rakastal-Mansarovar lake; at elevation about 4,570 m 
above mean sea level), travels about 1,450 km (320 km in China, 758 km in India, and 370 km in 
Pakistan) before it meets the Chenab and subsequently the Indus.  The catchment area of the 
Sutlej at Rampur is about 50,800 km2 (49,800 km2 at Nathpa Dam), of which about 30% falls in 
India and the remainder in China.  The catchments, particularly in China, receive little rainfall 
and precipitation is mostly in the form of snow.  A small percentage of the project catchments 
receive precipitation due to the South-West monsoon (June-September).  
 
The project area and the project's influence area are located in the lesser Himalayas and are 
characterized by rugged topography with high hills (altitude varying from 850 m to 2,000 m).  
The area experiences subtropical to sub-Himalayan climate; and is sparsely vegetated.  The 
immediate vicinity of the projects supports patches of dense forests, but has a long history of 
deforestation.  The hill slopes are steep, and are generally covered with sparse vegetation, over 
burden and outwash material.  The closest designated natural habitat, the Rupi-Bhaba Wildlife 
Sanctuary is located about 13 km away from the project.  The project area falls under Zone-V 
(severe earthquake zone) as per the seismic zoning map of India (IS: 1893-2002) (with epicentres 
of 29 recorded earthquakes of magnitude greater than 5 in the Richter scale, within 200 km of the 
project).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
During implementation of the Bank supported Nathpa-Jhakri Hydropower project, SJVN had 
developed some social and environmental capacity.  SJVN established an Environment and 
Resettlement Cell and adopted a Corporate Environment and Resettlement policy statement.  
Several training programs and study tours have been conducted.  Various environmental and 
social studies were commissioned by SJVN, where the consultants were working with SJVN 
staff closely -- building up additional capability.  SJVN has taken up sensitization programs for 
its staff on social and environmental issues and further strengthening of the institutions capacity 
Page  3
on these issues is planned.  In January 2004, SJVN also initiated the ISO: 14,000 certification 
process for its Nathpa-Jhakri Hydropower project.  
 
During implementation and subsequent operation of the 1,500 MW Nathpa-Jhakri Hydropower 
project, SJVN has already implemented a range of good environmental mitigation measures, a 
resettlement action plan and various community development initiatives.  SJVN have also 
demonstrated some adaptive capacity to manage environmental, resettlement and community 
development issues in its projects. Remarkable among these were -- a) completion of all 
environmental management targets set at the start of the project; (b) agreement to implement 
increased environmental management targets during the construction period; (c) substantial 
implementation of the increased targets -- such as fisheries development plan, wildlife sanctuary 
enhancement plan, the catchment area treatment plan, and the incremental environmental 
management plan.  On the social side some of the actions successfully implemented include: (a) 
uninterrupted operation of mobile health van for more than 4 years in the affected villages; (b) 
offering employment to about 60 project affected persons in the project; (c) construction of a 
resettlement colony and market complex for project affected people; (d) support to income 
generation activities to about 50 families; and, (d) infrastructural developmental works worth of 
about INR 25 million in the affected villages.  Although, it should be noted that owing to a 
retrospective change in the entitlement regime in the state additional persons have become 
eligible for compensation since the commissioning of the project and there issues are now being 
addressed by SJVN.  
 
SJVN has a Corporate Environment, Resettlement and Rehabilitation Group (includes Deputy 
General Manager and Senior Manger (both as an additional charge), an environmental officer 
and supporting staff) under direct supervision of Director (Personnel).  At project level, for 
Nathpa-Jhakri Project, the Environment, Resettlement and Rehabilitation Cell is headed by a 
senior manager (also includes an environmental engineer, a resettlement and rehabilitation 
(R&R) officer, 3 assistant engineers, and 3 supporting staff).  The current Environment, 
Resettlement and Rehabilitation cell dedicated for preparation of the Rampur Hydropower 
Project is headed by a senior manager (and includes a Deputy Manager and R&R officer).  The 
corporate group and project cells are involved in preparation of the Rampur Hydropower Project 
from early stages (starting with site investigation).  A process has been started to recruit a Senior 
Officer to head the Environment and R&R unit at Corporate Office and also recruit Executive 
Trainees having training in Social Sciences and Environment.  
 
However, implementation of the major part of the EMP in Nathpa-Jhakri Hydropower Project 
was undertaken by state level line departments such as forests or fisheries, who had weak 
capacity to ensure effective implementation.  The contractors and the project implementation 
unit implemented the remaining part of the EMP with low levels of supervision and monitoring.  
Some augmentation of the capacity to manage environmental issues will be needed for line 
departments (in state government) and the SJVN to implement the Rampur Hydroelectric Power 
Project to an acceptable standard.  
 
The Bank proposes to provide technical support to SJVN to introduce further improvements 
that would help translate more effectively their corporate policies for sustainability into systems, 
procedures and institutional capacity for improved design and implementation of environmental 
Page  4
and social programs.  The environmental and social assessments of ancillary works such as muck 
disposal sites and quarries are included in the existing assessments.  The transmission line will be 
implemented by POWERGRID, with whom the Bank have an agreed environmental and social 
policy.  The environmental and social impacts of the transmission line will be monitored by the 
Bank team.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr I. U. B. Reddy (SASES) 
Mr Tapas Paul (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The major environmental issues in the project would include (a) disturbance to the forest 
cover and biodiversity in the project influence area; (b) impacts on the potential water use 
downstream, such as at the Rampur town ; (c) induced erosion and landslides in the project area 
and its vicinity; (d) impacts from the project's associated facilities; and (e) the construction-
related impacts.  These issues would be addressed by the environment assessment for the project, 
and all required measures will be identified in an environmental management plan, and 
implemented.  Further the environmental impacts of the associated transmission line will also be 
assessed.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
The legally protected natural habitat, the Rupi-Bhava Wildlife Sanctuary is about 13 km 
away from the project.  However, the project area and the immediate vicinity of the project 
include patches of good secondary forests, which would be directly and indirectly impacted. 
These losses would be compensated or mitigated through the catchment area treatment plan, 
which would be prepared as part of the environmental management plan.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Of the 86.5 ha of land required for the project, about 54 ha (62%) is forest-land, part of 
which have only degraded forest cover. These forests will be lost.  In addition, there are patches 
of good quality secondary forests in the surroundings of the project, which would potentially be 
impacted directly (by the power evacuation facilities, quarrying, etc.) and indirectly (by 
increased pressure on the forest resources).  The direct losses of forests will be compensated 
through implementation of a compensatory afforestation plan.  The indirect losses will be 
compensated through the catchment area treatment plan, and the additional afforestation work to 
be undertaken using the additional amounts paid by the project to reflect the loss in net present 
value of forests.  The forest issues of the transmission line will be identified and mitigated 
separately and this will be monitored by the Bank team.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
The project area does not have any known archaeological or historical sites or remains.  
There is only a marginal possibility of impacts on cultural properties (such as community 
religious properties, sacred groves, and chance-finds).  These would be identified as part of the 
environmental assessment, and mitigated through the environmental management plan, which 
will also include a "chance-find" procedures for cultural properties.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 
X
The Social Assessment will study the characteristics of any the tribal families living in the 
project area to ensure that they are correctly treated and also to confirm whether the strictures 
terms of this OP will need to be applied for the Rampur project.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The resettlement impacts are very moderate, but it will be necessary to devise an appropriate 
resettlement package in consultation with the affected persons.  The project requires about 81 
hectares of land, out of which, 32 hectares is private land and the balance is government owned 
forest-land.  It is provisionally estimated that about 215 title-holders will be affected as a result 
of private land acquisition, and about 20 families will be physically displaced.  The approach to 
resettlement will be based on meaningful consultations and informed participation of the affected 
people in the design and implementation interventions.  The Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) is 
being prepared taking into consideration the choices and preferences expressed by the project 
affected people [PAPs] as agreed with Government of Himachal Pradesh.  As a part of a 
memorandum of understanding [MOU], a resettlement policy for this project was agreed by 
SJVN with Government of Himachal Pradesh.  The policy incorporates several provisions for 
taking up community development works, including the operation of a mobile health unit.  The 
arrangements may require some modifications consequent to Bank review of how well the R&R 
policy complies with the Bank's Operational Policy [OP] on Involuntary Resettlement.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
This project does not construct any dam, but uses tailrace water diverted by the dam earlier 
constructed by the Nathpa-Jhakri Power project.  The 60 m high Nathpa-Jhakri Dam was 
constructed in accordance with the Bank's policy on safety of dams.  In this project, the aspects 
related to the safety of the dam will be re-confirmed.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The River Sutlej (a tributary of the Indus) is an international river (lies in China, India and 
Pakistan).  Neither the upstream or downstream impacts are expected to be significant.  There is 
an existing dams upstream and downstream, particularly the major downstream reservoir at 
Bhakra.  In addition, the Sutlej is one of the 3 eastern rivers defined by the Indus Water Treaty; 
and is earmarked for sole use by India.  Therefore, the project (which does not include a storage 
reservoir) should be of minor interest to upstream and downstream riparian countries.  This 
policy has been complied with.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/31/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  6
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues and 
prepare to mitigate them?  
 
Environment  
 
The borrower has already prepared an environmental assessment (EIA) report, which 
contains an environmental baseline, prediction of impacts, an environment management plan 
(EMP), a disaster management plan (DMP), a catchment area treatment plan (CAT Plan), and 
a
resettlement action plan (RAP).  The EIA report, including the EMP, DMP and the CAT 
Plan are being reviewed by the Bank, and will be updated, before appraisal, as necessary.  
 
SJVN is also undertaking supplementary desk studies related to the cumulative impacts on 
the Sutlej river basin, the required managed downstream river flows; the terrestrial 
biodiversity impacts; and to build adaptive environmental and social management capacity.  
Results from these would be integrated in the EA reports and the project.  
 
Social  
 
The proposed borrower has already carried out a baseline socio-economic-survey which 
covered the key demographic and social economic information of the project affected 
persons (PAPs) and other people living in the affected villages.  The report has generated 
significant baseline information from the secondary data and primary household survey 
which will serve as excellent inputs for preparation of the Resettlement Action Plan.  The 
information such as demographic profile, income and occupation, land holding and cropping 
patterns, ownership of livestock and material assets, health situation, etc. were collected.  The 
details of availability of basic infrastructure facilities in the affected villages were also 
described in the report.  
 
The borrower has initiated steps for commissioning the local professional consultants for 
undertaking Social Assessment and preparation of RAP.  The results of socioeconomic 
survey will provide valuable inputs for both these proposed studies.  Both these studies will 
propose measures for mitigating adverse impacts among the PAPs as well as those living in 
the vicinity of the project area.  
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed?  
 
The borrower will undertake consultation on environmental and social issues.  The 
borrower has already started organizing meetings to meet the regulatory requirement of 
"public hearing".  More consultations on environmental and social aspects will be held as 
part of the process to update EMP, RAP and Social Assessment, and an ongoing basis, 
particularly with the affected people.  The Borrower is in the process of setting up a Public 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
Information centre (PIC) in the project area to provide access to the local people for project 
related information.  This PIC will be used for disclosing all safeguard related documents.  
 
The draft EA, EMP and RAP will be disclosed in the Bank's Info shop and locally by the 
borrower in  PIC and other places accessible to the local people and in a language understood 
by them prior to project appraisal.  The draft reports will be replaced with the final reports 
once the Bank and borrower endorse them.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Judith K. Plummer 
08/16/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
09/08/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Penelope J. Brook 
09/08/2005 
Comments:   
