Page  1
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (ISDS) 
Section I 
–
Basic Information 
D
ate ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/31/2005                                                                      Report No. AC1223
 
A. Basic Project Data 
 
A.1. Project Statistics 
Country: 
India
 
Project ID: P079675 
Project: Karnataka Municipal Reform 
Project 
TTL: Oscar Alvarado 
Total project cost (estimate):  235 ($M) :  
Appraisal Date:  February 2005 
IBRD Amount ($m): 190 
Board Date: June 2005 
IDA Amount ($m):   
GEF Amount ($m): 
PCF Amount ($m): 
Miscellaneous Funds  ($m):   
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Sector: 
 Urban (100%)
 
Lending Instruments: Regular Investment 
Loan 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency recovery)?                            No  
Environmental Category: A 
Safeguard Classification: A
 
A.2. Project Objectives  
The objectives of the project are two fold: Foster the decentralization process through 
improved governance and oversight of local governments at the State level and  at the 
municipal level, enhance the accountability financial soundness of the Urban Local 
Bodies (ULB) of and improve service delivery 
A.3. Project Description  
A. 
Institutional Development Component
 
will consist of supporting 
implementation of Statewide reforms and provision of technical assistance.  It will 
include activities such as improved accounting, computerization of Municipal functions, 
development of land and property related information system, technical assistance to 
town planning, and capacity building of participating institutions.  In addition the project 
will provide funds to conduct studies. 
B. 
Investment Support Component will 
provide investment support accessible to 
all ULBs for upgrading urban services and this is proposed to done through two 
“windows” covering different sectors.   
C. 
Bangalore Development Component 
includes two main activities:  (i) 
Bangalore Capacity Building Support and (b) Bangalore Investment Support: The 
investment program includes the 
Urban Road Rehabilitation Program
 and the 
Greater 
Bangalore Under Ground Drainage Program
.
D.  
Project Management Component. 
Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development 
and Finance Corporation (KUIDFC) will act the as nodal state level agency. A TA 
facility would assist local bodies in sub project development and other advisory services 
A.4
.
B. Check Environmental Category 
A
[X], B [], C [ ], FI [ ] 
Comments:  
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered 
 
Page  2
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment
(OP/BP 4.01) 
[X] 
[ ] 
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
[ ] 
[X] 
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
[ ] 
[X] 
 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03 -) 
[ ] 
[X] 
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
[X] 
[ ] 
 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
[ ] 
[X] 
 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
[ ] 
[X] 
 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
[ ] 
[X] 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)
*
[
]
[X]  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)  
[ ] 
[X] 
 
Section II 
–
Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management  
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
.
D.1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. 
 
Environmental Assessment (OP
/BP
4.01): 
The project would finance investment in urban basic services, 
which is likely to improve overall environmental conditions through expected improvement in efficiency of 
urban service delivery. A background environmental analyses was carried out, which identified key urban 
environmental issues and impacts based on a survey of baseline environmental conditions. The 
environmental analyses noted that the project will have moderate to significant environment impacts 
associated with the subproject to be funded under the Investment Support Component (General urban 
Investment and Public health investment components) and Bangalore Development component.  Most 
environmental impacts of activities proposed under General Urban components relate to construction 
activities and are not likely to be large scale, significant or irreversible. These impacts will be addressed 
through good engineering practices in planning, siting, design, construction and management plans.  The 
environmental impacts of activities proposed under the Public health components (water supply, sanitation, 
and solid waste) have potential to be significant, depending on project size, scale, location and magnitude.  
These impacts for specific investments and location will be identified and addressed using the procedures 
laid down in the Social and Environmental Management Framework (SEMF) prepared as part of 
environmental analyses. 
 
A
separate environmental assessment was undertaken for Urban roads in Bangalore (which is a planned 
investment for the first year), which indicated that there are no major environmental impacts. The 
construction-related impacts will be mitigated and monitored through provisions made in the EMP.
 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
4.12): 
The project aims to improve the service delivery in urban areas 
through supporting the urban local bodies (ULBs) in improving civic infrastructure. An integrated social 
and environmental assessment (ISEA) carried out in 17 ULBs noted that the proposed project interventions 
will not have any significant adverse impact on the local population. A separate ISEA carried out for 
Bangalore Urban Road Rehabilitation Program (component C2 of the project and planned for the first year 
investment) also did not reveal any adverse impacts due to the proposed project interventions. However, 
during project implementation, impacts (if any) for specific investments will be identified and addressed 
using the procedures laid down in the SEMF prepared for the project. Specific mitigation measures are 
included in the Resettlement and Rehabilitation (R&R) Policy prepared by Government of Karnataka 
(GoK) and agreed with the Bank which will form the base for the preparation of Resettlement Action Plan 
(RAP). 
 
The application of SEMF and the adoption of R&R policy have been demonstrated in case of Grea
ter 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' 
claims on the disputed areas
 
Page  3
Bangalore Water and Sewerage Program (Project Component C2). A separate ISEA was carried out which 
noted that the construction of the proposed sewerage treatment plants under Component C2 will entail land 
acquisition and will require an appropriate mitigation plan. Accordingly, a draft RAP has been prepared by 
GoK.   
 
I
ndigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
)
:
This policy is not likely to be triggered as the ISEA carried out in 17 
ULBs did not observe any adverse impact on the Indigenous Peoples (referred as tribal in India). On the 
contrary, the project is expected to improve the urban services and thus help improve the quality of life of 
tribal too. 
 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
).
 This policy is not likely to be triggered. 
 
D.2 Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area. 
 
Anticipated investments in urban services such as Solid waste management and sanitation 
has potential for significant social and environmental impacts, which will be mitigated 
through proper sub-project planning, siting, design, construction, operation and 
maintenance. Each of such sub-project investment will require an ISEA to identify 
significant social environmental impacts and develop a sub-project specific RAP and 
environmental management plant.
 
D.3. Describe the treatment of alternatives (if relevant)
.
The SEMF prepared includes procedures for analyses of alternatives, as a part of the 
social and environmental assessment based on social and environmental conditions, 
coping costs, affordability and willingness to pay for various urban services. Local 
governments would be trained in selection of projects based on analysis of alternatives 
and other criteria.
 
D.4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
OD 4.01: Environmental Assessment
:
Most of the significant environmental impacts will be mitigated by 
ensuring that the investments are properly planned, sited, designed, constructed, and operated and 
maintained. A social and environmental management framework (SEMF) has been prepared, which will 
serve as a management tool to address the environmental impacts in different sub-projects as and when 
these are identified and investment decisions are taken. The SEMF includes i) national, state and local 
regulatory requirements on environmental issues; ii) a screening procedure for reviewing sub-projects in 
order to classify them as having high, medium or low environmental impacts; iii) Sub-project cycle and 
how environmental considerations and assessments will be addressed in the different stages; (iv) Public / 
stakeholder consultation and approach during project implementation, (v) environmental roles, and 
responsibilities of different Government agencies such as KUIDFC and ULBs; (vi) capacity-building and 
training plans, and (viii) procedure for ensuring that the SEMF is kept up to date and maintained.  
 
In addition to the SEMF, a Bo
rrower’s Guidebook has been developed and will be used by the ULBs, 
implementing agencies and contractors. This includes guidance on (i) sub-project categorization, (ii) 
environmental impacts and mitigation measures for various sub-projects, (iii) carrying out an SEIA for sub-
projects with high impacts, (iv) terms of reference for environmental positions in the consultants’ teams 
and (v) incorporating EMP requirements in sub-project contract documents. 
 
OP 4.12: Involuntary Resettlement: 
The SEMF prepared 
for the project will serve as a management tool 
Page  4
to identify social impacts and screen sub-projects on social issues. An R&R policy for the project has been 
prepared by GoK which contains specific mitigation measures for different types of impact and categories 
of affected people. GoK has been successfully implementing R&R activities associated with development 
projects (including those funded by the Bank). GoK has implemented resettlement program of more than 
300,000 displaced people in Upper Krishna Project (a project partly funded by the Bank). The borrower has 
a
lso demonstrated their capacity to undertake social assessment and applying SEMF in the case of 
Bangalore Road Rehabilitation (Component C2) project, which revealed no adverse impacts. However, a 
separate social assessment carried out for  Bangalore Water and Sewerage Program (Component C2) of the 
project) observed adverse impacts and accordingly a Resettlement Action Plan has been prepared.  
 
OD 4.20: Indigenous People.
 
Not triggered 
 
Borrower Capacity: 
In order to have a focused attention on environment and social 
issues and ensure that the project achieves its development outcomes, a Social and 
Environmental Unit (SEMU) has been established with in KUIDFC and it is headed by a 
General Manager (with experience in Urban Affairs and working with local 
communities) with adequate administrative and financial powers. The unit also has a 
Manager responsible for social and environmental aspects. Government of Karnataka has 
also recruited and trained 33 environmental engineers for 43 towns, who would be 
responsible for planning and implementation of environmental management plan. At each 
of the participating ULBs, the social issues will be the responsibility of the concerned 
Health Officers who will be trained under the project to develop their capacities to 
address social issues. Similarly for BMP component, a manager will be responsible to 
address social and environmental issues. Besides ULBs, Resident Welfare Associations 
and other civil societies will be involved in planning, implementing and monitoring 
project activities at ULB level. Grievances Redress Committee at the district level will be 
constituted to address grievances reported by stakeholders particularly affected people. 
Similarly, a Negotiation Committee will be constituted at ULB level to help in finalizing 
compensation norms for land required for sub-project. Under the project, local capacity to 
deal with social and environmental issues will be developed through training programs, 
exposure trips, experience sharing workshops and documenting and disseminating good 
practices.
 
D.5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on 
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
As part of environmental and social assessment, extensive consultations were held in December 2003 and 
January 2004. These consultations included the ULBs, government agencies, NGOs and interested common 
public. As part of project preparation, KUIDFC and consultants organized stakeholders workshops for 
seventeen ULBs in Bangalore in early February 2004 to obtain feedback at different levels. The feedback 
has been used in preparation of environmental analyses, SEMF and the borrower's guidebook. Further 
consultations were held with the stakeholders during the social and environmental assessment carried out 
for Bangalore Road Rehabilitation subcomponent and Bangalore Water and Sewerage Program 
subcomponent (Component C2).  
 
E. Safeguards Classification
 (select one)
 
[x] S
1
.
–The project has significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; where there 
are significant potential impacts related to several safeguard policies.  
[] S
2
.
–
One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited to their 
impact and are technically and institutionally manageable.  
[
]
S
3
.
–
No safeguard issues 
Page  5
[
]
S
F
.
–
Financial intermediary projects 
F. Disclosure Requirements                                        Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:  
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/15/2004    
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
01/28/2005       
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/28/2005 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
 01/31/2005 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:  
Date of receipt by the Bank 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
Pest Management Plan:  
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
Dam Safety Management Plan:  
  
Date of receipt by the Bank 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable
 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain 
why. 
 
Section III 
–
Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level 
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment: 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?  
Since the sub-project details including size, design, locations etc will be identified during 
the course of project, a social and environmental management framework is developed 
that outlines the procedures for environmental risk identification, screening and 
assessing any potential environmental impacts of expected investment components.  
 
For the first year investments in Bangalore roads (BMP -road rehabilitation component) 
and Bangalore Drainage components (8 ULBs), a stand alone EA has been done, which 
includes an EMP and RAP.                                   
 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats: Not triggered  
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural 
habitats?        
 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) 
natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?  
The project EA indicated that project activities are not likely to result in significantly 
adverse environmental impact of degradation of critical natural habitats               
OP 4.09 - Pest Management: Not triggered  
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                                  
Is a separate PMP required?                                                                                         
If yes,  are PMP requirements included in project design?  
NO
 
Page  6
Draft OP 4.11 (OPN 11.03) - Cultural Property: Not triggered 
Does the EA include adequate measures?                                                                     
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on 
physical cultural resources? 
The project activities are not likely to impact on physical 
cultural resources                                                                                                                 
OD 4.20 - Indigenous Peoples: Not triggered 
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in consultation with 
the Indigenous People?                                              
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve the plan?        
 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and approved 
by the Regional Social Development Unit?                                                                           
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement:  
Has a resettlement action plan, policy framework or policy process been prepared?                 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve the plan / 
policy framework / policy process?    
GoK has prepared a Resettlement and Rehabilitation policy for the project which 
includes specific mitigation measures for different types of impact and categories of 
people affected by the project. the social assessment carried out in 17 ULBs and for 
Bangalore Road Rehabilitation subcomponent revealed no adverse impacts and therefore 
required no RAP. However, in case of Bangalore
 
Water and Sewerage Program 
subcomponent (Component C2) involves acquisition of land for establishing sewerage 
treatment plants, a Resettlement Action Plan has been prepared by GoK.
OP/BP 4.36 
–
Forests: Not triggered  
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints been 
carried out?   
 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these constraints?                  
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for 
certification system?       
No
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams: Not triggered  
Have d
am safety plans been prepared?                                                                                               
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts (POE) been 
reviewed and approved by the Bank?           
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements been made 
for public awareness and training?                              
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways: Not triggered 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                                                  
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification requirement, then has 
this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and 
sent?                                        
What are the re
asons for the exception?      Please explain:………………………… 
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                                                                        
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
:
Not triggered
 
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the international aspects of the 
project, including the procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for dealing 
with the issue, been prepared, cleared with the Legal Department and sent to the RVP?                   
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the OP?                                          
Page  7
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure: Yes 
Have relevant safeguard policies d
ocuments been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                        
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and 
language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local 
NGOs?                                         
All Safeguard Policies
:
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared 
for the implementation of the safeguard measures?   Yes                                                        
Have safeguard measures costs been included in project cost? Yes                                                              
Will the safeguard measures costs be funded as part of project implementation? Yes               
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of 
safeguard impacts and measures? Yes                                                                                                                      
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the 
same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?  
These will be finalized 
during project appraisal.
 
Signed and submitted by:  
Task Team Leader: 
Name: Oscar Alvarado 
Date: 02/01/2005 
Project Safeguards Specialist 1: 
Name: M. Hasan  
Date: 01/31/2005 
Project Safeguards Specialist 2: 
Name: Sanjay Srivastava  Date:  01/31/2005 
Approved by: 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator 
Name  Fredrick E. Brusberg   Date:   
Comments 
Sector Manager 
Name  Sonia Hammam 
    Date:   
Comments 
