Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1683 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/26/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P090764 
Project Name: Bihar Rural Livelihoods Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Parmesh Shah 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 26, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 15, 2006 
Managing Unit: SASAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (70%);Other social services 
(20%);Agricultural marketing and trade (10%) 
Theme: Other rural development (P);Rural services and infrastructure (S);Participation 
and civic engagement (S);Gender (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
63.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
7.00
7.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective will be to assist GoB to empower rural poor and improve 
their livelihoods through (i) developing and strengthening institutions of the poor, (ii) building 
and establishing pro-poor savings promotion and livelihood support organizations; (iii) financing 
livelihood business plans and investing in increasing the size of livelihood economy for the small 
producers and the poor and iv) creating a enabling environment for implementing and scaling up 
innovations for rural livelihood development and service delivery.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed operation would finance a 6 year project. The project's main components are:  
 
(a) 
Institution Building:  This component will build the institutional capacity of (i) the poor: 
mobilizing the poor into SHGs and federations and improving their quality and credit worthiness, 
making DCS and PACS into inclusive, transparent and profitable organizations, and developing 
commodity-based producer organizations, (ii) the support organizations - strengthen existing 
institutions like Women's Economic Development Corporation and COMFED (Bihar State 
Page  2
Cooperative Milk Producers' Federations Limited), and establish pro-poor support organizations 
like Rural Livelihood Mission, and Micro-finance and Enterprise Training Institute.  This would 
enable a wider and better choice of service providers for the poor and lay the foundation for 
development of good quality micro finance providers in Bihar, and (iii) capacity building of 
Panchayats for effective and inclusive service provision and community infrastructure.  
 
(b) 
Investment Fund: This component will have two windows: (i) Social Fund:  This will 
enable poor to access critical social services including health, insurance, support to social action 
interventions like advisory and legal services, help lines, etc.; and (ii) Livelihood Fund: This will 
finance livelihood needs and address and facilitate market driven skill building, technical 
assistance, savings promotion and credit access (micro-finance), sectoral investment in various 
commodity and value chains, livelihood enhancement infrastructure for value addition, linkages 
with agriculture research and extension agencies, private sector partnership and market access.  
Efforts will be made to leverage resources from financial institutions.  
 
(c) 
Project Management: This component will finance the incremental operating costs of the 
project coordinating team within the implementing agency, monitoring and evaluation systems, 
studies and other technical services.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented in select districts of Bihar State.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
An assessment of the institutional capacity of the borrower for Safeguards Policies will be 
determined as part of the preparation process and measures to establish this will be taken up.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Varalakshmi Vemuru (SASES) 
Ms Priti Kumar (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental assesment will be carried out as part of the preparation process.  The project 
is not planning to carry out any large scale infrastructure.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
After the project scope and activities are identified, a decision will be taken about 
applicability of these policies, particularly in relation to agricultural activities.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
Many of the project areas are likley to be in heritage Buddhist areas. The decision about this 
will be taken after the first preperation process.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 
X
Although Bihar has very less indigenous population after division of Jharkhand, this would 
be also examined during the first preparation mission.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/15/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  12/15/2005 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Time frame for studies will be indicated after the first preparation mission   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Parmesh Shah 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
