                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                  APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 07/28/2005                                      Report No.: 33586

1. Basic Project Data
Country: India                                 Project ID: P078539
Project Name: Second National Tuberculosis Control Project
Task Team Leader: Birte Holm Sorensen
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 2, 2005        Estimated Board Date: March 9, 2006
Managing Unit: SASHD                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: Health (100%)
Theme: Other communicable diseases (P);Health system performance
(P);Decentralization (S)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):            165.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                  41.00
        Financing Gap                                                         0.00
                                                                            41.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                          Simple []             Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)           Yes [ ]       No [ ]

2. Project Objectives
India has already reached the global targets of 70% case detection rate and 85% cure rate
on a nationwide basis in areas where DOTS is being implemented. However, there are
large differences in program performance across the country, with many districts not yet
having reached the global targets. On the other hand there are many areas of the country
where DOTS has now been implemented for five or more years, and the expectation
would be that ? if the program is functioning effectively ? the incidence of smear-positive
TB should start to decline in those areas. In accordance with these observations, the
Program Development Objective (PDO) of the proposed operation is: (i) to achieve the
global targets of 70% case detection and 85% cure rate in 100% of the districts; and (ii)
for the zones where DOTS has been under implementation for five or more years, the
incidence of smear-positive TB starts to decline. The two key indicators to track progress
towards the PDO (annex 3) are as follows: (i) the number of districts that have achieved a
detection rate of at least 70% and a cure rate of at least 85%; and (ii) the incidence of
smear-positive TB in zones where DOTS has been implemented for five years or more.

 The proposed operation would support the Revised National Tuberculosis Control
Program Phase II, henceforth referred to as RNTCP II, which has been defined by the

GOI in their Project Implementation Plan (PIP) dated May 31, 2005. This document has
been prepared by the Central TB Division (CTD) of the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare (MOHFW), GOI, through extensive consultations with state and district
representatives, representatives from the leading TB research institutions as well as IDA
and other donor representatives during program preparation.

 While emphasis in the previous phase of RNTCP was on introduction of DOTS in a
uniform manner across the country, the RNTCP II will increasingly target the states and
districts which have below average performance in the form of case detection rate below
70% and/or cure rate below 85% through additional technical and managerial support
from the center. A provision is made for additional financial inputs to weaker
Empowered Action Group (EAG ) states and a special provision has been made for
additional contractual posts in these states. In addition the EAG states will be more
closely monitored and supervised by the CTD. The North Eastern states with large tribal
populations and geographically difficult areas will be provided an allocation which is 1.3
times the regular norm and special incentives will be made available for health workers
who work in tribal communities. With DOTS available throughout the country, major
emphasis will now be given to Information Education and Communication both at
national and state level with additional Communications Facilitators for every five
districts engaged by the program.

 The Government has recognized that although a strong public sector DOTS program is
essential, it is not sufficient to reach all TB patients. A number of pilot activities therefore
have addressed issues such as including non-public providers in RNTCP, provision of
services to urban slum populations, ensuring that HIV positive persons suspected of TB
have access to diagnosis and treatment, and ensuring that multi drug resistant patients
receive treatment. These activities will be scaled up in RNTCP II.

 The challenges ahead for RNTCP II lie in (i) maintaining the current momentum of the
program, of the strict clinical standards and of an effective IEC strategy throughout the
country over a period of ten to fifteen years, especially as the larger, weaker states are
fully included in the program; and (ii) expansion of DOTS availability to ensure that
?hard to reach? groups, patients who seek treatment from non-RNTCP providers, HIV
positive and MDR patients have adequate access to effective TB treatment. These
aspects are essential for achieving the long term goal of reducing TB incidence and will
be addressed through this program.

 The Government of India has recently launched the National Rural Health Mission
(NRHM), an initiative to improve the health status of the rural people by promoting
convergence of several centrally schemes including RNTCP. Several components of the
NRHM, such as merging the different state and district health societies into one; making
the Chief Medical Officer overall responsible for program implementation at district
level; supporting a local female volunteer, ASHA, in every village; and inclusion of
Panchayat Raj Institutions and civil society groups in participatory health planning at
local and district level are likely to strengthen the capacity of the states, especially the
weaker states, and thereby facilitate implementation of the RNTCP.

3. Project Description
To achieve the PDO, two broad outputs are required: (i) DOTS services consolidated
through enhancement of the quality of public DOTS provision; and (ii) expansion of TB
services to generally under-served populations. During the first year of this program,
DOTS would have been introduced in all districts of the country. Focus would now be
on achieving program consolidation throughout the country and inclusion of necessary
additional components to expand and increase the program reach.

 Output one: RNTCP services consolidated. This output aims at sustaining the quality of
public TB services across the country. To have an impact on the incidence and mortality
due to TB, quality services must be maintained for many years. The previous phase
mainly focused on start-up to ensure provision of DOTS across the country. For sustained
quality public service provision, special emphasis would now be given to the quality of
laboratory services, supervision and monitoring, continuous operations research,
advocacy and health communication and strengthening of institutional capacity to
implement the program.

 Quality of laboratory services would be consolidated through (i) establishment of a
network of intermediate reference laboratories (IRL) at state level to allow intensified
supervision of laboratory activities at district level; (ii) introduction of a comprehensive
laboratory quality assurance (QA) mechanism based on regular supervision of staff at all
levels, proficiency testing with slide panels and blind cross-checking of slide samples
from all diagnostic centers; (iii) ensuring the routine reporting of QA results to state- and
central levels to allow targeted interventions for quality improvement.

 To improve supervision and monitoring the RNTCP II would strengthen the system of
supervision at all levels of the program. Central TB Division (CTD) would specifically
target low performing states for their regular visits; every year a few randomly selected
districts would be visited by a team from CTD and data validated. State TB officers
would regularly supervise the districts and likewise select a number of districts every
year for in-depth supervision and validation of data. District TB officers would travel for
15 days every month to supervise laboratory and other field staff as well as the DOTS
providers. This is one of the first DOTS programs worldwide to use a comprehensive,
computerized management information system for data collection and transmission; this
system would be on-line for all districts early in the program period. To monitor the
impact of the RNTCP on the incidence of tuberculosis, ARTI surveys will be repeated
every 3 years; survey outcomes from the 2008 survey in zones where DOTS has been
implemented for more than five years would provide the first evidence of program impact
on TB incidence. The program would continue to employ contractual staff for field level
supervision i.e. the Senior Treatment Supervisors (STS) and the Senior TB Laboratory
Supervisors (STLS) but increase the number of staff in low performing areas.

 Operational research to generate an appropriate and continuous flow of information
would receive priority attention in order to make TB control in India more effective. The
RNTCP would communicate the research agenda widely and engage

individuals/organizations to undertake research. Priority topics would include
strengthening service delivery to and demand for services from marginalized groups and
HIV/TB co-infected persons, further development of Public Private Mix (PPM) models,
and new areas such as pediatric DOTS and DOTS+ .

 Information, Education and Information (IEC) would be strengthened to (i) create
awareness of TB symptoms and demand for free DOTS services, with the drugs provided
in patient-wise boxes , among the public and the health providers; (ii) advocate for
political, administrative and community-level commitment to TB control in India; (iii)
enhance patient-provider communication and counseling to help ensure patient
compliance and patient-friendly service. A process rather than products orientation would
promote interpersonal interactive communication and needs-based planning using a
three-step package (formative research, strategy development and monitoring). The CTD
would provide leadership, manage the national level media and advocacy sub-component,
and oversee capacity building in the states. Detailed state and district IEC plans would
ensure contextual relevance and wide reach of information. Additional contractual staff to
facilitate communication would be provided for every five districts and special attention
would be paid to social issues such as stigma and gender, hearing the voices of
beneficiaries, and reaching marginalized and vulnerable groups and patients living with
HIV.

 Appropriate institutional capacity would be ensured at all levels to maintain program
quality. It would include: (i) reorganizing and strengthening CTD through the provision
of equipment and adequate physical facilities, and by having new units established and
program managers in charge of supervision and monitoring, human resource management
and development, financial management, procurement, advocacy and health
communication, and epidemiology/surveillance to better address weaker areas; (ii)
strengthening managerial capacity at state level and implementation capacity at district
level through hiring of additional contractual staff; (iii) technical assistance to support
CTD?s efforts to further decentralize the program?s activities in a phased manner and
encourage states to take ownership, and assigning additional WHO consultants to large
and poorly performing states; (iv) support to states? efforts to provide quality training to
all staff involved in the program, as well as DOTS providers; and (v) assistance to public
and private medical colleges to revise their curricula to include DOTS as the prescribed
treatment for TB, to provide training on DOTS implementation and monitoring to the
faculty, to support existing state level TB task forces in defining their roles and plans of
action, and to support the continued creation of active task forces in medical colleges.

 Output two: RNTCP outreach to target special groups expanded. This output aims to
maximize the inclusion of TB patients under DOTS. With expansion of DOTS to all
districts in the country the program would now implement appropriate strategies to
ensure that services reach (i) the poor, tribal people and other ?hard to reach groups?; (ii)
patients who consult non-RNTCP health service providers; (iii) patients infected with
HIV/AIDS; (iv) pediatric cases; and (v) multi-drug resistant TB cases.

 Despite country wide coverage of the RNTCP, the poor, tribal and other ?hard to reach?
groups still do not adequately avail of its services. A Social Assessment has been
undertaken to prepare an overview of who is not being reached in the current program
and provide insights into how the program can better ensure that their needs are
addressed. Based on this assessment, on a Tribal Plan, and on documentation of the
numerous positive experiences with accommodating the needs of special groups around
the country, each state would implement these activities as appropriate to the conditions
of their state. Special incentives will be provided to health staff working in difficult and
tribal areas and additional financial and managerial support extended to below average
performing areas.

 The first point of contact for patients is most often the non-public health care providers
(the term non-public health care providers, here, refers to the large range of providers
who are not part of the Ministry or Directorates of Health and Family Welfare of the
central or state governments). The program would seek to identify and successfully treat,
under the RNTCP, as many of the presently unregistered and undetected cases as possible
and promote the involvement of non-public health care providers in the RNTCP and in
DOTS provision. In continuation of the current efforts that appear to be yielding results,
RNTCP II would provide additional support in the form of training for non-public
providers. It would also provide additional technical assistance in the states to: (i) draw
from the experiences of current Non Governmental Organizations (NGO) and Private
Practitioner (PP) schemes and revise them, if necessary; (ii) prepare a framework for
phased expansion of Public Private Mix (PPM), develop tools for implementation and
indicators to monitor progress; and (iii) undertake operational research to assess the effect
of PPM related interventions on case detection, treatment success, equity in access and
financial protection for the poor.

 Under the RNTCP II, the aim of HIV/TB coordination would be to ensure optimal
synergy between the two programs at both state and district level for prevention and
control of both diseases. This would be accomplished primarily through joint planning,
sensitization, health communication and training in both programs, ongoing HIV
surveillance among TB patients, and intensified TB case finding among people living
with HIV/AIDS. Training in both programs would include management of TB in HIV
patients, including those on anti-retroviral drugs, and implementation of infection control
to prevent the spread of TB in HIV/AIDS clinical care facilities. Activities would be
targeted to all states and districts with a high HIV/AIDS prevalence. In addition, the
number of state level HIV/TB coordinators would be increased from the current six to
fourteen to ensure coverage of all states with a high HIV prevalence.

 Standardized drug regimens for the treatment of pediatric cases in 'patient-wise'boxes
would be introduced along with ensuring the availability of the necessary diagnostic
facilities for pediatric cases and appropriate staff training. The existing
recording/reporting system would be modified to allow adequate evaluation of case-
finding and treatment outcomes for pediatric cases.

 To address the problem of Multi Drug Resistance (MDR), laboratory capacity at state
level for the performance of sputum culture- and drug sensitivity testing would be
established in a phased manner. This would include routine surveillance systems for
levels of drug resistance against anti-TB drugs, clinical centers at the state level for the
treatment of MDR cases, and gradual expansion of access to drug resistance testing and
treatment of MDR-TB for cases who fail treatment under the RNTCP category two drug
regimen. Due to the high cost of second line drugs, DOTS+, and rigorous compliance
requirements, facilities would be carefully selected based on their demonstrated ability to
implement DOTS and to comply with strict quality assurance requirements.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will be implemented nationally.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Ruma Tavorath (SASES)
   Ms Varalakshmi Vemuru (SASES)


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                               X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                   X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environment
 The environment issues of this project are well defined, site-specific and mitigateable.
The primary issue is that of proper management of clinical and infectious waste materials
(primarily needles, sputum cups and slides) given the infectious, communicable and
opportunistic nature of the diseases involved under the scope of the project.

 Indigenous Peoples (Tribal Community)
 It is recognized that the highest burden of TB is borne by the disadvantaged groups of
the society who have been characterized as "hard to reach population" and include the
poor - both urban and rural, tribal communities and specifically women. In order to
increase the treatment reach especially for the tribal community the proejct needs to (i)

bridge the gaps related to information, access and providers, and (ii) facilitate the tribal
community to overcome socio-economic and cultural barriers to treatment seeking.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Improved services will result in increased waste generated. Unmanaged and inefficient
disposal of waste generated from TB units could result in spread of infections, increased
emissions and land pollution through improper burning of plastic waste.

 The project seeks to improve treatment outcomes for TB affected populations, but at the
same time needs to concentrate on the social aspects of treatment to address the "hard to
reach population" especially the tribal community.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
n/a

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Central Tuberculosis Division has undertaken an Environmental Assessment which
details the current practices under RNTCP Phase I. The assessment revealed that while
basic Infection Control and waste management practices are instituted, many of the
practices need improvement. RNTCP centers are currently practicing infection control by
chemical treatment of biomedical wastes. Disposal methods remain weak and most
infectious waste is dumped or burnt in open pits.

 Based on the findings and gaps observed in the EA, the CTD has prepared an
Environmental and Biomedical Waste Management Plan. The main modality of
implementation of the Action plan is by compliance with the technical guidelines for
disposal of bio-medial wastes as per revised RNTCP guidelines. Specifically the
guidelines will encourage use of bio-degradable plastic like polypropylene, discourage
incineration of plastic waste, discourage open dumping of slides and sharps, adoption of
Universal precautions and encourage waste reporting of centres to their prescribed
authority. The Plan focuses on upgradation of existing training modules; training
(Laboratory technicians, Medical officers, STLS and Class IV employees); procurement
of environmentally-friendly laboratory consumables, appropriate civil works and
awareness and monitoring to ensure sustained behavioural change and continued
compliance with Biomedical guidelines.

 The Plan will need to be strengthened before Negotiations, after consultations with the
state-level stake-holders.

 Under RNTCP I, the CTD had prepared a Manual for Laboratory Technicians, and
rolled-out the necessary training. Implementation is done at the state level, but CTD has
proved to have satisfactory management capacity and has provided the required guidance

and know-how. It also has a monitoring and reporting system in place. However, RNTCP
II aims to address existing weaknesses in implementation.

 Tribal Development Plan
 In accordance with Bank policy on indigenous peoples outlined in its Operational
Directive (OD) 4.20, the CTD has developed a Tribal Development Plan (TDP) to ensure
that the tribal community would have better access to TB treatment and quality and
efficient TB treatment services will be available in tribal areas. Among the major issues
identified in reaching TB services to the tribals are (i) inadequate health service
provisioning in tribal areas, total absence of private sector and high dependence on
Traditional Healers, (ii) inadequate accountability and monitoring of health service
delivery to tribals due to remoteness, (iii) poorly staffed facilities with unhelpful attitudes
of staff, (iv) lack of effective IEC in tribal areas, (v) limited extension services and
limitations of non-tribal staff to motivate tribals, and (vi) poor transportation facilities
and high cost of reaching health facilities.

 Based on extensive consultations the CTD has proposed activities and provided
financial allocations for (i) improving service coverage and providing quality RNTCP
services in tribal areas; (ii) improving accessibility, acceptability and utilization of
services by tribal community; (iii) promoting greater participation of tribal community
members and increasing inter-sectoral coordination to improve efficiency and
effectiveness of TB service provision; and (iv)undertaking operational research to refine
strategies during implementation.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The CTD has discussed the preliminary Plan with the States. The Plan is to be
disseminated to the states for their review and inputs. The CTD will then have further
discussions with the States and revise the Plan prior to negotiations.

 The TDP is based on primary data, review of available experience and consultations
with tribal communities including women and leaders, NGOs and other development
institutions working in Tribal areas, other civil society representatives and Health
Department staff working at different levels in different states. The TDP was disclosed
extensively and state-level consultations and workshops were held to finalize the TDP.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                         03/28/2005
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                     04/29/2005
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                      05/11/2005
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:

  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     04/28/2005
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 05/02/2005
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  05/11/2005
* If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:




C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?            Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA     Yes
report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the        Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in           Yes
consultation with the Indigenous People?
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review the plan?       Yes
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed Yes
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit?
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's     Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a     Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities  Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the         Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the           Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?

  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:                           Name             Date
Task Team Leader:                 Ms Birte Holm Sorensen          07/28/2005
Environmental Specialist:         Ms Ruma Tavorath                05/03/2005
Social Development Specialist     Ms Varalakshmi Vemuru           05/27/2005
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg
 Comments:
Sector Manager:                   Ms Anabela Abreu
 Comments:

