Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Report No. AC819 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: June 23, 2004   
 
 
 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P086414 
Project Name: POWERGRID System 
Development Project 
–
III 
Task Team Leader: Sunil Khosla 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 30, 2005 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): $600 million 
IBRD: $400 million 
Estimated Board Date: May 30, 2005 
 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment Loan 
Sector:  Power 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private 
sector development 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Sanjay Srivastava, M. Hasan 
Other financing amounts by source: Borrower 
 ($200m.) 
B.  Project Objective 
 
The objective of the Project is to help increase the facility for power exchanges between the regions/ 
states through: 
(a)  assisting POWERGRID in building a robust national transmission network which can facilitate 
reliable power transfers across the country; and 
(b) 
supporting the institutional development of POWERGRID for sustainable development of the 
national transmission system
.
C.  Project Description 
 
Government of India (GoI) has identified power as a key infrastructure development area to support its 
plans to achieve high levels of sustainable economic growth and poverty alleviation.  GoI has requested 
the Bank to provide a lending for approximately US$ one billion to POWERGRID, to support their 
investment requirements for next 8 years.  The investments are primarily aimed at building a strong 
national transmission network by raising inter regional power transfer capacity from 8,000 MW currently 
to 30,000 MW.  Initially, a four- year (2005-2009) Sector Investment Loan (SIL) of USD 400 million has 
been proposed to support part of the investment requirements for building the national grid.  The 
Borrower’s contribution would be USD 200 million. 
 
The project aims to support a time slice of POWERGRID’s investment program, financing those 
investments in the project period that meet the agreed eligibility criteria for funding, i.e. that the scheme is 
technically and operationally justified, economically and financially optimized as part of the least cost 
investment program, has received all the necessary Government clearances, and complies with 
POWERGRID’s environment and social policy and procurement procedures (which are acceptable to the 
Bank).  The technical assistance component would support policy dialogue in implementation of the open 
access and to attract new private transmission projects. 
 
Page  2
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project will be spread across various states all over the country.  The project is primarily aimed at 
building a strong national transmission network.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity 
 
Over the last few years the transmission sector in India has developed significantly, and is poised for 
further rapid growth. This will bring new and complex challenges for POWERGRID on social and 
environmental issues.  POWERGRID has established a strong Environment and Social Management 
Division (ESMD), which is headed by a General Manager and supported by seven environment and social 
specialists.  ESMD has been involved in undertaking regular environmental monitoring, supervision and 
reporting of progress on implementation of environment and social action plans, since PSDP-II.  Each of 
the seven regions of POWERGRID has a person assigned the responsibility for managing social and 
environmental issues and ensuring coordination with the ESMD corporate office in New Delhi.  ESMD 
will continue to work closely with other functional divisions within POWERGRID to mainstream most 
environmental issues into the design and planning process, with particular reference to route alignment, in 
order to mitigate environmental and social impacts.  POWERGRID as part of its regular plan will also 
periodically assess the capacity of its ESMD (to identify, plan, implement, monitor and manage 
environmental and social aspects) and identify areas for further capacity building. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[x] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
 
The investment component is likely to include transmission lines and  sub stations, which can 
have varying levels of environmental impacts (during construction and operation stage), 
depending upon the specific project location, scale and the size of the investment components.  
The project will use POWERGRID’s corporate ESPP (under revision), which outlines procedures 
and practices for environmental assessment in order to identify significant impacts and develop an 
environmental management plan.
 
[x] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
[] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
)
[x] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
[x] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
)
[x] Forests 
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
[] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
[] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
[] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
Page  3
[
]
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7
.50) 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[X] A   [ ] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
The proposed environmental category of the project is based on lessons from the earlier PSDP II project, 
including the nature, magnitude and likely significance of environmental impacts of the investment 
activities proposed under PSDP III. 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
 
[
]
S
1
[X] S
2
[
]
S
3
[
]
S
F
[
]
TBD (to be determined) 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues and 
prepare to mitigate them? 
 
POWERGRID through its Environmental and Social development division (ESMD) had developed (in 
1997-98) and effectively implemen
ted a environmental and social framework, titled ‘Environmental and 
Social Policy Procedures (ESPP)’. This is being revised as part of preparation for PSDP III.  The existing 
ESPP will be strengthened to improve management, monitoring and reporting of environmental policies 
and plans, including new requirements enforced by the GoI since 1998, as well as operational policies and 
directives of the World Bank. The revision of ESPP is being done based on wide ranging consultation 
with stake holders including communities and the project staff to incorporate lessons from the 
implementation of the original ESPP.  
 
The updated ESPP will also be mainstreamed with POWERGRID’s current plans to develop an integrated 
management system (IMS).  This would align organization-wide management system requirements for 
quality and environmental management systems, including occupation, health and safety management 
systems.  POWERGRID has constituted a committee of internationally and locally recognized experts to 
provide guidance at strategic level, and oversee POWERGRID’s progress in implementing its sustainable 
policy objectives.  This committee would have members from NGOs, donor agencies, government 
organizations, and independent experts.  It would meet frequently to review POWERGRID’s performance 
and provide direction to the ESMD team on best international practices and improving effectiveness of 
their existing management systems. 
 
B. 
How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? 
 
POWERGRID’s ESPP has been developed through a consultative process.  As per requirements under the 
ESPP, POWERGRID will undertake project planning and implementation in close consultation with 
stakeholders including with potentially affected local communities.  POWERGRID will disclose the 
ESPP, as per the policy.  
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW 
 
The Bank and POWERGRID will establish a due diligence procedure for the new, non-Bank-financed 
power plants linking to new, Bank-financed sections of the Grid to ascertain their compliance with local 
environmental and social requirements. The Bank safeguards and legal team is working on clarifying the 
corporate level policy approach to the subject of non-Bank-financed linkages. The option to use this 
project as a pilot for using corporate environmental and social management systems to address safeguards 
issues, is recommended.
Page  4
