                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                   CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                    Report No.: 121415
Date: November 8, 2017


 I. BASIC INFORMATION
  A. Basic Program Data
  Country:                 India             Project ID:           P164940
  Project Name:            URBAN REFORMS PROGRAM (AMRUT PLUS)

  Task Team Leader:        Uri Raich
  Estimated Appraisal     July 20, 2018      Estimated Board       September 28, 2018
  Date:                                      Date:
  Managing Unit:           GSU12             Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                                                 Financing
  Sector:                  Urban Development
  Theme(s):

  Is this project processed under 0P 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or No
  OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crisis and Emergencies)
  Financing
  Total Project  US$1,500 million (for     Total Bank Financing:   US$1,500 million (for
  Cost:          the program)                                      the program)
                 IPF financing: US$75                              IPF financing: US$75
                 million                                           million
  Financing Gap: 0.00
  Financing Source                                                               Amount
  BORROWER/RECIPIENT
  International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)     PforR: US$1,425 Mill.

                                                                   IPF: US$75 million
  Total                                                            US$1,500 million
  Environmental            B
  Category
  Is this a Repeater       No
  project?


                                                                                           1
B. Program Objectives

  The Program Development Objective is to strengthen the institutional, financial and
  accountability systems of the participating cities. In the first phase of the Program, the
  development objective is to strengthen the institutional, financial and accountability systems
  of a limited number of participating cities. In the long term, the development objective is
  expected to remain the same, but covering a larger number of cities, mainstreaming the
  lessons learned from the first phase into the subsequent phases.

C. Program Description

 The proposed PforR (“the Program?) will support the two KRAs of AMRUT (the
 government program). It will indirectly support the achievement of first KRA on improving
 access to service delivery by strengthening the core institutional systems and capacities at the
 ULB level that will enable efficient and effective utilization of the grant assistance. The
 Program will directly support the achievement of second KRA on the strengthening of
 municipal functioning and revenue mobilization by incentivizing states and cities for reform
 implementation. The Program will implement a select set of urban reforms to be identified
 during preparation in a limited number of states (approx. 3-5) and cities (approx. 50) and will
 be structured as a MPA comprising two sequential phases over a period of 8 years. The first
 phase with a Bank financing of US$500 million is expected to create a dual demonstration
 effect— (i) operationalize a national level performance-based incentive mechanism for
 implementing urban reforms, and (ii) improve institutional systems for service delivery at the
 ULB level through enhanced technical assistance.

 More concretely, the Program will focus on: (i) deepening the implementation of selected
 reforms at the sub-national level by identifying stretch targets (that go beyond the usual
 check-list approach); (ii) provide stronger financial incentives to undertake these reforms;
 and (iii) provide in depth technical assistance for institutional systems development and
 demand-driven capacity building. The Program’s performance-based incentive mechanism
 will be the primary instrument for providing resources to the ULBs in place of the existing
 mechanism that provides a substantial unconditional infrastructure grant with a small reform
 linked incentive. By adopting this approach, the Program seeks to test the hypothesis in a
 limited number of states and cities that a reform linked performance incentive mechanism
 can provide financial resources to the ULBs in a way that encourages states and ULBs to
 complete the process of devolution and strengthen their systems and capacities to improve
 service delivery. The Program provides an opportunity for the states and cities to define their
 own reform pathway and milestones rather than following the existing approach of standard
 milestones which ignores the diversity of the challenges they face. The Program will be
 designed along the following three principles:

 Principle 1- Supporting reforms at both state and city level: The added value of the
 proposed Program will be to focus on completing the process of devolution at sub-national
 level, and strengthening the local government systems to assume the functional mandates, by
 providing support at the state and local levels concurrently, as follows:


                                                                                              2
    Policy reforms at the state level: The reform activities at the state level will focus on
     the devolution of core municipal functions as per the 12th schedule of the Constitution.
     A detailed activity mapping for each of the functions will be required. The states will
     be required to devolve revenue raising powers and financial approval powers through
     appropriate legal instruments, that will empower the Mayors and enable the ULBs to
     take their own decisions with respect to deploying the financial resources for local
     priorities and levy taxes and user charges to ensure at least cost recovery during the
     operations phase. The states should also provide policy advisory and formulate relevant
     regulations/guidelines for other non-tax revenue sources which have been
     recommended by the 14CFC. States will be required to formalize a dedicated
     professional municipal cadre, initiate organizational restructuring of ULBs and
     formalize lateral recruitments in addition to the recruitments through state public
     service commission.


    Institutional strengthening and local governance reforms at the city level: At the city
     level the focus will be on strengthening core municipal systems and to improve local
     capacities to take on the devolved functions. The reform activities to strengthen the
     core functions include own source revenue generation; improving the organizational
     structures and human resource capacities; strengthening the planning and
     implementation capacities for service delivery; and establishing mechanisms for citizen
     participation. By strengthening the ULBs governance, accountability and financial
     management systems, the Program seeks to address the barriers that restrain private
     sector participation in the urban sector.


Principle 2- Providing incentive-based grants: The Program will provide incentives in the
form of performance-based grants to both states and ULBs for implementing reforms. To
ensure that the quantum and design of the performance-based grants serve as adequate
incentives for the intended reforms, the Program will focus on a limited number of states and
cities in the first phase. The grants system will be complemented by a tailor-made demand-
driven capacity building support that can only be put in place in a limited number of cities.

Principle 3- Selecting states and cities through a challenge competition process: For the state
selection, MoHUA will run a national level challenge competition based on a pre-agreed
framework and objective criteria. The challenge will be open to all states but only the top 3 to
5 ones will be selected for the Program. The competition will cover both past performance of
states and their respective cities in implementing reforms; their current baseline situation in
terms of policies, institutions and systems for service delivery; and the proposed reform
targets and methodologies to achieve those targets. The challenge process is envisaged to
provide space to present innovative and contextualized proposals for implementation of
urban reforms. The performance-based incentives at the state level will be linked directly to
the policy reform milestones that will be agreed during the preparation period. For the city
selection, MoHUA will conduct the baseline assessment based on the APA and will decide
together with the Bank on the number of top performing cities ensuring that the per city
allocation represents a strong enough incentive, as a proportion of their discretionary
transfers, to undertake the reforms.

                                                                                             3
  The Program will support the following three indicative type of activities:
  Activity 1- Incentive grants to the states: Grants to the states will be provided according to
  annual milestones, consistent with their policy reform implementation roadmaps, to be
  developed during preparation. The roadmap will contain clear and measurable targets in
  areas such as functional devolution to ULBs, provision of ULB autonomy, and development
  of a state-level comprehensive monitoring and evaluation system for the ULBs. A
  Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) will be signed between MoHUA and the respective
  state governments to commit on the reform milestones and the linked incentive grant. An
  independent verification protocol will be put in place to verify if the states have achieved the
  milestones on an annual basis, based on which the grant will be released.

  Activity 2- Incentive grants to the cities: The Program will provide incentive grants to the
  participating ULBs based on APA results that will capture improvements in institutional,
  governance and service delivery systems. The results will be used for the scoring/ranking of
  cities and to determine the size of the grant allocation. The APA tool will be developed
  during Program preparation and managed by a third-party provider. In addition, an
  independent verification protocol will be designed to verify the results of the APA and
  perform a quality assurance check.

  Activity 3- Technical assistance and program management support at national and sub-
  national level: This activity will be targeted at central, state, and city levels. At the central
  level the focus will be on program management support to MoHUA including preparing and
  monitoring state level policy reform implementation roadmaps, conducting APAs and other
  related program management activities. At the state level the focus will be on the
  implementation of the agreed policy reforms, and program coordination support. At the city
  level, the focus will be on capacity building for institutional strengthening and systems
  development that will enable the cities to improve their performance in the APAs.

  Activities 1 and 2 will be implemented following the PforR modality with Disbursement
  Linked Indicators (DLI). Activity 3 will be implemented through an IPF modality.The
  Program funding is indicated below.

       Activities             Disbursement modality Indicative Financing for Phase I
1. Incentive grants to states      DLI based                US$100 million
2. Incentive grants to cities      DLI based                US$325 million
3. Technical assistance and
   program     management             IPF                   US$75 million
   support

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

  The project activities may extend to several states and cities in India. The locations are yet to
  be known.

  The precise nature types of the Technical Assistance (TA) activities which would be
  supported by the IPF resources are also yet to be known.

                                                                                                4
    The TA support may primarily consist of consultancy services for capacity building and plan
    preparation. However, since the exact scope of these TA activities are not yet known and
    may entail the preparation and/or review of plans and policies with long-term implications
    the environmental safeguards category at this stage has been set to “B?. This category will
    be reviewed when the necessary information will be available.

    Social safeguard issues, including any significant, long term or adverse impacts or risks are
    not anticipated under this operation as this TA primarily consists of consultancy services and
    evaluation studies. OP 4.12 is not triggered as no resettlement is envisaged due to the
    implementation of the activities under this TA. OP 4.10 is not triggered as no region, district,
    block that has tribal population will be included for the TA is related to the Program
    activities.

  E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

    GoI and state governments have well developed laws and policies that covers environment
    and social issues. The TA may support capacity building, monitoring, preparation or review
    of plans and proposals that might have long-term consequences. During the preparation stage
    and before appraisal; upon finalization of the design of activities to be financed under the IPF
    component, the scope of the technical assistance will be examined (and proper mitigation
    measures detailed, as required) to avoid any long-term environmental issues. Gaps in
    borrower’s institutional capacity would be addressed accordingly.

 F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

    Mridula Singh, Senior Social Development Specialist, GSU06
    Deepa Balakrishnan, Environmental Specialist, GEN06

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY


 Safeguard Policies               Triggered?                          Reason
Environmental Assessment              Yes      The project is envisaging to utilize IPF resources
OP/BP 4.01                                     for technical assistance activities relating to
                                               technical and program management support,
                                               training and capacity building in cities in select
                                               States across India. Program activities and
                                               locations are not clear at this stage. During
                                               preparation and before appraisal; upon
                                               identification of activities to be financed under the
                                               IPF component, the scope of the technical
                                               assistance will be examined (for implied
                                               environmental impacts), and managed
                                               appropriately using suitable EA instrument.


                                                                                                  5
 Safeguard Policies            Triggered?                         Reason
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No       TA activities envisaged under IPF are not
                                            expected to have any impact on Natural
                                            Habitats
Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No       TA activities envisaged under IPF are not
                                            expected to have any impact on Forests

Pest Management OP 4.09            No       Reliance on synthetic chemicals or pesticides is
                                            not expected for any TA activity envisaged
                                            under the IPF
Physical         Cultural          No       TA activities envisaged under IPF are not
Resources OP/BP 4.11                        expected to have any impact on Physical
                                            Cultural Resources

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP           No        OP 4.10 is not triggered as no tribal populated
4.10                                         region will be included for the implementation
                                             of the activities under this TA.
Involuntary Resettlement           No        OP 4.12 is not triggered as no resettlement is
OP/BP 4.12                                   envisaged due to the implementation of the
                                             activities under this TA.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         TBD       Determination during the preparation stage will
                                            be based on whether the program will include
                                            investments which depend on dams (such as
                                            water supply) where the TA might need to
                                            provide for suitable assessments of dam safety
                                            issues. In the event the Program decides to
                                            exclude activities that are concerned with safe
                                            functioning of existing dams, OP 4.37 will not
                                            be triggered.
Projects on International          No       OP 7.50 is not triggered as the project supports
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                        skill development and the TA will complement
                                            the core program investment. The program
                                            itself will not take up any activity that results in
                                            transboundary changes in water quality or
                                            quantity. The TA using the IPF resources will
                                            monitor compliance with respect to avoiding
                                            such transboundary impacts.
Projects in Disputed Areas         No       OP 7.60 is not being triggered as the program
OP/BP 7.60                                  itself will not finance any activity in any
                                            disputed area.

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

  A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS
                                                                                                   6
    July 20, 2018


 B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
    needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage
    ISDS.

   The ISDS will be updated, with details on proposed instruments and safeguard related
   studies if required, once the TA activities are finalized.

IV. APPROVALS

 Task Team Leader:        Uri Raich
 Approved By:
 Regional Safeguards      Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed          Date: September 13, 2017
 Advisor:
 Practice Manager:        Name: Catalina Marulanda           Date: November 8, 2017




                                                                                        7
