                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                        APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                     Report No.: 113387

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:           March 09, 2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                     India                    Project ID:             P154283
 Project Name:                Shared Infrastructure for Solar Parks (P154283)
 Task Team Leader(s):         Surbhi Goyal,Amit Jain,Gevorg Sargsyan
 Estimated Board Date:        30-Mar-2017
 Managing Unit:               GEE06
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                              Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:       200.00                      Total Bank Financing:    75.00
 Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                          Amount
     Borrower                                                                                    100.00
     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                        75.00
     Clean Technology Fund                                                                        25.00
     Total                                                                                       200.00
 Environmental Category: FI – Financial Intermediary
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred        Yes
 project?


 2. Project Development Objective(s)
 1. The proposed development objective is "to increase solar generation capacity through the
    establishment of large-scale solar parks in the country". This will contribute to achievement of the
    Government of India’s (GoI) target of installing 100 GW solar power by 2022.

 3. Project Description
 2. The project will support implementation of the Ministry of New & Renewable Energy’s (MNRE)
    Solar Park Scheme, which promotes large-scale, grid-connected solar-power generation plants in
    the country. The Indian Renewable Development Agency Limited (IREDA) will receive the funds
    under the project and will on-lend the funds, at pre-defined terms, to the selected states agencies,
    which, in turn, will deploy these funds to procure shared infrastructure goods and services required
    for development of the respective solar park. IREDA will serve as the nodal project implementing
    agency (PIA) and will be responsible for supervising the works of the selected state PIAs. IREDA
    will carry out the functions like due diligence before disbursal of loan, coordinated recovery of loan,
    and obtaining relevant documents from these selected state PIAs, as required during the
    implementation and monitoring of this project.

3. The project is expected to demonstrate important economies of scale in solar generation, push down
   equipment and transaction costs, and increase efficiency while further reducing unit costs of solar
   power. It is expected that the ability to offer lower user charges —using a blend of International
   Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and CTF support to construct the parks—for
   access to the “plug-and-play? benefits of the solar park business model will translate into lower
   power tariffs quoted by solar generators.


Project Components

4. The project will have the following two components: Shared Infrastructure for Solar Parks
   (Component 1), and Technical Assistance (Component 2). These are described below.

Component 1. Shared Infrastructure for Solar Parks (estimated total project cost of US$198 million,
including US$75 million in IBRD loan and US$23 million in CTF loan)

5. Component 1 will cover financing for shared infrastructure e.g., access roads, water supply and
   drainage, telecommunications, pooling station inside the solar parks and transmission lines
   connecting these internal pooling stations to the external substation at the periphery of the park,
   feeding into the national/state grid. The scope of investments covered will depend on the modality
   and approach adopted by the state for developing the solar parks. While some states intend to
   provide a full range of infrastructure services to the selected private-sector developers, others intend
   to provide only pooling stations to facilitate internal evacuation. In most solar parks, project
   developers will be responsible for the interconnection of each plot in the solar park with pooling
   stations, using suitable voltage for underground or overhead cable.

6. The project will finance various solar parks included in the MNRE’s Solar Park Scheme. The first
   two solar parks are located in the Rewa and Mandsaur districts of Madhya Pradesh, with expected
   installed capacities of 750 MW and 250 MW, respectively. The estimated investment cost for shared
   infrastructure in these parks is US$62 million (of which the project is funding US$31 million). The
   state has already secured a majority of the land and is in advanced stages of procurement for shared
   infrastructure facilities for both the solar parks. In addition, the MNRE has tentatively identified
   various other solar parks for funding under this project. The IREDA in consultation with MNRE
   will continue to identify additional solar parks during the project implementation period. The
   project follows a framework approach, allowing new states to join if they meet the project’s
   Readiness Criteria for subprojects, including key milestones and deliverables identified as
   prerequisites (e.g., techno-economic, site clearance, fiduciary, environmental, and social
   requirements). This approach will ensure that the proposed future investments are ready for
   execution and meet the necessary due-diligence requirements of the World Bank. As soon as funds
   under this loan are committed, the Bank will be ready to provide additional financing to support
   phase II of the project.
Component 2. Technical Assistance (US$2 million in CTF grant)

7. Component 2 will provide capacity-building support to the IREDA, and the selected state PIAs,
   which will include the SNA and/or JV companies across the participating states. Although the role
   and mandate of state PIAs are growing rapidly to meet the GoI’s ambitious renewable-energy
   targets, they have limited capacity and experience to deliver on these mandates. The support
   provided aims to:
       Build core competencies in such areas as human resources, business planning, project
        monitoring, procurement and contract management, financial management, safeguards, and
        information technology.
       Develop a pipeline of solar-park projects through supporting pre-feasibility studies, site
        identification, and techno-commercial studies, among other activities.
       Assist the IREDA, and the selected state PIAs to identify additional areas where assistance may
        be required to implement their responsibilities to successfully achieve solar-energy targets by
        2022.

.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
8. The location of all solar parks to be financed under the project is not known. The first set of solar
   parks, to be financed under this project, has been identified at Rewa and Mandsaur districts in the
   state of Madhya Pradesh (MP). Rewa Ultra Mega Solar Limited (RUMSL) is the state PIA in MP.
   Additional parks may also be identified in MP as well as other states during the course of project
   implementation. Additional salient features of sites with key environmental and social aspects will
   be added as the locations are finally firmed up.

9. Rewa Solar Park. The project is located approximately 30 km east of Rewa town. The affected
   villages include Badwar, Barsaita Desh, Barsaita Pahad, Etar Pahad and Ramnagar Pahad. The
   project area comprises of open scrub wastelands with small parcels of land in between the site where
   agriculture is practised, located at an elevation of 370-400 m above mean sea level (amsl). Species
   of plants like Acacia nilotica (babul), Albizzia amara (Krishna Siris), Butea monosperma (Tesu),
   Diospyros melanoxylon (tendu), Holoptelea integrifolia (chilbil) were observed to be speckled on
   the land identified for the project. Most of the land area in the study area is rock-strewn with limited
   potential for agriculture due to rain fed irrigation. The project area has an undulating slope with local
   population owning land parcels at both the slope and plain areas. A seasonal channel of rain fed
   water, which flows for few months, locally termed as 'Aahri Nala', was observed to be present
   within the site limits, which crosses land parcels in the east to west direction and drains into Ban
   Sagar Lake, located at a distance of 30 km in the south-west direction from the project site. Areas
   under the slope terrain (falling within the project area) depended solely upon rainfall in order to
   undertake agricultural activities. During this one crop cycle, the local population sowed mainly rice
   or wheat. The location of the site favors the development of a solar park, as the site is situated in a
   rural setting with a suitable topography, it is located near existing grid connections and the area has
   a high level of solar insolation location. The drainage slopes of the park area shall be protected so as
   to allow natural drainage for downstream user communities.

10. Mandsaur Solar Park: Mandsaur district is part of the Malwa region, and is bounded by Neemuch
    District to the north, Rajasthan state to the east and west, and Ratlam District to the south. The total
    land under the project admeasuring about 553 hectares (Ha) fall under the jurisdiction of two
    revenue villages, namely, Runija (134.19 Ha out of total village land area of 2290 Ha) and
    uninhabited village Gujarkhedi (419.44 Ha out of total village land area of 626 Ha). Out of the total
    land under the project, land measuring an area of about 545 Ha was under the ownership and
    possession of government, which has transferred the land in favor of the state PIA. About 8 Ha of
    land - 2 Ha in Runija and 6 Ha in Gujarkhedi village - has been allotted to scheduled caste (SC)
    families (3 families in Runija and 6 families in Gujarkhedi). There is no habilitation in the
    immediate surroundings within 500 m of the project boundary. The proposed site has relatively flat
    topography with only minor undulations that would require minimal preparation. The boundary
    envisaged under the detailed project report (DPR) and the actual demarcation of the sites for the five
    blocks under implementation has undergone certain changes. This is on account of exclusion of
    forest area (Block P3) and the demand for exclusion of water bodies falling within the project
    boundaries by the local villagers. On verification of forest and project boundaries through ground
    truthing and checking of revenue record, it is found that there is no forest land falling within the
    project boundary. Four cultural properties have been identified within 10 km of the project site
    including 2 Jain pilgrims (teerths) located outside the village boundaries, one Dwarkadheesh temple
    in Runija Village which is outside the project boundary. There is one hill top within the project
    boundary where few stones with saffron color painted over them were found. The proposed site is
    relatively undulating and acts as a catchment area for the downstream water bodies being used by
    the local villagers. The state PIA (RUMSL)/ Developer has proposed adequate number of cross
    drainage structures in its site layout plans ensuring minimal or no adverse impacts on the natural
    drainage of the area. The preliminary findings of the due diligence study currently being undertaken
    reveals that the proposed site boundaries have been modified to exclude critical environmental areas
    like major water bodies and areas with topographic constraints (slope / shadow areas). 33/220 kV
    pooling substation of the solar park will be connected to 400 kV Mandsaur- Sitamau substation and
    is anticipated to come under the green corridor by March/April 2018. The alignment for the same is
    currently being finalized. Prima facie it appears the alignment shall not cross any major critical
    environmental features except river Chambal. It is assumed that an environment impact assessment
    (EIA) study will be undertaken separately for the transmission line.

11. The environmental and social impacts will not only be confined to the solar parks area, but also for
    the transmission line that will evacuate the power to the grid as an associate facility. Some of these
    transmission lines will be integral to the project and will be financed under the proposed project but
    not all. An ESIA, in line with ToR included in the ESMF, will be undertaken for the common
    infrastructure that is proposed to be financed under the loan. It would be made sure that associated
    infrastructures such as evacuation/transmission lines and others shall adhere to environmental
    management practices and do not cause any impact.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Gaurav D. Joshi ( GEN06 )
Parthapriya Ghosh ( GSU06 )
Pyush Dogra ( GEN06 )

6. Safeguard Policies                         Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01           Yes              The installation of the shared
                                                               infrastructure is expected to have some
                                                               impacts on the environment. Hence, an
                                                               Environmental and Social Management
                                                 Framework (ESMF) has been prepared to
                                                 ensure that the requirements of the policy
                                                 are met.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              Yes     While none of the current candidate
                                                 locations are known Natural Habitats, the
                                                 ESMF has the necessary guidance for
                                                 subsequently identified sub-projects to
                                                 comply with the policy, if and when
                                                 required.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       Yes     No large scale deforestation is currently
                                                 expected, but the policy requirements are
                                                 built into the guidance in the ESMF in
                                                 case future sites are identified involving
                                                 such activities.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes     This policy is triggered as there is a
                                                 possibility that cultural properties could
                                                 be affected by project activities. In
                                                 addition, the construction of the park
                                                 facilities could also involve chance-finds.
                                                 The ESMF addresses these issues and has
                                                 guidance for procedure to be adopted for
                                                 such situations.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            Yes     Baseline studies shows presence of
                                                 indigenous community in the state.
                                                 Though no IPs were found in candidate
                                                 park areas, OP 4.10 has been triggered as
                                                 all sub projects are not known as yet.
                                                 Project will prepare IPDP in case IP are
                                                 found in any sub project.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes     OP 4.12 has been triggered as there could
                                                 be acquisition of private land as all
                                                 sub-projects are not known yet. Private
                                                 land is being purchased in Rewa through
                                                 mutual consent (90 percent completed)
                                                 and in Mandsaur entire land belong to
                                                 government with no encroachment. This
                                                 may not be the case in all sub-project sites
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                No
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No
7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60    No

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Social:

There is no significant adverse social impact in both the identified sub-project sites.

The proposed Rewa solar park in MP is spread over 1500 Ha in 5 villages of Gurh Tehsil in Rewa
District. In Rewa, the private land identified for the project comprises of 164.231 Ha, owned by a total of
309 titleholders. The private land is being purchased through mutual consent. The Consent Land
Purchase Policy approved by the State Government of MP on November 12, 2014, has been adopted to
procure the private land for the project. So far approximately 90 percent of the private land owners have
provided their consent voluntarily for sale of their land for the proposed project. The land parcels under
the project area are unirrigated and depend upon rainfall. However, in the last three years, due to the
decrease in rainfall, these land parcels have been left barren and unused. Majority of farmers are now
engaged as non-agriculture labor. So far, only 22.5 percent of 5467.26 Ha of government land (falling in
all five project villages) has been transferred to the project. A part of government land transferred to
project was used by livestock owners for seasonal grazing for which an alternate grazing land is
available within 500 metres of the proposed project area. As the government land delineated for the
project was barren and rocky and not used for any activities (either as an income source or shelter) by the
local communities, there would be no impact on non-titleholders. The ESIA which also includes Social
Management Plan, has been disclosed locally and in Bank's InfoShop. The 400 kV transmission line to
evacuate power from solar park to the nearest substation, which is approximately 60 km away, is being
laid by POWERGRID. Since this line is not being funded by the Bank, it will be considered as an
associated activity. As POWERGRID's environmental and social policy and procedures (ESPP) is
accepted under 'use of borrower's system' by the Bank under the ongoing 'Fifth Power System
Development Project', the review of adherence to ESPP, while implementing this line by
POWERGRID, will be done by the Bank.

In Mandsaur solar park, the total land under the project admeasuring about 553 Ha fall under the
jurisdiction of two revenue villages, namely, Runija (134.19 Ha out of total village land area of 2290
Ha) and Uninhabited Village Gujarkhedi (419.44 Ha out of total village land area of 626 Ha ). Out of the
total land under the project, land measuring an area of about 545 Ha was under the ownership and
possession of government, which has transferred the land in favor of the implementing agency. About
8 Ha of land - 2 Ha in Runija and 6 Ha in Gujarkhedi village has been allotted to SC families (3 families
in Runija and 6 families in Gujarkhedi). There is no habilitation in the immediate surroundings within
500 m of the project boundary. RUMSL had already initiated the process of compensation and
Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R&R) assistance for land procurement. The land for which
compensation and R&R assistance process has been initiated is not being used by the project affected
people (PAP) for agricultural use and is lying vacant. Based on the Census Data and also from the
consultation with the local people, it is found that there is no tribal population in these villages.
However, scheduled caste (SC) population in the Runija Village account for nearly 25 percent of the
total population. These have been allotted land in and around villages. In addition to agriculture, the
people from this community are also working as construction labor, where they also commute to the
construction projects with families. Four cultural properties have been identified within 10 km of the
project site including 2 Jain pilgrim (teerths) located outside the village boundaries, one Dwarkadheesh
temple in Runija Village which is outside the project boundary. There is one hill top within the project
boundary where few stones with saffron color painted over them were found. The issue was discussed
with the local community and it has been reported that the place is known as Devnarayan where in the
old times a Gandharvsen from the surrounding area used to come by horse for worshipping and that's
how people call it Ghodarundi, however, very few people go there as there is no temple or any idol of
God at that location as verified during the field visit. The employment for the local villagers emerged as
one of the key issues during consultation with the people and the elected representatives. The project
will have positive social impacts with enhanced employment opportunities for the local population
during the construction as well as operational phase of the project.

Environment:

On the environmental issues, important issues include land use change and impact of the project
activities on areas outside the site boundaries -- due to removal of vegetation and trees, channelization
and leveling/grading of land for installation of plant and its ancillary infrastructure, potential hindrance
to movement of fauna across the site, impacts on health safety of the workers during installation of the
plant infrastructure, safety of nearby community during the period of construction. During the
post-commissioning or operation phase, potential impacts will arise when waste material is generated
from the plants -- either solar panels that cannot be used in the plant, or chemicals like transformer oil
need to be handled and disposed safely.

Handling of solar panels, especially those that cannot be used either due to damage or end-of-life, is a
potential long term issue. Currently, regulation covering this area is evolving and final form will
determine the extent of additional effort needed to comply with these.

Land-use change is a long-term issue associated with the project activities. There are few other
significant impacts of the project activities
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
None.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The project while selecting the sites ensured that there is a minimum adverse social and environmental
impacts. The land identified for Rewa is majority public land whereas in Mandsaur it is entirely public
land. At both the places, land is barren and unproductive. The sites do not include any habitation, thus
avoiding involuntary resettlement. For inclusion of new sites under the project, an ESMF was prepared
for safeguard management that also requires analyzing various alternatives for each sub-project while
carrying out respective ESIA. As per the agreed policies of ESMF, these ESIAs will be reviewed and
cleared by the Bank prior to approving the sub-projects for implementation.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
ESIA of Rewa solar park was carried out by an independent consultant. In agreement with the borrower,
due diligence of Mandsaur solar park has been carried out and gaps have been identified. An action plan
to address the gaps will be prepared and agreed upon with the borrower.

Considering the significance of project interventions and since other sub-project locations are unknown,
the borrower through independent consultants has prepared an Environmental and Social Profile of
candidate sites which formed the basis for the preparation of ESMF for the project. ESMF was drafted
based on Rewa solar park ESIA and has been disclosed locally. The ESMF details out the policies,
procedures and institutional responsibilities for assessing and managing the potential environmental and
social risks and impacts that may come up throughout the project cycle of various sub-projects, and is
intended for use and application by the agencies responsible for the execution of the investment
sub-projects to be implemented under this facility.
The ESMF provides detailed guidance, and sample terms of reference and reporting structures, for
compliance. Each sub-project, to be included at a later date under the project, will be screened to identify
further risk mitigation measures, including the preparation of a detailed Environmental Management
Plans (EMP) and Social Impact Assessment and/or Rehabilitation Action Plan (RAP) as applicable. The
ESMF will be applied to all investments under this facility. ESMF further includes the following: (1) a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF); (2) an Indigenous Peoples Plan Framework (IPPF); (3) a
Gender Development Framework (GDF); (4) an integrated Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM); (5)
Specific procedures on public consultation and disclosure; (6) Environmental and Social Monitoring
Arrangements covering selection, appraisal and implementation of sub-projects; and (7) a plan to
augment institutional capacity of the implementing agencies to manage environmental and social issues
in the project. A negative list describing activities / types of locations that will not be supported has been
included to avoid significant impacts on sensitive environmental receptors like recognized protected
areas for wildlife.

The IREDA will serve as the nodal PIA while and supervise the works of the selected state PIAs.
IREDA will carry out the functions of due diligence before disbursal of loan, coordinated recovery of
loan, and obtaining relevant documents from these selected state PIAs, as required during the
implementation and monitoring of this project, including confirmation of implementation of safeguards
aspects by the PIAs, and where applicable generators or SPPDs. IREDA, as of now, has one staff
handling environmental matters. This staff is reporting to Deputy General Manager (Technical
Systems). The overall responsibility of the safeguards within IREDA lies with the Director (Technical)
who is also head of the Environment and Social Management Cell within IREDA. It will be important to
augment the capacity of IREDA on safeguards specifically social aspects. IREDA also has an
Environment and Social Management System (ESMS), which has been developed based on the
multilateral financing norms (Asian Development Bank [ADB]). IREDA has previous experience of
working on Bank financed projects, which included support to small hydro plants. IREDA is in process
of updating its ESMS to also include the requirements of other multilateral and bilateral funding
agencies. Once updated, it will be disclosed on IREDA’s website.

The ESMF has identified areas and opportunities for augmenting the capacity to manage the social and
environmental issues. Staffing plan include need to hire environment and social specialist for
environmental management and social development at both JV level as well as with the developer.
These staffing, training and continuing skill development programs, other resources that will be required
for effective management of the environmental and social issues, and the required budget had been
recommended and described in the ESMF. All investment specific ESIA, EMP and RAP/IPP will be
reviewed and cleared by the Bank before bids are invited
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The ESMF and its specific instruments provide guidelines and procedures for further consultations
during implementation, in particular in defining and designing sub-projects and specific works. The
consultation frameworks provide systematic guidance to address potential risks and to enhance quality,
targeting, and benefits to the communities. Dialogue and disclosure actions during the assessment and
execution process of a sub-project are designed to ensure that those stakeholders, irrespective of whether
they benefit from or are adversely affected by the project interventions, are well informed and are able
participate in the decision-making process. The ESMF procedures consider the level of environmental
and social risk of each sub-project in allocating time and resources to be dedicated for stakeholder
consultation.

Local level consultations were carried out in both the candidate sites focusing on specific issues related
to the potential sub-projects and environmental and social issues associated with such sub-projects. Over
150 participants from potential project cities participated in these consultations and provided inputs to
the preparation of ESMF. ESMF for the project and ESIA of Rewa solar park have been disclosed
locally and also on the Bank's Internal Document Unit (IDU).

Consultation being a continuous process, the ESMF's disclosure on the websites of new JVs will
continue during project implementation. The EMPs, RAPs and IPPs for individual sub-projects will also
be disclosed as per the principles and procedures of described in the ESMF. The draft EMPs and RAPs
will be disclosed, followed by discussion with the affected community (including any individual
adversely impacted by such intervention); and final EMP and RAP will be prepared and disclosed only
after incorporating reasonable and relevant suggestions from the communities in the design of the
investments. The copies of the EMPs and RAPs will be placed at the offices of developers, district
magistrate and contractors' offices, enabling easy access to any community or individual. The executive
summary of EIAs and RAPs for all particular investments will be translated in local language and will be
placed in the office of local self-government body (village panchayat) of the village(s) where the
sub-project is located. The list of affected persons, if any, will be pasted on the conspicuous place in all
the affected towns/villages, usually at the prominent roadside entry to the investment site.

In Rewa as part of ESIA process, project carried out local level consultations in the project affected
villages. The objectives of the local level consultations were to inform the affected persons and
indirectly affected population about the project and to understand their perception about the project in
terms of both negative and positive impacts. About 70 individuals participated in the consultations. In
Mandsaur also, consultations were carried out in the project affected villages during due diligence
process. Further consultations will be carried out during ESIA.

Disclosure: In-country disclosure of the ESMF (on MNRE’s website) was completed on February 2,
2016 (http://mnre.gov.in/file-manager/UserFiles/Draft-ESMF.pdf). ESMF is also available on MNRE’s
implementing partner for the project at
http://www.ireda.in/writereaddata/ESMF_Solar%20Park_World%20Bank.pdf. The ESMF was
disclosed in Bank's InfoShop on February 11, 2016

The ESIA of Rewa Solar Park was disclosed in country on August 19, 2016
(http://mpnred.com/Images/pdf/Final_%20ESA%20Rewa%20Solar%20Report_19_08_16_%20WB.p
df) and in the Bank's InfoShop on September 1, 2016

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                      05-Jan-2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                   10-Feb-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
India                                                                            23 Feb 2017
Comments: The ESMF was initially disclosed on MNRE website on February 02, 2016.
             Subsequently it was also disclosed on IREDA’s website once it was considered as
             implementing agency of the project.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                       05-Jan-2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                    11-Feb-2016
"In country" Disclosure
India                                                                             23-Feb-2017
Comments: The ESMF was initially disclosed on MNRE website on February 02, 2016.
             Subsequently it was also disclosed on IREDA’s website once it was considered as
             implementing agency of the project.
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                       05-Jan-2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                    11-Feb-2016
"In country" Disclosure
India                                                                             23-Feb-2017
Comments: The ESMF was initially disclosed on MNRE website on February 02, 2016.
             Subsequently it was also disclosed on IREDA’s website once it was considered as
             implementing agency of the project.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?         Yes [ X No [     ]    NA [   ]
                                                                              }
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager        Yes [ X No [     ]    NA [   ]
(PM) review and approve the EA report?                                        ]

Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the     Yes [ X No [     ]    NA [   ]
credit/loan?                                                                  ]

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation     Yes [     No [ X ]    NA [   ]
of critical natural habitats?                                                 ]

If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of   Yes [     No [   ]    NA [ X ]
other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include               ]
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?       Yes [ X No [     ]    NA [   ]
                                                                              ]
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the            Yes [ X No [   ]    NA [   ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?                            ]

OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as          Yes [ X No [   ]    NA [   ]
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous        ]
Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or       Yes [ X No [   ]    NA [   ]
Practice Manager review the plan?                                          ]

If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been    Yes [   No [   ]    NA [ X ]
reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or           ]
Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process      Yes [ X No [   ]    NA [   ]
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?                                  ]

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or       Yes [ X No [   ]    NA [   ]
Practice Manager review the plan?                                          ]

Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                          Yes [   No [   ]   TBD [ X ]
                                                                           ]
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to        Yes [   No [   ]   TBD [ X ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of              ]
livelihoods)
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and    Yes [   No [   ]    NA [ X ]
constraints been carried out?                                              ]

Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome      Yes [   No [   ]    NA [ X ]
these constraints?                                                         ]

Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it     Yes [   No [ X ]    NA [   ]
include provisions for certification system?                               ]

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World      Yes [ X No [   ]    NA [   ]
Bank's Infoshop?                                                           ]

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place    Yes [ X No [   ]    NA [   ]
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to           ]
project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional             Yes [ X No [   ]    NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures          ]
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the   Yes [ X No [   ]    NA [   ]
project cost?                                                              ]

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include       Yes [ X No [   ]    NA [   ]
                                                                           ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [ X No [   ]   NA [   ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project       ]
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader(s):           Name: Surbhi Goyal,Amit Jain,Gevorg Sargsyan
Approved By:
Practice Manager/Manager:      Name: Demetrios Papathanasiou (PMGR)      Date: 10-Mar-2017
