Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1646 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/25/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P085291 
Project Name: West Bengal Health Systems 
Task Team Leader: Michele Gragnolati 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 28, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 15, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
75.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the proposed operation is to support the Government of West 
Bengal (GOWB) to (a) achieve better maternal and health outcomes, especially for the poor and 
disadvantaged; and (b) introduce systemic changes in the health sector to improve efficiency, 
equity and effectiveness in public spending.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would have two components.  COMPONENT 1 would co-finance (with 
Central, state and other external funds) activities in primary health; selected interventions at the 
secondary level which are necessary to achieve the MDGs; and activities in public health, 
especially those related to preventive health.  COMPONENT 2, PROGRAM COORDINATION, 
M&E and TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE, would finance full-time staff dedicated to coordination, 
performance monitoring and evaluation (e.g., of the planned innovations and reforms), and 
consultants to assist with the strengthening of institutional capacity for public health, and with 
implementation of innovative aspects of reform (e.g., for stewardship, HRD, decentralized 
planning, private sector engagement, etc.)   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Page  2
India, State of West Bengal   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
This project has been identified as a pilot project for use of Country Systems. The Bank will 
undertake Equivalency and Acceptability assessments to understand the current adequacy of 
institutional capacity to implement country systems and/or Bank safeguard policies. Current 
capacity is expected to be limited and is expected to require enhancement.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ruma Tavorath (SASES) 
Ms Meera Chatterjee (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This project is a Category B project, because its potential adverse impacts on the 
environment and public health are well identified and site-specific and the required mitigatory 
measures are defined and implementable. Under the State Health Systems II project, basic 
Healthcare Waste management systems were established, but not for the primary level. 
Continued implementation of this component after project completion and quality of 
implementation will be assessed within the framework of Diagnostic Assessments, to be 
conducted as part of Country Systems pilot. Measures for replicability within the SAWp 
approach will also be determined before finalizing an Implementation Plan.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
X
Scheduled Tribes constitute about 5.5 percent of the population of West Bengal and 
Scheduled Castes a further 23.6 percent.  Both groups are dispersed throughout the state, but 
some districts and administrative blocks have high concentrations. As this is a sector wide 
operation concerned with ensuring access of the poor and disadvantaged to health care, focussed 
attention will be paid to these socio-economically disadvantaged groups.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The extent to which this policy is triggered will depend on the amount and nature of civil 
construction envisaged by the GOWB during the life of the operation.  We would expect the 
policy to be triggered if large health facilities requiring land acquisition are planned, but not if 
the civil works are limited to renovations or extensions of existing facilities or new construction 
of small facilities on government or panchayat owned land.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
Page  3
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/30/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
This project has been selected by SAR to pilot the use of country systems under O.P./B.P. 
4.00.  Consequently Equivalence and Acceptability (E&A) Assessments will be carried out 
for the Environmental and Social Safeguards. The E&A Assessments will be started in July 
2005 and are expected to be completed and disclosed by March 2006.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michele Gragnolati 
06/23/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
06/23/2005 
Comments:  Category "B" is endorsed. Decision to transfer safeguards oversight to sector will be made 
at QER, when more information on land acquisition,SWAp, and potential use of country systems is 
clarified. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Anabela Abreu 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
