Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/16/2005 
Report No.:  AC1794
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P093720 
Project Name:  Himachal Pradesh Mid-Himalayan Watershed Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Daniel M. Sellen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 19, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: March 30, 2006 
Managing Unit:  SASAR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (25%);General public 
administration sector (25%);Forestry (25%);Sub-national government administration 
(25%) 
Theme:  Participation and civic engagement (P);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 LOCAL 
COMMUNITIES 
5.00
15.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The primary objective of the proposed project is to reverse the process of degradation of 
the natural resource base and improve the productive potential of natural resources and 
incomes of the rural households in the project area. The secondary objective is to support 
policy and institutional development to harmonize watershed development projects and 
policies across the State in accordance with best practices.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component One: Institutional Strengthening  
 
This component is aimed at ensuring that Gram Panchayat Watershed Development 
Plans have been prepared in an informed, participatory, and transparent process, that they 
can be implemented with adequate technical backstopping, and that Project performance 
can be adequately monitored and evaluate. The critical outputs of this component will be 
awareness and capacity of all stakeholders in participatory natural resource management, 
Page  2
and capacity of participating PRIs and other local village institutions to plan, implement, 
monitor and maintain watershed treatments.  
 
Component Two: Watershed Development & Management  
 
The output of this component is successful implementation of watershed treatment as 
prioritized in Gram Panchayat Watershed Development Plans, as well as treatment of 
critical lands that fall between GP administered areas. It includes the following sub-
components: (a) Non-arable land development: The primary objective is ecological 
rehabilitation of the degraded catchment by carrying out soil and water conservation 
measures through site specific treatment plan. The secondary objective is to narrow the 
gap between biomass production and consumption by raising community plantations 
through Joint Forestry Management (JFM) in degraded areas in the vicinity of villages; 
(b) Arable land development: This subcomponent will improve cropping systems through 
promoting adoption of latest recommended agronomic practices, crop diversification 
including high value crops, reducing post harvest losses, increasing value-addition 
including support for processing and marketing of the produce without disturbing eco 
system. It will also improve water availability in the project area using evolving water 
harvesting technologies and promoting optimal use of available water; (c) Fodder and 
livestock development: The aim is to improve productive potential through improvement 
of fodder, management practices and genetic upgrading. It will also contribute towards 
restoration of health, vigour and purity of the production environment. As targeted 
support to nomadic groups, this subcomponent will include implementation of Tribal 
Action Plans which are aimed at better flock management, improved animal health care, 
and promotion of income-generating activities; and (d) rural infrastructure development: 
This subcomponent covers construction of farm roads, footpaths, and small bridges to 
improve the accessibility to market and other public institutions. It will also contribute 
towards improvement in the availability of potable water.  
 
Component Three: Enhancing Mountain Livelihoods  
 
This component is aimed at promoting value addition in crop, livestock, and non-timber 
forest products (NFTPs) produced in the Project area. In contrast to the arable land 
development subcomponent, it will focus on the demand side, marketing, and 
establishing linkages between farmers and buyers. Given that watershed is a land-based 
approach, this component will also reach out to vulnerable groups (typically the landless) 
and develop income-generating activities for them. There are two subcomponents: (a) 
Agricultural marketing and processing: The Project will finance activities to (i) identify 
potential market opportunities; (ii) co-finance promising sub-projects with producer 
groups that facilitate their entry into commercialized production; and (iii) co-finance 
private sector entrepreneurs (on a one-time subsidy basis) for improving productivity, 
processing, or storage to create viable supply chains; and (b) Income generation for 
vulnerable groups: This is designed to finance small income-generating activities for 
women and the landless. Common Interest Groups (CIGs) would be identified during the 
watershed planning process and training given to encourage CIG development. Funds to 
CIGs would be disbursed through GPs.  
Page  3
Component Four: Project Coordination  
 
This component will finance construction of office/residential accommodation (where 
leasing is not possible), purchase of equipment, and vehicles, and incremental operating 
costs of the Project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Low levels of development, poor accessibility, poverty, and land degradation characterize 
the proposed project area. Land holdings are small (average 1.2 ha), and farming systems 
are largely rainfed and dependent on traditional cropping practices. This socio-economic 
scenario occurs within the context of fragile ecosystems with steep topography, poor 
soils, and periods of intense rainfall. A high degree of human dependence on natural 
resources has led to overall degradation of environment and natural resource base.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Mridula Singh (SASES) 
Mr Tapas Paul (SASES) 
Mr Ranjan Samantaray (SASES) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment (BP/OP 4.01) - Activities to be undertaken include prevention 
of soil erosion, reducing run off, promoting proper water resource management, 
development of arable and non-arable lands, and restoration of pastures. If not 
implemented properly, such activities could have adverse impacts on the soil and 
hydrologic regime of the area, such as changes in surface flow, moderation of peak flow, 
impact on water quality, slope instability etc. Assessment and mitigation measures will 
therefore need to be clearly spelled out in project/community implementation manuals 
and applied rigorously by the Project staff and beneficiaries.  Given the fact that many 
Page  4
sub-projects are unknown ahead of time and will be revealed during the course of 
implementation, an environmental and social framework for evaluating sub-projects will 
be created instead of an Environmental Management Plan.  
 
Forestry (OP 4.36) - Activities have the potential to impact significantly upon forest 
areas. The forestry component proposed in the project promotes afforestation, enhances 
environmental contribution of forest areas, while at the same time encouraging economic 
development. Logging operations are not part of Project activities. Most of the area 
where project is to be implemented is categorized as forest land.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) - The project is not likely to support/finance anyactivity that 
would entail significant conversion, loss or degradation of natural habitats (directly or 
indirectly). However, silvi-pasture based activities, management of grasslands, and 
chance introduction of exotic species to augment fodder sources may have implications 
for native species, many of which are already threatened or endangered.  
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) - Application of pesticides is envisaged under the project to 
promote production of high value crops and increase farm incomes. Care must be taken 
in order to ensure proper handling of pesticides and avoid harm to humans, livestock and 
the environment. Improper disposal of left-over insecticides have the potential to pollute 
natural drinking water sources.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) - There are indigenous peoples (trans-humant people i.e. 
nomads) in the Project area currently facing potential adverse impacts due to conflicts 
over resources and unequal access to government schemes. Indigenous peoples are 
among the intended beneficiaries and the Project is likely to improve their situation 
through targeted interventions. An Indigenous peopleâ
 ™s
development plan (IPDP) is 
prepared in consultation with the trans-humant nomads and with tribal development 
department.   
 
Safeguard policies such as Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12), Cultural Properties 
(OPN 11.03), Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) and Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
are not applicable in the current project.   With respect to OP 4.12, there will be no land 
acquisition in the project and for the proposed rural infrastructure public/community land 
would be used where available, or alternatively, land would be sought through voluntary 
donations by the beneficiary communities.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
A
high degree of human dependence on natural resources in Himachal Pradesh has led to 
overall degradation of environment and natural resource base. Project activities are likely 
to reverse this process and subprojects are unlikely to exert any significant negative 
impact on the social and physical environment. On the contrary, the principle aim of the 
watershed development and management component is to enhance the natural resource 
base.  
 
Page  5
As was seen in the previous project (IWDP), there are more benefits when treatment 
covers the whole watershed rather than only Panchayat lands. Treatment of degraded 
lands shall form part of the holistic treatment. Other areas cannot be excluded. Safety of 
structure and vegetative measures cannot be ensured unless treatment follows top to 
bottom (ridge to valley) approach and is location/site specific, need based and demand 
driven. Sporadic treatment could cause failures of structures and not produce desired 
results in view of highly degraded conditions of landscapes.  
 
For this Project, the Environment category B was assigned because no significant 
adverse or irreversible impacts are envisaged, and impacts are manageable within the 
existing institutional and technical framework.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
A
Pest Management Plan has been developed to help minimize the direct or indirect 
adverse impacts of promoting high-value crops.  
 
Watershed development tends to be a land-based intervention. To help avoid 
contributing to inequity through this project, special income-generating activities will be 
promoted (as in the previous project) to target landless and other vulnerable groups. The 
Tribal Action Plan will target the (landless) nomadic groups.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The performance of IWDP in terms of safeguards was consistently rated at least 
satisfactory for the six years of implementation.  
 
However, findings of Environment and Social Assessment (ESA) highlighted and 
justified the need to have a separate Environment and Social cell within the project 
located at Project headquarters. The proposed cell shall focus on ensuring that concerns 
raised and identified in the ESA are considered in the preparation of Environment and 
Social Guidelines (ESG) which also includes screening criteria for sub-project selection 
and implementing the ESG during its execution. In addition, the cell shall ensure 
compliance of the project activities with the existing legal and policy environment, 
including the safeguard policies of the World Bank. The cell would undertake assessment 
of capacity building requirements of the project staff and other stakeholders to ensure that 
the project benefits are shared by all in a transparent way and that such activities do not 
negatively impinge on environment. The cell would also provide technical support to the 
M&E cell.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
A
stakeholder analysis was completed as part of ESA to determine the rights and 
responsibilities of beneficiaries, their relationship with the natural resources, and their 
capacity-building needs. The primary stakeholders are the households living in (or 
passing through, in the case of transhumant populations) selected degraded watersheds in 
Page  6
the Mid-Hills region of the State. The analysis has focused on villages, nomadic groups, 
women, and the Panchayats and village institutions. Specific strategies on participation 
and inclusiveness are prepared to ensure consultation during project implementation. 
Secondary stakeholders include service provides, the Forestry Department, and other line 
departments.  
 
Disclosure requirements, meeting the requirements
 of
the World Bankâ
 ™s policy 
onpublic disclosure will be fulfilled by organizing disclosure workshops. A plan for in-
country disclosure, specifying the timing and locations; translated key documents, such 
as the ESA and ESG Summary in local language; newspaper announcements for 
disclosure etc will be done. The reports will be made available online. Strategies 
developed (IPDP and IPM) will be disclosed to the stakeholders, which will include, 
among others, line departments (Rural Development, Panchayati Raj, Animal Husbandry, 
Forest, University, NGO etc) along with PRIs and project beneficiaries.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/09/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/15/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/16/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/09/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/15/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/16/2005 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/09/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/15/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/16/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
Yes 
Page  7
report? 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by the regional safeguards 
team?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in 
consultation with the Indigenous People? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Daniel M. Sellen 
09/09/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Tapas Paul 
09/09/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Mridula Singh 
09/09/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Ranjan Samantaray 
09/09/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Pramod K. Agrawal 
09/15/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
09/15/2005 
Comments:   
