                         INTEGRATED          SAFEGUARDS            DATA SHEET
                                      RESTRUCTURING             STAGE
         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring

                                                                         Report No.: ISDSR15762

Date ISDS PreparediUpdated:             18-Nov-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                       India                  I Project ID:                Ip132739
 Project Name:                  Neeranchal National Watershed Project (PI32739)
 Task Team Leader(s):           Grant Milne,Priti Kumar
 Estimated Board Date:          17-Jul-2014
 Managing Unit:                 GFA12
 Sector(s):                     Agricultural extension and research (38%), Irrigation and drainage
                                (34%), Sub-national government administration (23%), Public admin
                                istration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (4%), General agriculture,
                                fishing and forestry sector (1 %)
 Theme(s):                      Water resource management (50%), Other environment and natural
                                resources management (50%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                        No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:         357.00                      Total Bank Financing:        1178.50
 Financing Gap:              0.00
     Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                  178.50
     International Development Association (IDA)                                                         178.50
     Total                                                                                               357.00
 Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred          No
 project?


 2. Current Project Development Objectives
 The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support IWMP through technical assistance to
 improve incremental conservation outcomes and agricultural yields for communities in selected sites,
and adoption of more effective processes and technologies into the broader IWMP in participating
states.
Proposed New PD~ (from Restructuring Paper)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support the watershed development component of
PMKSY through technical assistance to improve incremental conservation outcomes and agricultural
yields for communities in selected sites, and adoption of more effective processes and technologies in
participating states.

3. Project Description
The project would be implemented through four components:

Component 1. Central Institutional and Capacity Building

Strengthen the institutions and human resources of key national stakeholders, particularly the
Department of Land Resources, for more effective planning, implementation, monitoring and
evaluation, documentation and reporting of the Watershed Component of the PMKSY, through the
following:

1.1 Capacity building and institutional development at national level: Support training needs
assessments, institutional and human resources review, build the capacities of the Department of Land
Resources for program management and policy analysis, develop common training materials,
coordinate and support national and international exposure visits, and provide backstopping for
Participating States to deliver training programs in Part 3.

1.2 National information and data center: Develop capacity and frameworks within the existing system
for data base development and coordinate improved knowledge and information sharing related to the
Watershed Component of the PMKSY.

1.3 Communications: Create awareness and enhance information about PMKSY, benefits (with focus
on the Watershed Component of the PMKSY), program implementation and impacts, through a
comprehensive communications outreach and branding initiatives.

1.4 Monitoring and evaluation: Develop and strengthen an integrated monitoring and evaluation
system, linked to a new management information system that connects Department of Land Resources
and Participating States, for tracking the national performance of the PMKSY (with focus on the
Watershed Component of the PMKSY).

Summary of component revisions: The existing structure of four sub-components remains unchanged.
Minor changes in the description of sub-components 1.3 and 1.4 reflect how Neeranchal support to the
watershed component of PMKSY will also benefit the PMSKY scheme through communications, and
monitoring and evaluation/project reporting activities.

Component 2. National Innovation Support

Support the application of innovative, science-based knowledge, tools, and approaches to underpin
improvements to the Watershed Component of the PMKSY around watershed planning and
implementation, with specific focus on hydrology and augmentation of water resources, agricultural
intensification, climate change and rural livelihoods, through the following:
2.1 Agricultural performance, rural livelihoods, and climate change innovations: Consolidate existing
knowledge and innovations and transfer them to Participating States to support farmers in achieving
better agricultural performance, build better resiliency against climate change, and improved
livelihoods.

2.2. Decision support systems and databases for hydrology and watershed management benefiting
PMKSY: Develop and pilot new decision-support systems to support the Department of Land
Resources and Participating States to plan and implement the Watershed Component of the PMKSY in
a more comprehensive and scientific manner, with land and hydrological considerations, linkages
and trade-offs at the core in watershed management, support augmentation of water resources,
demonstrate water use efficiency in agriculture, strengthen community water management and provide
technical backstopping to Participating States for related data base development.

Summary of component revisions: The existing structure of two sub-components remains unchanged.
Minor changes in the description of sub-component 2.2 reflect how Neeranchal support to the
watershed component ofPMKSY will also benefit the broader PMSKY scheme through activities
related to development of a central data base, data portal, decision support systems and tools, and
climate change activities.

Component 3. Implementation Support in Participating States

Provide intensive, technology-based support to improve Watershed Component of the PMKSY
operational effectiveness, for planning, implementation and management, upscale innovation,
operationalization, convergence/integration with other programs of the Recipient, measuring impacts
on the ground in selected sites in Participating States, and addressing unique, or state specific,
challenges related to watershed treatment, through the following:

3.1 Support for improved program integration in rainfed areas: Strengthen remote sensing and
geographic information systems capability in the State Level Nodal Agencies, develop state-level data
bases, support landscape-level catchment assessment and planning for the Watershed Component of
the PMKSY, and strengthen community-based monitoring.

3.2 Institutional strengthening: Enhance relevant capacities in Participating States in the State Level
Nodal Agencies, and at field level.

3.3 Adoption of research and development and technology transfer: Improve the adoption of
innovations developed and tested in Part 2 of the Project with respect to agriculture performance,
decision support systems for hydrology and water resource management, climate change and risk
reduction, value addition, supply chains, extension systems, and livelihood improvement.

3.4 Project management and coordination: Provide incremental support to the State Level Nodal
Agencies to implement activities under Part 3 of the Project effectively.

3.5 State-specific innovations and pilots: Support identified small-scale, state-specific innovations and
piloting to address locally suitable watershed-related initiatives and institutionalize knowledge and
lessons learned for possible upscaling.

3.6 Urban/peri-urban watershed management: Pilot in urban/peri-urban watershed management
practices in up to two small catchments in each Participating State, including integrated catchment
planning, upstream source securitization, in-situ water harvesting and management, improvements in
water quality and natural waste water treatment and re-use for agriculture.

Summary of component revisions: The existing structure of six sub-components remains unchanged.
There are no substantive changes to the description of the sub-components, which remain focused on
the watershed component of PMKSY. The component name has changed slightly to align with the
final Government of India Cabinet note for Neeranchal.

Component 4. Project Management and Coordination

Provide technical assistance and other support for project management and coordination.

Summary of component revisions: There are no changes to this component
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
In late 2014, the Government of India began developing a new national scheme PRADHAN MANTRI
KRISHI SINCHAYEE YOJANA (PMKSY) which aims to converge three centrally supported
schemes covering water, agriculture and watershed management. The Ministry of Agriculture is the
designated national nodal agency for PMKSY. Based on the transitioning of the national watershed
program to the new PMKSY scheme, the original Neeranchal PAD and supporting documents of the
Neeranchal project require minor revisions to align them to the final Cabinet Notes prepared for the
PMKSY scheme and the Neeranchal National Watershed Project. The main changes are minor
editing of the PDO and a proposal to extend the closing date by 21 months to make up for the time lost
between approval of the Neeranchal project by the Bank's Board of Executive Directors (July 17,
2014) and the expected effectiveness date. The overall project component and sub-component
structures are not changing. The Department of Land Resources (DoLR) in the Ministry of Rural
Development (MoRD) remains the implementing agency for the watershed component ofPMKSY and
the supporting Neeranchal project. Some activities within sub-components, for example
communications and M&E, are being reworded to indicate that they will be supportive to PMKSY.
One other revision is to account for the recent bifurcation of one of the participating states (Andhra
Pradesh) into two separate states; Andhra Pradesh and Telangana.

The broad objectives of PMKSY will be to: achieve convergence of investments in irrigation at the
field level (preparation of district level and, if required, sub district level water use plans); enhance the
physical access of water on the farm and expand cultivable area under assured irrigation (Har Khet ko
pani); integrate water source, distribution and its efficient use, to make best use of water through
appropriate technologies and practices; improve on-farm water use efficiency to reduce wastage and
increase .availability both in duration and extent; enhance the adoption of precision-irrigation and other
water saving technologies (More crop per drop); enhance recharge of aquifers and introduce
sustainable water conservation practices; ensure the integrated development of rainfed areas using the
watershed approach towards soil and water conservation, regeneration of ground water, arresting
runoff, providing livelihood options and other natural resource management activities; promote
extension activities relating to water harvesting, water management and crop alignment for farmers
and grass root level field functionaries; explore the feasibility of reusing treated municipal waste water
for peri-urban agriculture; and attract greater private investments in irrigation. This will in turn
increase agricultural production and productivity and enhance farm income.

The project would continue to provide technical assistance and demonstrative investments in order to
enhance the outcomes of the watershed component of PMKSY, which will be the flagship watershed
scheme of the Government of India, operational in all the 28 States. Neeranchal would predominantly
focus on dry-land areas in nine states: Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Himachal
Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Uttarakhand. The states present a
wide range of physical characteristics ranging from hilly terrain in northern India (Uttarakhand and
Himachal Pradesh) to forested highlands in central India (Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh) on one
hand to drier landscapes of the western India (Rajasthan and Gujarat) on the other. The eight states
also vary in terms of agro-climatic and/or agro-ecological zones with widely varying temperature and
rainfall profiles. Broadly, all the states have small and marginal farmers with small sized farmlands
facing the challenges of climatic variations with current low levels of resilience to climate change. The
project design for state-level investments would build on the model in the new Bank-supported
Karnataka Watershed Development Project II, as well as lessons learned from earlier Bank-supported
watershed projects, and smaller bi-lateral programs. The project would primarily focus on technical
support, complementing ongoing and planned field investments the watershed component of PMKSY
and may finance some activities as pilots and demonstrations. Technical and institutional capacity
built through project would result in improving the efficiency and outcomes of the watershed
component ofPMKSY.

5. Environmental      and Social Safeguards      Specialists   on the Team
Anupam Joshi ( GENDR )
Sanjay Srivastava ( GENDR )
Surbhi Dhingra ( GSU06 )

6. Safeguard    Policies                       Triggered?       Explanation     (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OPIBP 4.01            Yes
Natural Habitats OPIBP 4.04                    Yes
Forests OP/BP 4.36                             Yes
Pest Management OP 4.09                        Yes
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11         No
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                  Yes
Involuntary Resettlement OPIBP 4.12            No
Safety of Dams OPIBP 4.37                      No
Projects on International Waterways OPIBP No
7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
As part of project preparation, key safeguards issues have been identified associated with the proposed
project activities through a Strategic Environment and Social Assessment (SESA). It included
collection and collation of secondary data, stakeholder consultations, situational analysis, risk analysis,
limited field based primary surveys and policy analysis at the national, state, district, block/project,
watershed and community levels.

The key social challenges identified are: (i) ensuring participation, inclusion of vulnerable groups and
equity through mobilizing individuals and institutions at different levels and locations; (ii) creating
opportunities for landless other than labor in watershed works; (iii) challenges of gender
main streaming in decision making process and building women asset base and gender based
discrimination; (iv) gender sensitization of Gram Panchayats and other watershed related institutions;
(v) building accountability and transparency in decentralizing service delivery and improving its
performance, particularly for convergence and distribution of benefits to avoid incidences of elite
capture; (vi) ensuring increased participation of tribal/indigenous communities; (vii) absence of a
robust grievance redress system, other that functioning of the Right to Information (RT!) Act; and
(viii) ensuring that people/communities continue to enjoy their rights and entitlements on common
property resources. No additional social issues are expected to arise through the transition of IWMP
to become the watershed component ofPMKSY.

The key environmental challenges identified are: (i) soil erosion due to faulty practices, in untreated
areas resulting in loss of potential productivity gains, increased surface runoff and local loss of soil
biota; (ii) overgrazing of remaining common property resources and increased spread of invasive
species, including in aquatic ecosystems and chance introduction of exotic species; (iii) lowering of
groundwater and its quality; (iv) limited opportunity for mainstreaming sustainable environmental
practices at the watershed level through convergence of various schemes; and (v) challenges of
developing technical capacity to arrest land degradation, reduce soil erosion and improve groundwater
status at the implementation level. No additional social issues are expected to arise through the
transition of IWMP to become the watershed component of PMKSY.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
Given the nature of project support and generally positive outcomes of watershed development
interventions, no potential indirect and/or long term impacts are envisaged due to anticipated future
activities in the project areas.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
A typical watershed development program, which is implemented as a standalone project was
considered but rejected as the current demand is for technical and value added support to improve the
outcomes of the larger Government funded watershed component ofPMKSY.

A top down department led project design was considered for undertaking various watershed activities
and works but rejected. Instead, based on the social and environmental issues and the gaps identified
in the SESA, the project would strengthen the existing and/or new institutions at the grassroots level to
enable local communities participate in planning and construction of watershed facilities and
subsequently operate and maintain the systems on their own.

Support in the form of only technical assistance was considered, but partially modified to include
limited demonstrative investments for fully showcasing the investment cycle from planning,
coordination up to field level investments. The project is only financing technical assistance in
components 1 and 2. For component 3, the project is only financing technical assistance for core
activities linked with the watershed component ofPMKSY in selected sites. The project is therefore
not financing operational soil and water conservation works such as field bunds, farm ponds or check
dams. In addition however, participating states will also be supported for minor office upgrading, and
small scale research pilots and demonstrations to showcase new approaches and innovations that could
be scaled up into the watershed component ofPMKSY at a later date. For these small scale pilots and
demonstrations, the project could therefore finance small trials of new types of soil and water
conservation measures, conservation agriculture demonstrations, Integrated Pest and Nutrient
Management (IPNM), etc.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
As part of project preparation, four experienced and independent environment and social development
consultants were contracted by DoLR who were supervised by an experienced team leader. This team
undertook a Strategic Environment and Social Assessment (SESA) foridentifying, among others, key
policy gaps, institutional shortfalls, technical shortcomings along with assessing the current state of
watershed development, impacts of watershed investments and inclusion and participation of
communities in watershed development programs. Stakeholder consultations were held and a
situational analysis was undertaken, which also incorporated stakeholder views and feedback for
identifying key environmental and social issues related to watershed programs. Although the scope of
the project is largely technical assistance with limited demonstrative investments, a Free Prior
Informed Consent was conducted during stakeholder consultations at the watershed level by informing
the potential beneficiaries about the nature of the project and potential interventions planned under it.

Although the project's primary support is in the form of technical assistance, it does provide an
opportunity to positively influence the watershed outcomes under the watershed component of
PMKSY. This justifies the need for looking at the policy/institutional level issues in the watershed
sector and not limit to the impact-mitigation approach. Therefore, the SESA is being conducted in two
phases. The first phase of SESA is an impact-centered one that provides an analysis of the current state
of watershed development and its potential outcomes and covers the potential impacts and compliance
with safeguard policy regime. It also includes an Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) to address project's potential negative and positive environmental impacts (both direct and
indirect) and develop measures to prevent, minimize, mitigate and compensate for adverse impacts and
enhance the positive impacts. The second phase of SESA would be a policy level SESA and will be
undertaken during initial days of project implementation. It will focus on mainstreaming
environmental and social mitigation action, processes for improving watershed outcomes, effective
steps for monitoring and building human resource capacity for ensuring inclusions and participation of
the vulnerable communities, among others. It would suggest measures to introduce key policy and
process changes in the ongoing IWMP and would also benefit from initial experience of bringing in
technological support in community level watershed planning and coordination.

The borrower has low capacity to address safeguard policy issues. There is limited prior experience of
implementing Bank projects. While watershed improvement is generally associated with positive
impacts, capacity to address environmental and social issues is currently weak, especially at the
subproject levels. Given the fact that implementation of central schemes is administered at the state
level, coordination with multiple states on safeguards may pose a challenge. Given the technical
assistance scope of the project, with only limited demonstrative investments on the ground (such as,
water and soil conservation works, constructing check dams and other erosion prevention structures
etc.), there may be only minor environmental and/or social safeguards issues to be mitigated. The
project will support institutional development, generation and adoption of new and innovative
technology for watershed planning, and training and capacity building of stakeholders and the SESA
has drawn from ESMF and EMPs of other Bank funded watershed projects.

To improve the capacity, an Environment and Social Cell (ESC) is proposed with support from the
Project Implementing Unit (Pill). The second phase of SESA would explore the feasibility and
appropriateness of establishing this Cell in the proposed Center of Excellence. Until the Cell is
established, one Senior Environment and Social Manager would be hired at the PIU, who may move to
the Cell whenever and wherever it is established. Adequate provisions for orientation, sensitizing, and
training the relevant stakeholders, including beneficiaries, implementing officers etc on environmental
and social concerns would be undertaken. This will be closely supervised during implementation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation        and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Stakeholder Analysis resulted in identifying stakeholders at different levels and mapping the key
expectations, issues and concerns as related to each stakeholder and the sub-groups thereof. This was
based on stakeholder consultations at the Watershed level, PIA level, District level and State level.
The key stakeholders include inhabitants of the micro watersheds (in villages), the institutions of local
governance (PRI), block level officers and key line departments (for example, forests, agriculture,
rural development, MNREGA, etc.), State level institutions and Watershed Development Departments,
and the DoLR. Within the new PMKSY scheme, state Water and Agriculture departments become
more important stakeholders. The communities in the watersheds are quite diverse - social (scheduled
castes, others), economic (landless, small, marginal, and large farmers), ethnic (scheduled tribe,
others), gender (female headed households).

As part of disclosure plan, DoLR has disclosed the draft SESA report on its website and invited
stakeholder comments/feedback before the report is finalized. An executive summary of SESA is also
prepared and translated in the local language and disclosed. Besides DoLR's website, these documents
would be made available in the key stakeholder offices at the state level.

B. Disclosure Requirements
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes        rx:   No [   1    NA [     1
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes      tx:   No [   1    NA [     1
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional             Yes   rx:   No [   1    NA [     1
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in       Yes   rx:   No [   1    NA [    1
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include       Yes [X 1 No [      1    NA [    1
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [Xl   No [    1   NA [   1
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader(s):
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:                                                      Date: 12/1/2015
Practice ManagerlManager:      Name: Martien Van Nieuwkoop               Date: 12/1/2015
