Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1841 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/05/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P097989 
Project Name: India Sustainable Land and Ecosystem Management Country Partnership 
Program 
Task Team Leader: Adriana Jordanova Damiano 
GEF Focal Area: Land degradation 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 1, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: October 30, 2006 
Managing Unit: SASES 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Forestry (50%);Crops (50%) 
Theme: Land administration and management (P);Other environment and natural 
resources management (P);Rural policies and institutions (S);Biodiversity (S);Climate 
change (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
50.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project's development objective is to contribute to poverty alleviation in India by promoting  
sustainable land management practices which  would improve land and ecosystem productivity, 
and reduced vulnerability to extreme weather events (droughts, floods), including the effects of 
climate change.  
 
The global environment objective of the proposed India Sustainable Land and Ecosystem 
Management Partnership Program (SLEM Partnership) is to maintain and restore globally 
significant ecosystem functions and services.  
 
Specifically the Partnership is expected to achieve its objectives by providing support for:  
 
Page  2
i.     Preventing and/or controlling land degradation via restoration of degraded (agricultural and 
forested) lands and biomass cover in order to produce and utilize biomass in ways that maximize 
productivity as well as carbon sequestration, reducing vulnerability to and climate change 
adaptation, biodiversity conservation and  sustainable use of water resources, including in major 
watersheds.  
 
ii.    Enhancing local capacity and institution building and strengthening for improved land and 
ecosystem management.  
 
iii.   Facilitating knowledge dissemination and application of national and international good 
practices in SLEM within and across states.  
 
iv.    Replicating and scaling-up successful integrated landscape and ecosystem management 
practices and technologies that maximize synergies across the UN Conventions on Biological 
Diversity (CBD), Climate Change (FCCC), and Combating Desertification (CCD) conventions.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The SLEM Partnership is proposed as a long-term partnership programming framework that 
seeks to improve land and ecosystem management in India through investments to strengthen the 
enabling environment and build institutional capacity, and to demonstrate viable investment 
models.  The preliminary design envisions that the SLEM Partnership resources will be grouped 
in two windows:  
 
i. 
Capacity-Building Window to include resources for activity driven and targeted capacity 
building for SLEM, project preparation. This window will also support knowledge sharing and 
wider adoption of SLEM policies and good practices drawing on the lessons learned in the 
project.  
 
ii. 
Investment Window to provide incremental financing for a range of options aimed at 
improving the management of land and ecosystems and achieving sustainable improvements.  
This might entail, but not be limited to 1) improving and sustaining the productivity of rain fed 
agriculture (through crop diversification, mixed cropping, crop rotation, water harvesting, 
drought insurance schemes, integrated pest management,  innovations in market development 
and extension, etc), 2) promotion of small scale irrigation systems managed through user groups 
(e.g., water user associations) to improve water use efficiency and prevent salinisation and water 
logging, 3) improvements in the productivity and sustainability of range lands, including 
strengthening traditional land management systems,  4)  improving the sustainability and 
economic productivity of forest, woodlands, and costal areas; 5) biodiversity conservation 
schemes; 6) energy efficiency in rural areas, and 7) reducing vulnerability to climate change.  
 
The SLEM Partnership focuses on promoting environmental conservation and management of 
land and water resources. It is expected that individual projects eligible for GEF support would 
endorse the same approach which would translate in investments for sustainable land and 
ecosystem management through integrated management of landscape elements. To be effective, 
SLEM has to be seen by stakeholders to be contributing directly to poverty reduction at 
household and community levels, in addition to maintaining land quality and ecosystem 
integrity. The essence of the proposed Partnership is to catalyze incentives, knowledge and skills 
to bring about changes in land and ecosystem management in ways that are sustainable and are in 
Page  3
line with the economic interests of farmers. Overall the Partnership is not expected to have 
negative environmental and social impacts.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The SLEM Partnership will be developed as a national project with individual or cluster of 
participating States where individual stand alone projects will be implemented.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
At this preliminary stage of project design, Ministry of Environment and Forests (MOEF) will 
most likely be responsible for administrating GEF resources under the SLEM Partnership in 
coordination with key stakeholder Ministries.  MoEF already has established project 
coordination mechanism under the GEF Empowered Committee. The Committee will be 
strengthened for improved institutional coordination and clarity on rules of engagement and 
responsibilities of project implementing agencies.  The capacity of MOEF to oversee the 
implementation of Environment and Social Safeguard Framework (ESSF) will be assessed 
during project preparation and implementation arrangements agreed upon.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Tapas Paul (SASES) 
Mr Shankar Narayanan (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The SLEM Partnership provides an umbrella instrument designed to enhance adoption and 
implementation of SLEM through a number of stand-alone operations. The stand-alone 
operations which may be eligible for incremental funding under the proposed Partnership are 
likely to have varying levels of environmental and social impacts depending upon the location of 
these operations, and scale and nature of activities. Under the umbrella Partnership framework an 
Environment and Social Safeguard Framework (ESSF) will be developed to screen proposed 
projects for adverse environmental and social issues and to determine, through consultation and 
other due diligence measures that: (i) the proposed activities provide sufficient incentives for 
resource users to continue good resource management practices post project implementation, and 
(ii) appropriate economic benefits flow to the resource users.  In addition, the ESSF will include 
an exclusion list of activities which can not be supported by SLEM such as involuntary 
resettlement, non-integrated use of pesticides, and introduction of exotic or genetically modified 
species.  Each identified investment will then be processed using the regular Bank project cycle 
commencing with PCN which will identify project specific environmental and social 
development impacts and develop appropriate environmental mitigation plans.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Will be determined once SLEM Partnership design is more developed and type of investment 
operations eligible for SLEM Partnership resources identified. For individual projects this policy 
may be triggered and mitigation plans will be developed under the specific project.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
Will be determined once SLEM Partnership design is more developed and type of investment 
operations eligibl
e
for SLEM Partnership resources identified. For individual projects this policy 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
may be triggered and mitigation plans will be developed under the specific project.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
Will be determined once SLEM Partnership design is more developed and type of investment 
operations eligible for SLEM Partnership resources identified. For individual projects this policy 
may be triggered and mitigation plans will be developed under the specific project.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 
X
Will be determined once SLEM Partnership design is more developed and project 
implementation area identified.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
Will be determined once SLEM Partnership design is more developed and type of investment 
operations eligible for SLEM Partnership resources identified.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
This legal policy may be triggered in some watershed management projects and will be dealt 
with under the specific projects.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X
Will be determined once SLEM Partnership design is more developed and project 
implementation area identified. For individual projects this policy may be triggered and 
mitigation plans will be developed under the specific project.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/15/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The PAD ISDS will provide an outline of the Partnership safeguard requirements which will 
be further developed in a relevant section of the Partnership Implementation Manual.  
 
Timeline for production of project specific safeguard studies will be determined in 
accordance with the individual project preparation schedule. Hence, timeframe for 
completion of safeguard related studies.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Adriana Jordanova Damianova 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
09/29/2005 
Comments:  SASES / Safeguards will review again at QER stage. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jeffrey S. Racki 
 
Comments:   
