Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1490 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/23/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P092735 
Project Name: National Agricultural Innovation Project 
Task Team Leader: Willem G. Janssen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 27, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: March 14, 2006 
Managing Unit: SASAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Agricultural extension and research (100%) 
Theme: Rural policies and institutions (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
50.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The general objective of the project is to contribute to the sustainable transformation of Indian 
agricultural sector from a food self-sufficiency to a market orientation in support of poverty 
alleviation and income generation. The specific objective is to accelerate the collaborative 
development and application of agricultural innovations between public research organizations, 
farmers, private sector and other stakeholders.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project pursues the further evolution of the Indian agricultural research system as supported 
in the past by National Agricultural Research Project I-II and by National Agriculture 
Technology Project (NATP). The project is planned for six years to be implemented by the 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education, Ministry of Agriculture / Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research (ICAR). Under the guidance of a multi-stakeholder steering committee 
three components are foreseen:  
 
Page  2
1.  
Strengthening ICAR?s role as the catalyzing agent of the emerging Indian Agricultural 
Innovation System. The (O&M) changes of NATP will be consolidated. The role of the clients 
and beneficiaries in the governance mechanisms of ICAR and the state agricultural universities 
(SAUs) will be reviewed. Capacity will be built to support technology transfer towards and 
between private sector, farmer organizations, NGOs, extension and other public research 
organizations. The communication and information capacity of the ICAR system will be 
strengthened, e.g., by developing agricultural intelligence systems and websites to support 
extension agents and farmers with technical advice in various local languages. ICAR will 
strengthen its ability to manage Intellectual Property Rights. ICAR will increase its capacity in 
technology foresighting and in analyzing, synthesizing and advising on agricultural and 
innovation policy issues. The result will be a more agile and responsive research system that 
supports market based agricultural development in a cost-effective way.  
 
2. 
The establishment and support of collaborative research models for sustainable 
improvement of agricultural value chains. Consortia will be developed in which public 
organizations, private sector, farmer organizations, NGOs and others are jointly responsible for 
governance, design and implementation of research programs and the application of the resulting 
innovations on-farm and in the value chain. Research will be complemented with knowledge 
management activities, such as the organization of seminars, conferences and innovation market 
places, development of networks of users and experts and conventional or Internet based 
communication strategies. Consortia will be selected through a competitive process, following 
conditions on the types of partnership, the contributions of different partners, the quality of the 
expertise in the consortium, the importance of the proposed topic, the agenda outlined for the 
consortium, and the provisions for maintaining the consortium when the project closes. The 
inclusion of international partners will be encouraged. The project will finance investment and 
operational costs of the consortia with the understanding that the members will contribute 
personnel cost. As a result value chain participants will have improved access to innovations that 
improve their income.  
 
3.  Similar collaborative research models will be established and supported for income-oriented 
rural livelihood improvement in disadvantaged areas. This component will build on the research 
management arrangements that were established under NATP, but with increased roles for non-
public stakeholders and strong emphasis on participatory approaches for defining and 
implementing the agenda. Action research to improve rural livelihoods will be integrated with 
the activities of rural development projects (including World Bank funded projects), Agricultural 
Technology Management Agencies, other State extension initiatives and NGO?s to increase the 
uptake of the results. This component will have a sponsored as well as a competitive grants 
element. The outcome will be that the rural poor from the disadvantaged regions will gain access 
to new opportunities for improving their livelihoods.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented by state agricultural universities, ICAR research facilities, and 
private sector partners, selected through competitive criteria related to reform performances. 
While the exact selection of these agencies are not known at this point of time, the research and 
on-farm demonstration would be limited within the campus and demonstration sites of these 
Page  3
agencies, within the period of the project. Successful research activities, eventually, will have the 
potential to be practiced all over India.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The ICAR / Department of Agricultural Research and Education had already implemented 3 
Bank-supported projects, and thereby had developed some capacity to manage the environmental 
issues arising from some research and extension activities. The various integrated pest 
management and integrated nutrient management initiatives during the NATP were evaluated to 
be highly successful. The ICAR, the regional research facilities, and the state universities have 
trained staff who could potentially deal with possible environmental issues such as soil health, 
conjunctive water use and balanced use of chemical and bio-fertilizers. However, substantial 
capacity building, at different agency level, will be required in environmental impact assessment,  
risk assessment related to scaling up, on-farm trial and commercialization of biotechnology 
research, etc.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
X
Given the research and value chain capacity orientation, the direct environmental impacts in 
the project are expected to be low. The likely environmental issues in the project are indirect and 
long-term. These relate to the proposed collaborative research, extension and commercialization, 
which might have biodiversity and ecological impacts including soil nutrient and water stress 
impacts . Technology transfer to private sector, farmer organizations and other agencies would 
need to consider risks associated with food safety standards, pest and nutrient management; 
stress on soil health, local ecology, and water including groundwater. The project may involve 
limited construction activities whose impacts will not be significant.  The working conditions at 
the research facilities and universities could be improved, so as to accomplish health risks 
minimized.  
 
A
comprehensive environmental and social management framework (ESMF) will be 
prepared to identify,  mitigate and manage potential significant environmental and social issues 
in respect of each sub-project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
The project does not propose to promote chemical fertilizers or pesticides. Any residual risk 
of promoting pesticides, as well as the scope of further improvement in and/or extension of the 
integrated pest management practices developed under NATP will be covered in the ESMF as 
described under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) above.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 
X
Project activities may not have any significant direct impacts on the tribals. But, it could, in 
some cases, affect them indirectly.  Technologies aimed at commercializing the natural resurces 
in the tribal areas could impact their livelihoods. The issue of intellectual property rights/ 
entitlements may also trigger. These issues become clearer as and when the sub=projects begin 
to ground, which takes place over 
time. Hence, a checklist carved out of the Management 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Framework will need to be developed to eanble the likely impact identification. Subsequently, 
mitigation/ management measures could be drawn to serve as a post-research implementation 
tool.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/29/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A.  The target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER) is September 2005, at which 
time the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared.  
 
B. ICAR will initiate a study to develop an integrated environmental and social impact  
management framework along with a check list for assessing each sub-project.  For this, it 
will prepare an extensive list of possible environmental and social risks and impacts arising 
from the various project activities and initiatives, in consultation with various stakeholders 
and experts.  The ESMF will be finalized in consultation with the stakeholders. Drafts of the 
ESMF and the Consultation Reports will be available by September 2005, which would be 
finalized before appraisal of the project by November 2005.  
 
C. An eligibility as well as selection criteria will be developed to identify private sector/ 
non-government agencies to be involved in collaborative research/ dissemination activities. 
This will enable minimizing risks associated with collaborations and technology transfers.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Willem G. Janssen 
04/13/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Pramod K. Agrawal 
04/20/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gajanand Pathmanathan 
04/14/2005 
Comments:   
