Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1665 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/20/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P089484 
Project Name: Second Uttar Pradesh Diversified Agriculture Support Project 
Task Team Leader: Robert S. Epworth 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 9, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: April 27, 2006 
Managing Unit: SASAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Agricultural marketing and trade (30%);Agricultural extension and research 
(30%);Roads and highways (20%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural policies and institutions (P);Rural 
markets (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
70.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
70.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
35.00
35.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the project would be to increase the productivity, product diversity and market 
access of the state's farmers, livestock producers and fishermen.  Key indicators of success 
would be increased areas and yields of diversified field and tree crop, livestock, and fish 
products; complemented by an increase in the proportion of production that is marketed as fresh 
produce, or is processed or value added in some form.  In support of this objective, the project 
would aim to increase private sector investment in all facets of the agricultural and allied sectors 
(from production and service provision through to commodity trading and processing/value 
adding); and to ensure more effective use of government funds already allocated to these sectors.  
 
By stimulating growth and diversity of the agricultural economy, the project would contribute 
to poverty reduction, both through the higher productivity of small and marginal landholders, 
and increased opportunities for employment and livelihood support for the rural landless   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The proposed project would cover all 70 districts in the state (32 phase I districts from the first 
UPDASP, and 38 new phase II districts; and project activities would be grouped into two 
components:  
 
(i) 
Promoting Intensification and Diversification of Agricultural Production, by making 
extension and adaptive research more relevant and accessible to farmers; encouraging the 
development and introduction of more effective agricultural production systems; and reducing 
the risk associated with change, especially for small operators.  
 
o
Extension and Adaptive Research System Reform . Introduction/further development of 
decentralized pluralistic extension and adaptive research system in all districts of UP, through 
adoption of the ATMA management concept (farmer participation; collaboration between line 
depts.; public private partnerships). All government funds allocated for these activities would be 
converged under this approach, and the project would therefore be supporting a time-slice of all 
extension activities of all relevant line Depts.  
 
o
Production System Innovation.  Introduction of innovative agricultural and livestock 
production systems would be actively promoted, and supported by an investment grant scheme 
(size to be determined during preparation) specifically targeted at marginal landholders and the 
landless; along with livestock upgrading programs.  
 
o
Risk Management Pilots.  Introduction of risk mitigation mechanisms for small and 
marginal farmers, involving concepts such as weather-based insurance, warehouse receipts and 
commodity futures, would be tested, through MOUs with private sector providers.  
 
(ii)  Increasing Farmer Access to Expanding Market Opportunities by improving the relevance 
of market information and regulatory framework; improving supply chain management; 
increasing market infrastructure and making market management more responsive to farmers 
needs; and promoting private sector investment in agribusiness  
 
o
Market Information.  Support for provision of comprehensive information systems for 
growers, traders, processors and exporters on the prices and volumes traded in the major outlets  
-
linked eventually with information on product standards, certification, and regulatory policies 
and procedures,  
 
o
Regulatory Framework.  Strengthening of regulatory services in UP designed to improve 
the safety and quality assurance of domestic and export products through direct support to 
necessary public services and by ensuring a competitive policy environment to encourage private 
participants wherever feasible.  
 
o
Market Infrastructure and Management.  Development and testing of two market-yard 
management models in partnership with the Mandi Parishad (State Marketing Board), involving 
establishment of: (i) district-based markets managed by private sector entities who also provide a 
range of input supplies and general services to farmers on the same site (standard mandi fees 
would still be collected); (ii) five specialized markets for fish, and fruits and vegetables and some 
smaller block-level markets, to be operated as regulated markets, but with enhanced governance 
and greater participation of market stakeholders in design and operation of the market, and 
blocked funds for facility repairs and maintenance.  
 
o
Supply Chain Management.  Strengthening of coordinated and uncoordinated supply 
chain management by working with the private sector in domestic and export market 
Page  3
identification and promotion through market surveys, trade fairs etc; and facilitating linkages 
between growers, traders, processors and exporters; promoting milk marketing through 
establishment of a professionally managed marketing cell within the State 
(Pradeshik),Cooperative Dairy Federation, developing  new arrangements and facilities to 
promote production of clean milk, and pilot testing new NDDB designed milk producer 
associations registered under new provisions of the Companies Act, as an alternative model to 
village milk cooperatives.  
 
o
Agribusiness Development.  Establishment of a professionally managed Agribusiness 
Development Facility (ABDF) to promote private sector involvement in agro-processing and 
services provision, such as testing laboratories and quality assurance - assisting potential 
entrepreneurs to identify business opportunities; prepare marketing and business plans; and to 
access investment funds from existing GOI sponsored schemes and commercial banks (including 
potentially, the new Bank funded Small Enterprise Development and Financing Project).  To 
finance selected innovative agribusiness ventures, an Innovations Grant Fund (size to be 
determined during preparation) would be established and administered by commercial banks.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The whole of Uttar Pradesh State   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
This is a follow-on project. During the previous Bank assisted (First) UP Diversified Agriculture 
Support Project, ample efforts have been made towards building the capacity towards addressing 
social as well as environmental safeguard polciies.  Hence, the borrower is endowed with 
adequate capacity to address the safeguard policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The proposed project is not expected to have any significant adverse impacts.  However, 
there is a need to prepare an adequate environmental management framework to maximize the 
environmental opportunities that this project offers (e.g. enhanced production and marketing of 
environmentally-sustainable agriculture, aquaculture and clean milk, environmental awareness-
building) as well as mitigate any potential adverse impacts (e.g. related to small physical 
infrastructure investments such as market yards, market waste management, agribusiness 
activities).   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The proposed project activities are not expected to have any significant adverse impacts on 
natural habitats; however; this will be reevaluated if activities are changed during preparation 
and as examined by the environmental assessment.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
The proposed project activities are not expected to trigger the Forests OP.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Although the project does not intend to directly finance the purchase of pesticides, there is 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
expected to be induced impacts of increase in pesticide use in the project areas.  To mitigate 
against this induced impact, as in the first UP DASP project, there will be significant emphasis 
on Integrated Pest Management and Integrated Nutrient Management demonstrations and 
training, along with supporting interest in and certification of organic farming where possible as 
markets indicate.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
The proposed project activities are not expected to have any adverse impacts on cultural 
property;  this will be re-examined if project activities change during preparation.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
As none of the activities demand lands, to be secured involuntarily,  there is no need to 
trigger this policy. However, activities like Market Development do require lands. The same 
could be made available, either by voluntary donations or private purchase. This being the case, 
similar to the previous project, arrangements to ensure 'voluntariness' in the land transactions 
will have to be developed and agreed upfront.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
The project is not expected to finance activities that would require this OP to be triggered.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
The project is not expected to finance activities that would require this OP to be triggered.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X
The project is not expected to finance activities that would require this OP to be triggered.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/29/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An Environmental Assessment will be conducted to examine how to better mainstream 
environmental opportunities into the proposed project and recommend proactive measures to 
mitigate against any adverse impacts, as well as recommend capacity-building and 
monitoring suggestions.  This will build upon the extensive experiences of the previous 
project.  
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
There is no need for a Social Safeguards study. Based on the past experiences of the 
previous project as well as other projects in the region, the project will be able to draw an 
arrangement to ensure voluntariness in the land transactions.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Robert S. Epworth 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gajanand Pathmanathan 
 
Comments:   
