Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
Report No: AC198 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: November 28, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P084792 
Project Name: Assam Agricultural 
Competitiveness Project (ex ARIASP II) 
Task Team Leader: Robert S. Epworth 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 2004 
Credit amount ($m.): $95.0m 
Estimated Board Date: September 2004 
 
Managing Unit: SASRD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Agricultural extension and research 
(50%);Irrigation and drainage 
(30%);Animal production (20%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure 
(P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Tapas Paul and Mridula Singh 
Other financing amounts by source:   
Borrower ($15.0m); Beneficiaries $20.0m). 
 
 
 
B.  Project Objective
 
 
The objective of the project would be to facilitate market driven agricultural intensification and 
diversification by assisting farmers to become more competitive and able to take advantage of 
emerging economic opportunities 
 
C.  Project Description
 
 
The emphasis of the project would be on improving service delivery, farmer organization and 
market linkages, supported by expansion of essential rural infrastructure. The aim would be to 
develop a market oriented agricultural services delivery system that can help farmers make better 
use of their farm resources and project funded infrastructure to intensify and diversify 
production. Three components are envisaged: 
 
Page  2
 
 
• 
Promoting Agricultural Productivity and Farmer Competitiveness 
(about $16m or 
12% of project costs) : farmer organization; credit access; farm mechanization; market 
information and access; technology transfer; livestock upgrading and disease control; 
beel and pond fisheries; market-yard management;  and a pilot agribusiness development 
grant Fund. 
• 
Agricultural Services Reform 
(about $14m or 11% of project costs): human resource 
development; restructuring and reorienting public systems (irrigation) to increase farmer 
participation and facilitate partnerships with private agribusiness where 
appropriate(research and extension). 
 
• 
Rural Infrastructure Development 
(about $100m or 77% of project costs) : expand 
small holder irrigation, particularly STW; rehabilitation of roads and bridges; and 
development of selected market-yards where private sector is involved.   
 
The new project would, 
inter alia
, (i) reorganize and coordinate the extension operations of line 
departments (agriculture, livestock, fisheries and irrigation), following the Agricultural 
Technology Management Agency (ATMA) model being piloted under the National Agricultural 
Technology Project (NATP) – and encourage public/private cooperation and partnerships in 
service delivery; (ii) develop commercially oriented farmer organizations, active in facilitating 
technology transfer, input and equipment procurement and commodity marketing; (iii) promote 
commercial interaction between farmer groups and commodity traders/agribusiness through a 
pilot agribusiness development grant Fund, facilitated by a range of service providers from 
private sector, NGOs, universities and Govt departments;(iv) rationalize the current system of 
matching grants for farm investment in irrigation and mechanization, offset by better farmer 
access to credit institutions; (v) concentrate irrigation development on expanding the spread of 
shallow tubewells and limiting support to rehabilitation of public schemes, based on rigorous 
screening to ensure participatory management and full recovery of operation and maintenance 
costs; and (iv) further expand availability of farm mechanization to small and marginal farmers. 
The project would be implemented over five years. Community mobilization would be facilitated 
through NGOs, continuing the practice of the first phase.  
 
Finally, Assam forms a major part of one of the most biologically diverse regions in South Asia 
in terms of fisheries and forest, and wetland fauna and flora.  Environmental and biodiversity 
conservation concerns and how to mainstream these issues within new production systems would 
therefore be addressed specifically during project preparation.  
 
 
D.  Project location  
 
Service delivery reform would aim for statewide coverage by project end, but implemented 
district by district in a phased manner; while infrastructure development would be limited to 
specific districts of Assam with the greatest need.
 
 
 
Page  3
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity
 
 
Implementation of the project will be coordinated by the ARIASP Society, which was created by 
the Government of Assam specifically for the ongoing Assam Rural Infrastructure and 
Agricultural  Services Project (ARIASP) and has operated successfully as the nodal Project 
Implementation Unit. 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[X] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[X] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[X] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[X] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[X] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [X] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION
 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
 
Because of Assam’s particular circumstances, and the nature of the proposed project a number of 
Bank safeguard policies would be triggered, including environment, natural habitats, involuntary 
settlement, indigenous peoples, cultural property and pest management.  Plans to mitigate 
potential risks in these areas would be developed, based on environmental and social assessments 
made during preparation; and implementation monitored by task team members with the 
appropriate skills. To ensure consistency, social and environmental safeguards for the road 
component would conform to what is agreed between the Bank and the Government of India for 
the PMGSY.  Mitigation measures for all safeguard policies triggered by this project would be 
identified prior to the Quality Enhancement Review (QER) planned for April 2004. 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be 
addressed? 
 
These will be addressed as an integral part of the social and environmental assessment exercise 
undertaken as part of preparation.  
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN 
REVIEW 
 
The policies that would be triggered by the project were confirmed at the PCN review. 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review: 
 
This is tentatively planned for April 2004 
 
wb69553 
C:\Documents and Settings\wb69553\My Documents\Assam ACP\AACP final ISDS.doc 
November 28, 2003 4:39 PM
 
