Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1143 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: December 14, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P090585 
Project Name: Punjab State Roads Project 
Task Team Leader: Simon Thomas 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 18, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: April 11, 2006 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private 
sector development (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Kirtan C. Sahoo, Environmental 
Specialist;  I.U.B. Reddy, Resettlement Specialist, Frederick Brusberg, Social Safeguards 
coordinator 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  IBRD: 250 
Other financing amounts by source: Government of India 
$200m 
B.  Project Objectives  
 
The 
project development objective
 is to provide improved transport operating conditions for road 
users in Punjab.  The 
outcome indicators
 for the raised service levels provided by the state roads 
which connect the village roads to the National Highways include (a) elimination of the growing 
traffic congestion on the network; (b) increased vehicle speeds; (c) reduced transport costs by 
reducing road roughness; (d) improved financial sustainability for road development and 
maintenance and (e) strengthened capacity to plan and manage the network.  The project will 
also assist in the greater participation of the private sector in the development, maintenance and 
management of the road network, through possible support for concessioning, contract 
maintenance and stakeholder consultation. 
 
C.  Project Description  
 
A
Sector Investment Loan is proposed to finance specific investments and achieve targeted 
changes in the organization, management and financing of the sector.  This would be the first 
Bank operation in the Punjab road sector, and a sector wide approach (SWAP) would not be 
warranted at this stage of the dialogue, though it might be considered for future lending. 
Nevertheless, it is intended to i
nclude the maintenance of all Plan Roads, within the project’s 
scope, in order to bring a sector approach to road maintenance. The proposed project will target 
Page  2
the 7,000 km of Plan Roads, which link the rural road network to the National Highways and 
provide most of the main roads in Punjab.  The following project components are planned 
 
Component 1: Road Upgrading and Rehabilitation (approximately US$350 million)
 The project 
would fund a combination of road widening/upgrading of about 400 km and pavement 
rehabilitation/ strengthening of about 800 km of roads. The GOP has developed a policy for 
Public-Private Partnership and prepared model road concession documents.  Several of the most 
heavily trafficked Plan roads might be improved through PPP and the project could support this 
initiative through funding the grant component. 
 
Component 2: Road Routine Maintenance (approximately US$90 million)
 The total project cost, 
though not Bank funding, will cover the whole 7,000 km network and include the routine 
maintenance costs (to be fully funded by GOP); this would be similar to the approach adopted 
for the Rural Roads Project and is used in Bank-supported projects in other countries. 
 
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening (approximately US$10 million). 
The project will be 
implemented by the Punjab Roads and Bridges Development Board (PRBDB) established under 
the Public Works Department of the State of Punjab in 1998.  It is staffed from the PWD with the 
mandate to develop and maintain the state highway network.  The management of the PRBDB 
view their role primarily as planning and management of the road sector, with the 
implementation of the works contracted to the private sector.  
 
Social impact
:
The selection of project roads will be made on the basis of road condition and 
traffic level, while ensuring some regional balance to the poorer districts in western Punjab.  
During project preparation, the need to include specific HIV/AIDS provisions in the works 
contracts will reviewed as well as the desirability of contract provisions for hiring local unskilled 
and semi-skilled labor
.
It is proposed to construct specific facilities for two-wheeler and non-
motorized traffic, where flows are high around major urban areas. 
 
D.  Project location 
 
The project is located in the State of Punjab in north-western India.  The specific roads to be 
financed have not yet been determined. The selection of project roads will be made on the basis 
of road condition and traffic level, while ensuring some regional balance to the poorer districts in 
western Punjab.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies  
 
This will be the first World Bank financed project implemented by the PRBDB.  The PRBDB 
has a professional staff of 20 with a more professional and innovative approach than the normal 
PWD.  Initial discussions have been positive but additional training will be provided together 
with technical support during the early period of project implementation. Safeguards capacity 
will need to be assessed during project preparation and necessary measures taken to ensure the 
needs of the project. 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
The significant potential environmental concerns in the project, at this stage, are expected to 
include: (a) loss of road side trees, which are found along most of the roads in Punjab; (b) the 
impacts of road improvements on the ecologically significant wetlands, wild life sanctuary and 
ramsar sites; and (c) the impacts of road improvements on important historical, archeological and 
religious sites depending upon their proximity to the project roads.  Punjab has a population of 
25 million and  is one of the most prosperous and developed states in India. The most recent 
estimates indicate that more than 94 percent of Punjab’s population are above the poverty line, 
70 percent are literate, 94 percent of the six year olds are enrolled in primary schools, 72 percent 
of children under twelve months are immunized, 99 percent of households have access to safe 
drinking water, and the average life expectancy of its citizens is 68 years.  All the villages in 
Punjab are electrified and 92 percent of households have access to electricity – the highest 
among all the states in India. 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[X] A   [ ] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD  
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[Yes ] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
GOI’s environment standards meet the World Bank requirements.  The focus 
needs to be on effective implementation and suitable measures will be designed 
into the project. While the project is not expected to encounter particularly 
sensitive problems, such as nature reserves, road widening will have an impact on 
tree-lined roads which are common. Such issues, including the applicability of 
other safeguard policies, will be examined and addressed as part of the EA to be 
carried out for the project.  
Social impact:  
The selection of project roads will be 
made on the basis of road condition and traffic level, while ensuring some 
regional balance to the poorer districts in western Punjab.  During project 
preparation, the need to include specific HIV/AIDS provisions in the works 
contracts will reviewed as well as the desirability of contract provisions for hiring 
local unskilled and semi-skilled labor
.
It is proposed to construct specific 
facilities for two-wheeler and non-motorized traffic, where flows are high. 
[
Yes] 
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
A
great diversity of wild life exists in Punjab especially in the Shiwalik area and 
in the wetlands. The wetlands such as the Harika lake wetland (declared a wild 
life sanctuary in 1982),  and the wetland in Ropar (designated as ramsar site in 
2002) host a number of vulnerable species of birds and attracts the largest number 
of migratory birds in north-western India, requiring significant conservation 
measures. 
Proximity of the project roads to such sensitive sites may trigger the 
safeguard policy on natural habitat (OP/BP 4.04). 
 
[No ] 
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
Not applicable 
[
Yes] 
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
GOP has indicated that most road right of ways are free of encroachers and does 
not expect extensive resettlement.  This was broadly confirmed during site visits 
Page  4
but four-laning and bypasses may require some resettlement.  The details will 
only be available once the feasibility study is completed.  A Resettlement and 
Rehabilitation Policy framework, with an entitlement matrix for different types of 
impacts/losses, will be agreed consistent with OP 4.12. Resettlement Actions 
Plans, as needed, will be developed for First Year roads.  The framework will 
then be applied to subsequent phases. GOI has introduced a 
“National 
Resettlement Policy”
 February 2004 and to the extent possible this will be 
applied.  
[
TBD] 
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
Among the state’s total population, Sikhs constitute 63 percent and Hindus about 
35 percent. However, there is a rural-urban divide with Sikhs preponderant in the 
countryside (about 72 percent) and Hindus dominating the towns. Scheduled 
Castes of both communities comprise 35 percent of the population in 2001 – the 
highest proportion in India. 
There are no known indigenous peoples however 
this will further be examined during project preparation to determine whether 
OD 4.20 is triggered
 
[
Yes] 
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
Punjab is naturally characterized by two regions, sub-mountain strip at the 
foothills of Shiwalik range in the North-East and the alluvial plain, which is part 
of the vast Indo-Gangetic plains. The area under forests in Punjab is minimal 
though there has been improvement in the last few years. It is understood that the 
road side plantations, commonly found along roads in Punjab, have been declared 
as protected forests requiring necessary approvals and mitigative/compensatory 
measures for felling such trees. At this stage it is not clear whether the project 
roads pass through reserved forests or not. 
The applicability of the safeguard 
policy on forests (OP/BP 4.36) can only be determined once more information 
in this regard is available. 
 
[No ] 
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
Not applicable 
[
Yes] 
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
Punjab plain is the cradle of Indian civilization and is dotted with sites of 
archeological remains and historical and religious sites. Some of such sites are 
expected to be very close to the road carriageway. As per the previous Strategic 
Options Study (1997), some of the roads such as the ones in Phillaur-
Nawanshahar  stretch are reported to be extremely intensive from physical and 
cultural environmental perspectives. 
The applicability of the safeguard policy on 
Cultural Property (OP/BP 4.36) will be determined once more information in 
this regard is available.
 
[
No] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
Not applicable 
[
No] 
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
Not applicable 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
The Quality Enhancement Review (QER) is targeted for September 2005, at which time the 
PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared. 
 
The Requests for Proposals (RFP) for the 
Feasibility Study
 has been issued to the short-listed 
consultants and includes the Environmental and Social Safeguards screening and development of 
the Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy Framework for the Project (the assignment is 
expected to commence February/March 2005 and take 6 months). The RFP for the 
Detailed 
Design
 of
the First year roads (required for appraisal) has been agreed and should be issued in 
February 2005 and includes the requirement to prepare all the necessary Environmental 
Management Plans for each road (and contractual provisions for the works contracts) and any 
Resettlement Action Plans required. All aspects have been cleared by the safeguards members of 
the project team.  
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Simon Thomas 
December 14, 2004 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Frederick Brusberg 
December 14, 2004 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Guang Zhe Chen 
December 14, 2004 
Comments 
