Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1570 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/19/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P094360 
Project Name: Vector Borne Disease Control Project 
Task Team Leader: Gandham N.V. Ramana 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 1, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: September 29, 2006 
Managing Unit: SASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Other communicable diseases (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
25.00
25.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project would support GOI in achieving its stated goal of reducing mortality and 
morbidity from vector borne diseases, namely malaria, dengue, Japanese encephalitis (JE), 
visceral leishmaniasis (LF) (also known as Kala Azar), and lymphatic filariasis (LF). (Indicators 
and targets would be developed and refined during project preparation)   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed operation aims to expand access and enhance quality of VBD control services--
prevention, care and treatment of VBDs, integrated vector management, strengthened 
surveillance, M&E, and operational research.  It would have a national scope, as all five VBDs 
affect the majority of the states and Union Territories, though at varying levels of disease burden, 
and would cover not only rural but also urban areas, as malaria and dengue are increasing 
problems for the cities. The proposed operation would support the National Program, which 
includes the following three areas of intervention:  
 
(i) Increasing access and quality of care and treatment, achieved through strengthening capacity 
of health facilities, medical and health personnel in public and private sectors, village level 
Page  2
functionaries, ensuring adequate supplies of drugs and laboratory supplies, and introducing ACT 
in malaria drug resistant areas.  
 
(ii) Preventing VBDs and improving integrated vector management (IVM), focusing on 
increasing utilization of insecticide treated nets (ITNs), targeted indoor residual spraying (IRS) 
and scaling up of source reduction, through behavioral change communications, advocacy with 
local and community leaders, public-private partnership with NGOs and informal providers, and 
inter-sectoral collaboration between health and other departments.  
 
(iii) Surveillance, M&E, and Operational Research, to improve tracking and reporting of VBD 
cases for timely response to outbreaks, establishment of information systems and linking of 
laboratory support and human resource development. It will also include operational research to 
assess effectiveness of innovative strategies and interventions, such as for delivering services in 
urban and remote inaccessible areas and introducing new technologies.  
 
The proposed operation would also focus on strengthening institutions at all levels (center, 
state, and district) for long term sustainability of VBD control.Under the framework of the 
National Rural Health Mission (NRMH), capacity will be strengthened in the areas of human 
resource development and management, finance, procurement, advocacy and health 
communication, and epidemiology/ surveillance and results based planning and budgeting. 
Technical assistance will be provided to support efforts to decentralize the programs, including 
strengthening the capacity and advocacy of the Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs), and to 
promote inter-sectoral collaboration.  It would also enhance the capacity of private and public 
sector institutions to manage and implement effective VBD services in urban areas.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented nationally.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The ongoing Enhanced Malaria Control project was a Category C, and did not require an 
Environmental Assessment or plan. An EA was undertaken to review impact of pesticides which 
found that levels of pesticides and DDT increased in blood samples collected after spraying and 
worker safety and storage, use and disposal systems are currently inadequate. National Vector 
Borne Disease Control Programme (NVBDCP, formally known as National Anti-Malaria 
Programme) has prepared Guidelines on Indoor Residual Spraying, but there is no standard 
procedure for disposal and there has been no evaluation of implementation of these guidelines.  
 
It is important to recognize that the current ongoing Malaria Control project has been successful 
in shifting emphasis from IRS to a broader mix of effective and environmentally friendly 
interventions, such as use of larvivorous fish and promotion of ITNs. Use of IRS has declined by 
50% between 1997 and 2004. During preparation of the VBD project, discussions will be 
continued with regard to maintaining the reducing trend of IRS and DDT use and possible long-
term planning for phase-out of DDT.  
 
NVBDCP may have the basic capacity to oversee implementation, but capacities would need to 
be built up at national and state levels for sustained monitoring and evaluation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  3
Ms Ruma Tavorath (SASES) 
Ms Shreelata Rao-Seshadri (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This project is categorized as Category B, as provision of preventative and treatment services 
under this project involves the use, storage, transportation, and disposal of insecticides and 
pesticides in various applications. The management of these insecticides requires stringent and 
systematic cradle to grave management, otherwise there could be direct environmental and 
public health implications.  There is no construction waste envisaged, as there are no major civil 
works.  
 
The proposed project will finance insecticides for control of malaria and other VBDs. In 
India the import, manufacture, sale, transport, distribution and use of insecticides is regulated 
under the Insecticides Act.  
 
While it is recognized that DDT is produced in India and is used in the vector control 
program, the Bank funds will not be used for procurement of DDT.  DDT use has been banned in 
the agriculture sector since 1989 and is no longer used in urban areas under the Urban Malaria 
Scheme (UMS) in favor of pesticides like malathion and synthetic pyrethyroids.  It is still used in 
rural areas in indoor spraying applications (IRS) and it is important that appropriate guidance and 
training on safe handling is provided to the workers. Community awareness and information 
dissemination will play a key role in ensuring effective, focused and targeted use of DDT.  
 
The preparation of the proposed VBD control project would focus on two areas related to 
environmental safeguards: (1) alignment of DDT use with WHO Global Integrated Vector 
Management Framework and the decisions of the Stockholm convention; and (ii) undertaking of 
the Environmental Assessment.  GOI would undertake an assessment of current situation in the 
country of insecticide use in vector control (spraying, bed-nets etc), understand the distribution 
chain from production to disposal, and evaluate current worker practices and monitoring 
systems. Based on the Assessment, an Integrated Vector Management Plan would be developed, 
which will define sound management and operational practices on the use and management of 
insecticides, including DDT, establishment of an institutional framework, capacity building, 
strengthening of technical guidelines, stringent monitoring of the supply and distribution chain, 
evaluation of behavioral changes and community awareness and advocacy.  The Plan will be 
disclosed in-country and through the Bank Infoshop, before appraisal. Consultations will be held 
with key stakeholders, before finalization of the Plan.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The Pest Management Plan will be integrated and central to the EMP and will focus on sound 
and effective management of insecticides and pesticides and proposed strategies for reduced 
reliance on insecticides, while maintaining and improving effective vector control.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 
X
Poverty and Social Assessment will be carried out during project preparation to examine the 
impact of malaria and other VBDs on tribal population and the poor, as well as barriers to access 
and use of preventive and treatment interventions.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/17/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  07/17/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Poverty and Social Analysis completed by December 2005.  
 
Environmental Assessment completed by March 2006.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Hnin Hnin Pyne 
06/21/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
06/22/2005 
Comments:  SASES Sageguards will review vector management plans. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Anabela Abreu 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
