Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1584 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/09/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P083782 
Project Name: Railway Capacity and Safety Enhancement Project 
Task Team Leader: Simon Thomas 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 9, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: July 18, 2006 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Railways (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
50.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective is to increase the effective capacity and safety of IR's existing track 
infrastructure.  This will be achieved by: (a) reducing train headway times and introducing 
higher capacity wagons; (b) reducing the risk of signaling failures and the potential for human 
error; and (c) assisting IR to become more commercially oriented and meet traffic demands on 
its commercial network.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will focus on IR's core commercial railway network, largely consisting of 
the Golden Quadrilateral and diagonals.  This project will increase the effective capacity and 
safety of the existing infrastructure by supporting:  
 
-
Track circuiting/block signaling on the Delhi - Howrah line: this will substantially raise track 
capacity (50 - 80 percent) by reducing train headway times, as well as significantly improving 
signaling safety; US$70 million.  
 
-
Automatic block proving equipment on relatively busy lines: this is a basic safety 
requirement on modern railways, eliminating the possibility that coaches or wagons are left in 
otherwise vacated track sections; US$60 million  
Page  2
-
Stainless steel wagons with higher axle-loads/lower maintenance: IR is investing in higher 
capacity wagon fleets thus reducing unit costs.  Stainless steel wagons will be used for the 
movement of corrosive commodities; US$60 million  
 
-
Track maintenance machines: IR plans to increase effective track capacity by increasing 
speeds, especially for freight trains. The required track conditions can only realistically be 
provided by mechanical maintenance;  US$45 million  
 
-
Consultancy/training provision: to be defined;  US$3 million  
 
-
Contingencies and front-end fee:  US$12 million  
 
The total preliminary cost is estimated at US$250 million.  In parallel, another project will be 
formulated to help eliminate track capacity bottlenecks through additional lines, electrification 
and/or conversion to broad gauge track.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Kanpur - Howrah in Northern India, and minor activities on a network of commenrcial links on 
IR's network.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
This will be the first Bank operation of general support to IR in a decade, during which time the 
Bank's safeguard policies and other fiduciary requirements have changed considerably. This 
project will raise few, if any safeguard policies.  However, IR is implementing satisfactorily and 
ADB project which requires adherence to policies similar to those of the Bank.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
X
Project implementation should have no significant environmental implications as 
construction is limited to digging a trench alongside the rail track, laying a cable, and then back-
filling the trench. An environmental assessment is being undertaken on the first section of track.  
Following the submission of RITES' report on track circuiting of the Kanpur - Mughalsarai 
section, a review would be undertaken of current practices and procedures followed by the 
Indian Railways to identify and address potential environmental impacts, and develop a simple 
Environmental Management and Monitoring Framework, which would be used to effectively 
manage environmental impacts associated with physical construction activities, such as trenching 
and cable laying within the proposed project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
As part of environmental assessment, a simple social screening will be undertaken to confirm 
the land requirements for civil works such as station rooms, signal rooms, etc. under Track 
circuiting component. The details such as amount of land required, its current use, ownership, 
encumbrances, etc. will be ascertained and accordingly the trigger for Involuntary Resettlement 
will be determined.  If required, suitable measur
es will proposed to mitigate those minor impacts.  
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/04/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
This is a very simple project and it is unlikely that any major safeguard studies will be 
required.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Simon Thomas 
06/09/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
