                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                 APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                                 Report No.: 106769

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: July 5, 2016

    I.      BASIC INFORMATION

1. Basic Project Data


Country:                  India                 Project ID             P156867
Project Name              Skills Strengthening for Industrial Value Enhancement (STRIVE)

Task Team                 Muna Meky, Denis Medvedev
Leader(s)
Estimated Appraisal       July 21, 2016            Estimated Board             September 30, 2016
Date                                               Date
Managing Unit           GEDDR                      Lending InstrumentProgram for Results
Sector(s)               Education
Themes                  Education for the knowledge economy, other public sector
                        governance, other private sector development
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or No
OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?

Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     538.75                Total Bank Financing:            268.75
Financing Gap:          0.00
Financing Source                                                               Amount
Borrower                                                                       270.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                          268.75
Total                                                                          538.75
Environmental           C
Category:
Is this a Repeater      No
project?

2. Project Development Objective(s)

To increase access to quality and market-driven vocational training provided in ITIs and apprenticeships

3. Project Description

STRIVE aims at improvements of the Craftsmen Training Scheme (CTS) and Apprenticeship
Training Scheme (ATS). STRIVE funding will specifically be leveraged to strengthen key
drivers affecting labor market responsiveness and efficiency: focusing on results through
introducing performance-based funding principles in the public skills development realm,
deepening public private partnership in training delivery and supervision, introducing high
quality ICT-enabled teaching and learning in long-term training programs and teachers’ training,
promoting inclusion in skills development, especially of female youth and youth from scheduled
castes and scheduled tribes, and strengthening the drivers of outcome-based training
development


4. Activities of the Project

The World Bank Program support (P4R+IPF) consists of two categories of activities: (i)
institutional training and (ii) trainers. The proposed operation will use a hybrid instrument,
combining PforR and IPF mechanisms for financing. The estimated cost of the program is over 6
years and Bank’s contribution will be 268.75 million. Under the operation, US$38.75 million
will be dedicated to financing a specific set of technical assistance (TA) activities. The objective
of the TA support is to strengthen capacity to adopt more systematic planning, implementation
and monitoring mechanisms. The indicative list of activities to be supported under this category
include (i) policy development and regulatory reform, (ii) program implementation support
through National and State Project Management Units, (iii) piloting innovative interventions
focused on improving training and employment outcomes for girls, and (v) Monitoring and
Evaluation activities including impact evaluations, tracer studies, qualitative assessments, and
third party validation studies to allow for improving scheme design.

Skills training interventions planned under the Program are expected to result in substantial
social and environmental benefits to the society at large, especially, to the poor and vulnerable
sections. Adverse impacts that are sensitive, diverse and unprecedented on the environment
and/or people are not foreseen. However, planned efforts are essential to ensure that the proposed
interventions do result in sustainable social and environmental benefits. Further, the lending
instruments adopted for the purpose are twofold: one, Program for Results Operation which
covers the bulk of the credit; and the other Investment Project Financing, meant to support the
Technical Assistance component. Consequently, the social and environmental management have
been planned separately for the two lending streams.


5. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)

The Program essentially aims at providing technical, institutional and financial support to ITIs,
apprenticeship programs and other government agencies for enhancing quality of skill
development. These institutions are located throughout the country in all the states. While each
state is unique and varies substantially in respect of geophysical, biological and socio-economic
and cultural characteristic, these have no bearing on the interventions planned, which are rather
exclusively in terms of ‘training’.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
6. Safeguard Policies            Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP   No           This component is to support
4.01                                          institutional capacity building and
                                              other soft components. No civil
                                              works and / or other related
                                              activities are planned. Hence,
                                              OP/BP 4.01 is not triggered.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04      No           There is no civil works and/ or
                                              other activities planned that may
                                              result in any work in natural
                                              habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36               No           This policy is not triggered, as the
                                              Operation is focused on supporting
                                              specific technical, institutional and
                                              financial support to existing ITIs
                                              and other government agencies.
Pest Management OP 4.09          No           This Operation does not support
                                              any pest management or pest
                                              control activities.
Physical Cultural Resources      No           Existing institutes are to be
OP/BP 4.11                                    supported under this Operation.
                                              Therefore, physical and cultural
                                              resources are unlikely to be
                                              affected.
Indigenous Peoples OP/ BP 4.10   Yes          The policy is triggered given the
                                              Program is country-wide and the
                                              beneficiaries could also include
                                              students belonging to Scheduled/
                                              Tribal Areas and/ or that TA
                                              activities may have a bearing on the
                                              Tribal Areas. A Social Assessment
                                              has been carried out and a Tribal
                                              People Planning Framework
                                              prepared to be adopted, as
                                              appropriate, during implementation.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   No           This policy has not been triggered
4.12                                          given that Operation shall not
                                              finance civil works involving
                                              compulsory land acquisition,
                                              involuntary resettlement, or causing
                                              restriction of access to natural
                                              resources.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No

Projects on International        No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP      No
7.60


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Skills training interventions planned under the Program are expected to result in substantial
social and environmental benefits to the society at large, especially, to the poor and vulnerable
sections. Adverse impacts that are sensitive, diverse and unprecedented on the environment
and/or people are not foreseen. However, planned efforts are essential to ensure that the
proposed interventions do result in sustainable social and environmental benefits. Further, the
lending instruments adopted for the purpose are twofold: one, Program for Results Operation
(P4R) which covers the bulk of the credit; and the other Investment Project Financing (IPF),
meant to support the Technical Assistance (TA) component. Consequently, the social and
environmental management have been planned separately for the two lending streams.

For the P4R lending stream, the Bank task team has carried out an assessment of the
Environmental and Social Systems (ESSA) as part of the Program preparation, to gauge the
adequacy of environmental and social systems at national, state as well as ITI levels against
the six core principles. This has enabled assessing the extent to which the Program systems
promote environmental and social sustainability; avoid, minimize or mitigate adverse impacts
on natural habitats and physical cultural resources; protect public and worker safety; manage
land acquisition; consider issues related to indigenous peoples and vulnerable groups; and,
avoid social conflicts. Further, the team, jointly with the borrower, has identified the gaps and
actions for enhancing the program systems and mitigating environmental and social risks.

Simultaneous to the conducting of ESSA, efforts have been made towards addressing the
safeguard requirements for the IPF. TA component is designed essentially to provide soft
support to the main Program and is expected to encompass the following elements: (i) Project
management support including external technical capacity support; (ii) policy and other
analytical as well as diagnostic studies; (iii) national as well as international Observation
Study Tours (OST) including workshops, seminars etc.; and (iv) Information, education and
communication campaign (IEC).

It is categorical that no construction activities will be supported out of this fund. Hence, the
component’s proposed interventions will not result in any adverse impacts on people and/ or
environment. In fact, even the main Program, aimed at skill development, will not result in any
adverse impacts. But, the social assessments made during the Operation preparation have
established that there could be tribal people in the Program areas and some of the analytical
studies may be specific to the tribal areas. At the same time, full knowledge about the
interventions likely to happen during implementation does not exist at preparation, to warrant
a comprehensive planning. Given this situation, in accordance with the Indian Constitutional
provisions as well as World Bank’s Operational Policy (OP) on Indigenous Peoples, 4.10, a
Tribal Peoples Planning Framework has been prepared.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
While the Operation interventions, on the whole, will have a positive impact on the technical
education sector, specific interventions envisaged under the Program such as refurbishment/
retrofitting/major repair works of existing classrooms/laboratories/libraries may have some
potential but limited adverse environmental impacts in the local context. Thus, potential
indirect and/ or long term negative impacts are not envisaged.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
ITI and apprenticeship training is a highly diverse and multi-faceted activity. The type of
programs offered depends upon a variety of factors related to trainers, trainees, training
providers, nature and scale of trades. Even the strategy of implementation varies substantially.
So, the Operation characteristically will try and experiment with a variety of alternatives.
These, however, get unfurled during the implementation and are meant to enhance the
effectiveness of the intervention. No adverse impacts are envisaged from any of the alternative
skill development interventions.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Among several groups, one notable group on the periphery of economic and social progress
are the tribal groups (or ‘Adivasis’). These people have been identified by the Indian
Constitution as ‘Scheduled Tribes’ (ST).1 There are an estimated 84 million tribal persons,
which accounts for around eight percent of India’s population of 1.2 billion. The tribal
peoples’ poorer education and health indicators are attributed in the first instance to poverty,
which in turn, is a result of them being physically isolated, concentrated in remote hilly and
forested areas suffering from poor accessibility and practicing mostly subsistence agriculture,
often dependent on forest produce.

In response to the unique challenges faced by the STs, GoI has undertaken a number of
measures over the years. The Constitution of India recognizes the diversity of STs across India
as well as other complex problems in terms of geographical isolation, socio-economic
backwardness, distinctive culture, poor infrastructure facilities, language and religion,
exploitation by various groups, and so on. In response, five broad categories of safeguards 2 are
provided: (i) social – chiefly related to abolishing of un-touchability; (ii) economic – chiefly
provision of Fifth and Sixth Schedule Areas; (iii) educational and cultural – reservations in
educational institutions; (iv) political – provides for reservation of seats in legislature; and (iv)

1
  There are 645 distinct tribal groups recognized as STs in India. More than half the population is concentrated in the
states of Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Jharkhand and Gujarat (the ‘central belt’ of India). A second
belt starts from the north, and comprises Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand to the seven states in
the north eastern region. The third is the southern belt with some STs in the south Indian states, as well as islands of
Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep.
2
       GoI,      Tribal      Constitutional     Safeguards      and     Protective      Measures       for       Tribals,
http://ncsc.nic.in/files/ncsc/new6/261.pdf.
services – reservations in appointments or of posts in public employment. Thus India has both
protective provisions to safeguard tribal people from social injustices, as well as
developmental provisions to promote their educational and economic interests. Further,
administrative provisions under the Fifth and Sixth Schedules give special powers to the state
for the protection and governance of tribal areas and reservation provisions to ensure due
representation in legislative bodies and government jobs. The introduction of Panchayats
(Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act (PESA) was enacted by the Indian Parliament on Dec 24,
1996. This Act offers a provision for greater local control over resources and decision making
to the tribal people through institutions like Gram Panchayat and Gram Sabha.

The Fifth Schedule consists of districts in the states of Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand,
Chhatisgarh, Odisha, Telangana, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Maharashtra
and Rajasthan which are dominated by tribal population. As per the Constitution each of these
states is expected to form a Tribal Advisory Council. The Constitution further provides that it
shall be the duty of the Tribes Advisory Council to advise on such matters pertaining to the
welfare and advancement of STs in the state as may be referred to them by the Governor.

The tribal majority regions of North East India, is the part of the Sixth Schedule of the Indian
Constitution. It has a set of legal provisions are designed especially for tribal majority regions
in the North Easter hills of India. The Schedule provides for the constitutions of Autonomous
District Councils (ADCs) under which all the tribal chiefs and headmen were placed. The idea
was to provide a democratic voice to the tribal structures within the modern state.

The Fifth and Sixth Schedule of Indian constitution provides for self-governance by tribals.
Accordingly, measures to reach the tribal populations including conducting consultations and
seeking consent in respect of activities taken in these areas, have been specified.

India is well endowed with a variety of institutions at national as well as state levels, having
well laid out training programs, but with varied capacities. Implementation arrangements, viz.,
systems and procedures do exist for outreach activities to create awareness and mobilization.
A clear and definite mandate does exist both at the national and state levels for ensuring the
social inclusiveness and capacity building of various agencies to address social issues.
National and state legislations too provide for affirmative actions to ensure inclusion, among
others, including tribals.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The primary stakeholders include the intended target population or beneficiaries of the
Operation viz., -- trainees comprising men, women, Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribes,
Minorities, Persons with Disability, and Other Backward Classes – the selected ITIs,
Advanced Training Institutes (ATIs), RDATs, ITI instructors, local employers and local
communities. Apex level stakeholders include the relevant state departments of education,
employment, labor, social welfare, tribals and minority. Likewise, national level stakeholders
include Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship, Directorate General of Training,
and related agencies at the national level; Department of Training; Tribal Affairs; Women and
Child; Minorities; and Social Justice and Empowerment.
Extensive consultations have been made during the Program preparation through field visits to
various states, chosen based upon geographical as well as socio-economic and cultural aspects
throughout the country. The states include – Assam (North East), Jharkhand (East),
Maharashtra (West), Telangana (South), Uttarakhand (North), and Haryana (North).
Information has also been generated out of consultations conducted in Odisha, Tamil Nadu
and Chhattisgarh, undertaken under other Bank assisted projects. At the national and state
levels, consultations were carried out with various stakeholders including government officials
at the national level and state level and industry partners at the states who take in apprentices.
A good number of industries which take in apprentices were also visited during the assessment
and consulted in order to understand the issues and problems of apprenticeship. Draft Tribal
People Planning Framework (TPPF) has been disclosed through the website of MSDE and
disseminated widely across different states. Protocols to conduct consultations in the Fifth and
Sixth Schedule Areas during implementation is as follows: selection of persons/ agencies to be
consulted, venue and timing for consultations, setting of agenda, making available relevant
documents in local languages, conducting of the consultative meeting as well as recording the
proceedings and subsequently disseminating the same. Bi-annual monitoring through local
participation (tribal leaders and other department) shall also be done.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop                              N/A
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive N/A
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure
India                                                       N/A
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 June 28, 2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                              July 5, 2016
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/ Audit/or EMP
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain
why: N/A


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including         Yes [ ] No [X ] NA [ ]
EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or            Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
Practice Manager (PM) review and approve the EA
report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP            Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to             Yes [ ] No [ ] NA X[ ]
cultural property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate      Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X ]
the potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning              Yes [X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for           Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the      Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X ]
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit or Practice Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a       Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been         Yes [X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the             Yes [X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been           Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader(s): Name:       Muna Meky, Denis Medvedev

Approved By
Practice Manager/ Manager:       Name: Keiko Miwa                Date: July 5, 2016
