Page  1
1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
PROJECT APPRAISAL STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1365 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: March 16, 2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID:  P094513 
Project Name: India ( Tamil Nadu and 
Pondicherry) Emergency Tsunami 
Reconstruction Project  
Task Team Leader: Shyamal Sarkar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 21, 2005 
Estimated Board Date:  April 30, 2005 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: ERL 
Sector: Housing construction, Agriculture and 
Fishing 
Theme : Natural Disaster, Rural Development 
and Urban Services 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Bilal Rahill, Environmental Specialist; I.U.B. 
Reddy, and Warren Waters,  Social Development Specialists  
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  IDA 390 
Other financing amounts by source: Government Funding 
$ 200 
B.  Project Objectives  
 
The project will support the efforts of the governments of India, Tamil Nadu and Pondicherry to revive 
livelihoods and promote recovery in the tsunami-affected areas.
 
C.  Project Description  
 
GoI’s program of tsunami-related reconstruction and rehabilitation is multi-sectoral and includes 
livelihood support, microenterprises, housing, roads, ports, health, education, environment, and coastal 
protection and risk mitigation. The International Development Association (IDA) would provide support 
to the GOI for assistance in Tamil Nadu and Pondicherry in the following activities – reconstruction of 
housing and public buildings and revival of livelihoods in fisheries, agriculture and livestock.  
 
The proposed Project's total cost is estimated to be about US$603.0 million including contingencies, of 
which Bank financing would be US$390.0 million. The indicated amounts for individual activities at this 
stage are notional as the details are still being finalized by Tamil Nadu and Pondicherry. The notional 
allocations for the different components will be reviewed regularly with GoI and the state governments 
and adapted to the changing environment, especially by taking into account the funding available from the 
non-government sectors.  The following is a brief description of the project components and sub-
components:  
 
Component 1: Housing Reconstruction
(US$338.0 million). This component will have four sub-
components: (i) upgradation of services in temporary shelter sites; (ii) financial assistance for repair and 
reconstruction of existing houses and construction of new houses, mainly by the owner with exceptions 
wherever necessary; (iii) services such as access road, internal roads, water connections, latrines, storm 
drains, electrification, rain water harvesting structure as necessary, and limited community infrastructure 
Page  2
2
facilities such as community hall, anganwadi (nursery school), primary school, etc. depending upon a case 
by case analysis, in new resettlement areas; and (iv) resettlement of project affected families.  The 
assistance is expected to be provided to repair / reconstruct / construct about 140,000 damaged houses in 
Tamil Nadu and Pondicherry in accordance with universal standards with exception for dense urban areas 
such as Chennai, for the assistance developed by GoI, and resettlement of about 3,000 families who are 
likely to be affected by the land being acquired for relocating tsunami affected families in Chennai.. 
 
Component 2: Restoration of Livelihood
(US$25.0 million). The assistance to revitalize the livelihoods of 
the affected families will be provided through two sub-components:  
(i) assistance to fisheries which will include (a) restoration of damaged fisheries infrastructure, such as 
harbors, patrol boats, clearing of bar mouth and estuaries, and aquaculture infrastructure; and (b) 
reestablishment of safety-at-sea systems/services; and  
(ii) assistance to agriculture, horticulture and livestock, which will include: (a) restoration of damaged 
lands, farm ponds and dug wells; (b) repair/reconstruction of damaged infrastructure; and (c) promotion 
of sustainable management of coastal land and water resources. 
 
Component 3: Public Buildings and Public Works
(US$11.0 million). This component will provide 
finance small public works such as repair, reconstruction and upgrading of damaged public buildings 
including schools, community halls, and cyclone shelters, restoration of damaged river and drain banks, 
and plantation/replantation of mangrove and shelter belts. 
 
Component 4: Technical Assistance and Training
(US$11.0 million). This component will finance: (a) 
capacity building that will include training of masons; (b), community participation aiming at ensuring 
the involvement of the affected communities, especially the most vulnerable groups, in planning, deciding 
and implementing the housing reconstruction program (c) technical services in connection with land 
management and resettlement layouts, (d) preparation of social and environmental management plans; (e) 
studies to develop fisheries policy; (f) identification of possible new forms of livelihoods in coastal 
villages; (g) updating CRZ management plans; (h) studies for assessment of the vulnerabilities and longer 
term issues and the needs associated with coastal zone protection and hazard risk management, and 
especially the vulnerabilities with Nagapattinam district of Tamil Nadu; 
 
Component 5: Project Management
(US$5.0 million). This component will finance the incremental 
operating costs associated with the implementation of the project including audits, quality assurance and 
technical audits, continuous environmental and social assessment; and basic office equipment, furniture 
and vehicles both at the center (Planning Commission) and in Tamil Nadu and Pondicherry. 
 
D.  Project location 
 
The project is located in the State of Tamil Nadu and Union Territory of Pondicherry in southern India. 
The project locations in Tamil Nadu are spread over in 13 coastal districts, namely, Cuddalore, 
Nagapattinam, Thirunveli, Kancheepuram, Kanyakumari, Thirvallur, Pudukottai, Thanjavur, 
Rmanathanpuram, Villipuram and Chennai and two enclaves- Pondicherry and Karaikal in the union 
territory of Pondicherry.     
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies  
 
The Relief Commissioner Offices in the revenue departments of Tamil Nadu and Pondicherry  are the 
nodal departments for overseeing the implementation of the project  activities through district 
administrations. Th
e
Relief Commissioner’s offices as well as district administration have sufficient 
capacity and familiarity to deal with land acquisition matters.  However, they have limited or no 
experience in dealing with environment and social issues in the context of Bank-supported operations. 
Page  3
3
Therefore, they will mobilize technical capacity in the form of Project Management Consultants to 
support oversee the preparation and implementation of environment and social management plans.  Initial 
discussions have been positive in addressing the safeguard aspects of the project, but additional training 
will be provided together with technical support during the early period of project implementation. 
Safeguards capacity will need to be assessed during early part of project implementation and necessary 
measures taken to ensure the needs of the project. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
A
number of project activities are unlikely to entail any significant environmental and social issues, 
except large resettlement colonies particularly in urban areas and infrastructure activities such as jetties, 
fish processing facilities, access roads, and water management structures, among other things. An 
Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been developed to support a due diligence 
process, to avoid causing harm or exacerbating social tensions, and to ensure consistent treatment of 
social and environmental issues across sectors of intervention. The ESMF should assist the Project 
Implementing Agencies in screening all the subprojects for social and environmental issues and/or 
impacts, in accordance with applicable laws regulations and the Bank’s safeguard policies  
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[] A   [X] B   [] C   [ ] FI   TBD  [ ] 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[Yes ] 
Environmental Assessment
(OP
/BP
4.01) 
The vast majority of subprojects will focus on the repair, rehabilitation, reconstruction and 
upgrading
 
of damaged and/or new houses (almost 90% of project funds).
 
Considering the nature and magnitude of potential environmental impacts from relatively 
limited scale and magnitude of reconstruction works, the proposed operations are likely to 
be classified as category ‘B’.  The requirement to carry out an Environmental Analysis is 
incorporated in the subproject cycle through a screening. For subprojects with potential 
adverse impacts, a limited Environmental Analysis will be done during project 
implementation.  At the same time, the implementing agency will apply the following 
minimum standards during implementation: inclusion of standard environmental codes of 
practice (ECOP) in the repair and reconstruction bid documents of all subprojects; review 
and oversight of any major reconstruction works by specialists; implementation of 
environmentally and socially sound options for disposal of debris; and provisions for 
adequate budget and satisfactory institutional arrangements for monitoring effective 
implementation.
 
[
NO] Natural 
Habitats
(OP
/BP
4.04) 
[TBD ] 
Pest Management
(OP 4.09
)
The project includes subcomponents to provide assistance agriculture, horticulture and 
livestock. The nature of the work envisaged is of a rehabilitation nature and does not 
involve any intensification of agricultural practice requiring more intensive use of 
pesticides. The nature of work will nevertheless be monitored closely to determine 
whether there emerges requirements for the introduction of Integrated Pest Management 
practices. 
Page  4
4
(No) 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)
Not applicable 
[
Yes] 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) 
A
large amount of private land acquisition is involved for reconstruction of  houses. 
Further, the sites to be used for reconstruction of houses  in Chennai are likely to involve 
displacement of substantial number of squatter families
.
The exact nature and magnitude 
of impacts will be known during the implementation, when site-specific plans are 
available.  Therefore, subprojects will be screened for applicability in accordance with 
ESMF and accordingly sub-project specific resettlement plans will be prepared, wherever 
required and are subject to approval by the IDA.  
A
full Resettlement Plan (RP) will be prepared in case of all sub-projects impacting more 
than 200 persons due to land acquisition and associated impacts, while an abbreviated RP 
will be prepared in case of all sub-projects involving less than 200 persons. Sub-projects 
not involving any land acquisition or associated impacts as determined by the screening 
process will be exempted from the preparation of any resettlement plans, but will be 
included in the social assessment.
 
[
TBD] Indigenous 
Peoples
(OD 4.20
)
It is unlikely that there are any known tribal population in the disaster affected areas (13 
costal districts of Tamil Nadu and 2 enclaves of Pondicherry) living in the disaster 
affected villages. However this will further be examined during project  sub-project 
screening and social assessments  to determine whether OD 4.20 is triggered for any of the 
sub-projects and accordingly tribal development plans will prepared, if required.
 
[
No] Forests
(OP
/BP
4.36) 
Not applicable  
[No ] 
Safety of Dams
(OP
/BP
4.37) 
Not applicable 
[
Yes] Cultural 
Property
(draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03
)
The emergency operation may pose limited risks to some cultural property. Therefore,  
subprojects will be reviewed for their potential impact on cultural property and clear 
procedures will be required for identification, protection of cultural property from theft, 
and treatment of discovered artifacts, and will be included in standard bidding documents.  
While not damaging cultural property, subproject preparation may later identify and 
include assistance for preservation of historic or archeological sites.  If these opportunities 
occur, cultural property management plans would be prepared for those subprojects.
.
[
No] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
(OP
/BP
/GP
7.60)
*
Not applicable 
[
No] 
Projects on International Waterways
(OP
/BP
/GP
7.50) 
Not applicable 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
As part of ESMF, screening guidelines and formats have been prepared. These will be used to 
determine the need for preparation of Environment management and land acquisition and 
resettlement plans. Following this, the mitigation plans ( EMP and RAPs) for applicable sub-
projects will be prepared prior to the approval of  corresponding civil works bid documents by 
the Bank.  
Page  5
5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Shyamal Sarkar 
March 16,  2005 
A
pproved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Frederick Brusberg 
March 16, 2005 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Sonia Hamam 
March 16, 2005 
Comments 
