Page  1
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (ISDS) 
Section I 
–
Basic Information 
Date ISDS Prepared
/Updated:  December 2, 2004                                            Report No.:AC1040
 
A. Basic Project Data 
 
A.1. Project Statistics 
Country: India 
Project ID: 
 
P075060 
 
Project:  Reproductive and Child Health Program, 
Second Phase
 
TTLs: Sadia Afroze Chowdhury/ G N V Ramana 
Total project cost (by component):   ($M) : 
 
Appraisal Date: January 20, 2005 
IBRD Amount ($m):- 
Board Date:  April 28, 2005 
IDA Amount ($m):  
GEF Amount ($m):- 
PCF Amount ($m):- 
Miscellaneous Funds  ($m): - 
Managing Unit:  SASHD 
Sector: HNP 
Lending Instruments: SIM 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency recovery)?                            No  
Environmental Category:  B 
Safeguard Classification: S
2
A.2. Project Objectives  
The project development objective is 
to expand the use of essential reproductive and child health services 
of adequate quality with reduction of geographical disparities
.
The proposed results indicators would 
measure progress in raising contraceptive prevalence and reducing the unmet need for spacing methods of 
contraception; raising the percentage of deliveries conducted by skilled providers; increasingly meeting 
obstetric emergencies; expanding immunization of young children; raising the percentage of new born 
children visited by a qualified health provider within a week of their birth; expanding exclusive breast-
feeding up to six months; increasing the percentage of children with diarrhea who receive oral re-hydration 
therapy; and eradicating polio.  For several of these indicators, separate measurement would be conducted 
for the EAG states (Bihar, Chhatisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and 
Uttaranchal), in order to track movements in geographic disparities. 
 
A.3. Project Description  
 
The approach to development assistance in the proposed operation is essentially a sector-wide approach.  
Hence, the 
components
 of the project are actually 
program components
.
The components are briefly 
described below. 
 
Project Component 1: State Program Implementation Plans [Rs. Cr. 34,342] 
 
This component would comprise 
all of the RCH Program activities to be implemented by the states
.
Many 
of these activities would be a continuation of existing activities, while others would be new activities made 
possible by the flexible funding the states would receive.  Both categories of activities would be reflected in 
the SPIPs, so as to present a comprehensive picture of the state’s reproductive and child health activities. 
Because there would be many complementarities and synergies between the two categories of activities, 
continuing and new, it would be artificial to associate these categories with “sub-components” –hence no 
sub-components are defined for Component 1.  Instead, a broad description of the continuing and expected 
new activities is given below. 
 
Continuing Activities
.
Under the RCH Program, states would continue to: (i) operate and maintain all Sub-
centers in the country. Services provided by Sub-centers include ante-natal care, immunization, Vitamin A 
distribution, basic curative care, family planning services, and –in some states—routine deliveries;  (ii) 
implement family planning activities that take place outside Sub-centers, especially sterilization and the 
Social Marketing of Contraceptives scheme; (iii). distribute free temporary contraceptives out of various 
types of facilities (and, as noted below, this aspect of the program would be given a greater priority); (iv) 
operate the Maternity Benefit Scheme, 
Janani Suraksha Yojana
,
which seeks to expand the demand for safe 
Page  2
motherhood services by the poor, scheduled castes and scheduled tribes; (v) operate existing urban family 
welfare services; (vi) offer routine immunization for young children and mothers; (vii) implement training 
activities; (viii) implement Behavior Change Communications activities; and (ix) ongoing reproductive and 
child health activities currently assisted by the EC, USAID and UNFPA in certain specific areas would 
continue and would also be reflected in the SPIPs. 
 
New Program Directions/Activities
.
First, states would place a greater emphasis on catering to the unmet 
demand for temporary methods of contraception.  Second, states would expand services for safe 
motherhood, with a focus on evidence-based interventions such as expanding skilled care at birth by 
attendants with midwifery training.  Communication strategies would be developed and implemented for 
improving community awareness about the danger signs of pregnancy, and for publicizing the availability 
of services.  Third, states would implement evidence-based strategies to improve child survival.  There 
would be a strong focus on community-based new-born care, improving routine immunization, and child 
nutrition, in addition to facility-based care.  A nation-wide BCC strategy would also be implemented to 
promote good feeding practices.  Fourth, to meet the needs of the rapidly growing urban population, 
especially those of slum residents, SPIPs would include the expansion of RCH services in urban areas in 
partnership with the private sector.  Local municipal bodies would play an active role in the design and 
implementation of the services.  Fifth, states would aim to improve access to effective RCH services for 
tribal and scheduled-caste populations.  To this effect, and as already noted, a 
Vulnerable Communities 
Reproductive and Child Health Plan
 would be included by states in their SPIPs.  Sixth, SPIPs would 
include initiatives for promoting the health and development of adolescents (12-19 years), who constitute 
over one-
fifth of India’s population.   
 
Project Component 2: Program Management, M&E and Technical Assistance [Rs. Cr. 4,078] 
 
This component comprises three sub-components that would be implemented by the DOFW, in close 
coordination with the states.  
 
Sub-Component 2.1:  Program Management
:
The DOFW (under the leadership of the Secretary Family 
Welfare) would continue to have responsibility for all central management functions of the program, both 
existing and new.  For example, the DOFW would continue to ensure that vaccines and other materials for 
the immunization program are available in the quantities needed and in a timely fashion.  The new 
functions would mostly revolve around the SPIPs and associated Annual State Plans: their ex-ante 
appraisal, the ex-post evaluation of their implementation, and the discussions with the states leading to 
changes in the subsequent year’s Annual State Plans. At the 
state level
,
program management functions 
would be carried out by the State Family Welfare Bureaus (under the overall leadership of the Principal 
Secretary Health and Family Welfare).  Further details of program management arrangements at central, 
state and district level are given in Technical Annex 6, 
Implementation Arrangements
.
Sub-Component 2.2:  Monitoring and Evaluation
:
Reliable and robust Monitoring and Evaluation (M& 
E) arrangements to provide baseline values and to track progress towards achievement of the targets for the 
Results Indicators (Technical Annex 3), as well as progress towards the paradigm shift are needed. M&E 
triangulation would ensure the participation of different stakeholders, validate changes in program 
performance using different sources of information, and support participatory decision making based on 
data.  Moreover, triangulation would minimize the potential for misreporting by reliance on three mutually 
independent quantitative and qualitative sources, namely: computerized common Management Information 
Systems (MIS) coordinated by the DOHW; community monitoring by PRIs and NGOs (household surveys, 
CNAA); and special studies commissioned by independent health research institutions (National Family 
Health Surveys, District level RCH household surveys by IIPS, facility surveys, etc.) and the quality 
assessment by an independent source i.e. Indiaclen for health status data and Indian Institute of 
Management for management and implementation.  The M&E system will also incorporate reporting 
required by the Infection Management & Environment Plan as well as special monitoring arrangements for 
polio eradication.  A common set of output and process indicators (action oriented, results focused, equity 
centered, yet flexible enough for state needs), including institutional and management indicators would be 
used among triangulation partners with consistency at the district, state and center level.  This has been 
Page  3
discussed and agreed with the DOFW and also costed in the program budget.  It is expected that this system 
will be functional by the end of 2005.  Please see Annexes 3 and 14 for more details. 
 
Sub-Component 2.3:  Technical Assistance
.
In order to provide well-coordinated, effective and timely 
technical assistance to the states during implementation of the RCH Program, the central government 
(MOHFW /Department of Family Welfare) would establish the 
National Health Systems Resource Center
 
(NHSRC).  The NHSRC has been set up as a unit within the.  An advisory committee comprising  the 
MOHFW and the Development Partners (DPs) has been established to harmonize the Technical Assistance 
(TA) contracting procedures and evolve rules of business for the proposed NHSRC.  Three separate 
proposals are under consideration for institutionalizing this resource center.  The first is to establish the 
NHSRC as a society in which the MOHFW and development partners would be appointed as the 
Governing Board members.  The second is to outsource the NHSRC to an agency and the third proposal is 
to have a combination of a society and an outsourcing agency.  In this proposal, the NHSRC would be 
registered as a society which in turn would outsource the activities.  The institutional structure of the 
NHSRC would be finalized by appraisal.  Till the National Health Systems Resource center is fully 
established,  specialized TA support from the DPs would continue based on an agreed TA plan 
 
In addition to this technical assistance is also planned to address planning capacities in the states specially 
the EAG and the 7 North Eastern States.  USAID, EC, DFID, UNFPA and WHO are providing support for 
the process of advertising, recruitment and training of interim Technical Assistance (TA) support for the 
MOHFW and for the eight EAG states, followed by Assam, Jammu & Kashmir, and the north eastern 
states.  This process is being done in a phased manner starting with the EAG states and will be continued 
through the program implementation period.  The RCH/FW Societies at the state and district levels will be 
strengthened with a management support unit.  The salary and operational costs of the contracted 
specialists for all these 17 states (approximately 500) and the management support units, will be initially 
covered under the Sector Investment Program of European Commission (EC) and subsequently through the 
DFID/Bank pool financing the program.  
 
Project Component 3:  Polio Eradication [Rs. Cr. 1,580] 
 
India’s polio eradication activities began in 1995 with emphasis on the eradication of poliomyelitis by 
2001.  The program progressed until it suffered a major setback with an outbreak in the state of Uttar 
Pradesh (UP) in 2002, resulting in a heavy financial burden on the program in continuing and increased 
vaccine and operational costs.  Given its limited resources and competing priorities, the government was 
not able to secure the additional resources urgently required for the procurement of Oral Polio Vaccine 
(OPV) to sustain the eradication efforts. In response to this financing gap the Bank provided a supplemental 
credit and restructured five projects to provide additional funds.  A gap of US$40 million remained.  This 
financing is critical for sustaining the ongoing polio eradication program and to scale-up the activities 
during 2004 as recommended by the IEAG, and it is expected that the second phase of the Reproductive 
and Child Health Project (RCH II) will finance this gap and assist the GOI to achieve it’s polio eradication 
goal by 2007. 
 
A.4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis: 
The project will be across all the states of India.  
 
B. Check Environmental Category 
A
[
], B [
 X
], C [ ], FI [ ] 
Comments:  
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered 
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment
(OP/BP 4.01) 
[X] 
[ ] 
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
[ ] 
[X] 
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
[ ] 
[X] 
 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03 -) 
[ ] 
[X] 
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
[ ] 
[X] 
 
Page  4
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
[X] 
[   ] 
 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
[ ] 
[X] 
 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
[ ] 
[X] 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
[ ] 
[X] 
 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)  
[ ] 
[X] 
 
Section II 
–
Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management  
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
.
D.1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe 
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. 
 
Environmental Assessment (OP
/BP
4.01):  
Activities envisaged in the RCH-II program would result in a range of environmental issues triggering the 
safeguard policy on Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01). This requires the project to undertake an 
Environmental Assessment of the program.  The environmental issues that need to be addressed include 
infection management in the healthcare facilities,  environmental degradation due to improper treatment 
and disposal of healthcare wastes and environmental and health issues within the healthcare facilities due to 
improper provision of water and sanitation facilities and construction related environmental issues.  
 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20): 
Despite a number of interventions by the central and state governments, the tribal community is still unable 
to access reproductive and child health services owing to (i) demand side barriers to accessing services in 
the public sector which include direct and indirect costs; limited access and connectivity; poor quality 
services; and social, economic and cultural barriers especially for women; (ii) health service infrastructure 
in remote and semi-remote areas being understaffed and poorly functioning facilities; (iii) provider attitudes 
especially strong stereotypes which prevent sensitive and client centered provision of services; (iv) 
inadequate accountability and monitoring of health service delivery to tribal populations, and (v) lack of or 
incorrect knowledge dictating inadequate health seeking behaviour. Ineffective and inadequate attention to 
addressing constraints in tribal communities seeking health care, they  continue to suffer high rates of 
morbidity and mortality.
 
D.2 Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the 
project area. 
 
Social 
If the issues related to providing quality health care for the tribal communities by the Government are not 
addressed and the tribal populations are not equipped to seek health care, then they will continue to have 
poor health status. However, the RCH program seeks to address these and also seeks greater integration 
with other governmental health and poverty reduction/social welfare programs, which will improve health 
services and health seeking behaviour in tribal areas. 
 
Environmental 
The program intends to encourage private sector and NGO participation in delivering the healthcare 
services to increase the program coverage and to reach out to wider sections of the society. This would 
require adequate regulatory measures and enforcement mechanisms to ensure that, the private sector gives 
adequate attention to the issues identified.  Otherwise, the present situation can only further worsen in the 
long term. 
 
D.3. Describe the treatment of alternatives [w11](if relevant). NA 
 
D.4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard issues. Provide an assessment of 
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
OD 4.01: Environmental Assessment
:
The borrower, in this case the MoHFW has developed an Infection Management and Environmental Plan 
(IMEP).  The purpose of the IMEP is to ensu
re that all parties/stakeholders recognize that the maintenance 
Page  5
of sanitary conditions, use of appropriate disinfection and sterilization techniques, provision of potable 
water and clean air in the healthcare facilities and nosocomial infection control are the basic infrastructural 
requirements for delivery of RCH services.  
 
IMEP therefore identifies the key issues and has listed out the key interventions that need to be made in 
o
rder to ensure safety to healthcare service providers, the patients, the general public and the environment. 
These interventions range from formulating composite national guidelines on infection management to 
building awareness and capacity at all levels to implement these guidelines.  The plan contains a time 
bound action plan and a broad institutional framework to enable its implementation.  
 
At present the Government does not have the required capacity to implement the IMEP. The IMEP has 
therefore recommended a capacity building program (to be fine tuned as part of the larger capacity building 
program for the program implementation) for various Government agencies to be involved in RCH-II 
activities. IMEP has also recommended formation of a working committee at national level to deliberate on 
the key issues and provide guidance to the ministry in implementation of the proposed action plan.  
 
OD 4.20: Indigenous Peoples: 
A
tribal development plan has been prepared by the MOHFW, GOI based on consultations with tribal 
populations, NGOs and local health staff.  It sets out a broad range of interventions that will increase access 
to RCH services by tribal people and in tribal areas. The major interventions include: community 
involvement in the planning process as well as in the management and implementation of services and 
programs; using community-based workers (men ad women) as social mobilizers, educators and providers 
of non-clinical services; involving locally-elected bodies including tribal boards; promotion of tribal system 
of medicine and tribal healers to make them integral part of health delivery mechanisms; involvement of 
NGOs and the private sector through Public-Private partnerships in the provision of services and for 
referrals; and effective IEC strategies for promoting behavioral change. 
 
Borrower Capacity:  
The RCH program has been designed by the MOHFW as an integrated sector program that would 
encompass all the activities of the Department of Family Welfare, and will be implemented through the 
MOHFW’s existing structures. The Secretary Family Welfare, will provide overall leadership. He will be 
assisted by an Additional/Joint Secretary, designated as Ex-officio Project Director supported by a team of 
technical and financial managers.  This team would be responsible for overall policy development, 
facilitating and monitoring State-level planning, establishing technical standards, providing financial 
oversight, central procurement, and leading the monitoring and evaluation of the program in accordance 
with performance bench marks. In addition, the Center would support partnerships with the private sector 
and non-governmental organizations.  At the State level, Principal Secretary Health & Family Welfare will 
provide overall leadership to the program. Similar to Central arrangements, s/he will be assisted by 
Secretary/Commissioner Family Welfare, designated as ex-officio Project Director with Director Family 
Welfare as Additional Program Director. The technical and program management support would be 
provided by State Family Welfare Bureau.  At the district level, under the overall leadership of Chief 
District Medical Officer (CDMOH), the Additional District medical Officer (ADMO), Family Planning-
RCH would provide direct oversight to the program. For technical and program management functions, 
s/he will be supported by the  District Family Welfare Bureau. Together, they will have the core 
responsibility for implementing the program. In the Tribal areas, RCH will be implemented in coordination 
with the ITDAs.  
 
It is proposed that an officer at the GOI, State and district levels will be designated and will be responsible 
for the project implementation is focused on the vulnerable sections including tribal populations, SCs and 
the poor and the social development outcomes are achieved.  
 
D.5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on 
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
The key stakeholders under the project are end beneficiaries, community groups, NGOs, local authorities, 
private providers, community organizations, government officials, the private sector, academic institutions.   
and health staff, all of whom were part of project preparation.    
Page  6
The draft Tribal Development Plan was extensively shared with different stakeholders and various health 
centers at the Central and State levels. The MOHFW at the Central and State levels has hosted the 
document on its website.  The suggestions and comments obtained will be incorporated and the Plan 
finalized. 
 
The IMEP has been developed based on discussion with various stakeholders including MoHFW, the 
Central pollution Control Board, the Ministry of Environment and Forests, equipment suppliers, NGOs, 
INCLEN and the development partners. The draft IMEP has also been placed in the Ministry’s website for 
public access and control.  
 
E. Safeguards Classification
 (select one)
 
[
]
S
1
.
–The project has significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; where there are significant 
potential impacts related to several safeguard policies.  
X] S
2
.
–
One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited to their impact and are 
technically and institutionally manageable.  
[
]
S
3
.
–
No safeguard issues 
[
]
S
F
.
–
Financial intermediary projects 
F. Disclosure Requirements                                        Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:  
Date of receipt by the Bank: November 22. 2004 
Date of “in-country” disclosure: November 16, 2004 
Date of submission to InfoShop:  January 4, 2005 
For Category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
 Not 
Applicable 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
Not Applicable 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
Not Applicable 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
Not Applicable 
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:  
Date of receipt by the Bank: November 22, 2004 
Date of “in-country” disclosure: November 16, 2004 
Date of submission to Infoshop:  January 4, 2005 
Pest Management Plan:  
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
Not Applicable 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
Not Applicable 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
Not Applicable 
Dam Safety Management Plan:  
  
Date of receipt by the Bank 
Not Applicable 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
Not Applicable 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
Not Applicable 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why. 
 
Section III 
–
Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level 
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment:
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
YES
 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA report?  
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?  
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats:  
Would the project result in any significant conversion  or degradation of critical natural habitats?        
NA 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, 
does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?             
NA
 
Page  7
OP 4.09 - Pest Management:  
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                              
NA
 
Is a separate PMP required?                                                                                    
NA
 
If yes,  are PMP requirements included in project design?                                     
NA
 
Draft OP 4.11 (OPN 11.03) - Cultural Property:  
Does the EA include adequate measures?                                                               
NA
 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural 
resources?                                                                                                                 
NA     
 
OD 4.20 - Indigenous Peoples:  
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in consultation with the Indigenous 
People?                                
Yes
 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve the plan?        
TBD
 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and approved by the Regional 
Social Development Unit?                                                                                                     
TBD  
 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement:  
Has a resettlement action plan, policy framework or policy process been prepared?           
NA
 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve the plan / policy framework / 
policy process?                                                                                                                        
NA
 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests:  
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints been carried out?  
NA 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these constraints?                  
NA 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for certification 
system?                                                                                                                                              
NA
 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams:  
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                                                                              
NA
 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and 
approved by the Bank?                                                                                                                       
NA 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements been made for public 
awareness and training?                                                                                                                      
NA
 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways:  
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                                                                        
NA
 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification requirement, then has this been cleared 
with the Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?                                       
NA
 
What are the reasons for the exception?      Please explain: 
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                                                                        
NA
 
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
:
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the international aspects of the project, including the 
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the issue, been prepared, cleared with 
the Legal Department and sent to the RVP?                                                                                      
NA
 
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the OP?                                     
NA
 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure:  
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?     
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language that are 
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies
:
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for the 
implementation of the safeguard measures?                                                             
Yes
 
Have safeguard measures costs been included in project cost?                                        
Yes
 
Will the safeguard measures costs be funded as part of project implementation?            
Yes
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and 
measures?                                                                                                                             
Yes
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same been 
adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
 
TBD
 
Page  8
S
igned and submitted by:  
Task Team Leaders:                            Sadia Afroze Chowdhury/ G N V Ramana         Date: Dec. 14, 2004 
 
Project Safeguards Specialist 1:        Ruma Tavorath                                                    Date: Dec. 14, 2004 
 
Project Safeguards Specialist 2:        Varalakshmi Vemuru                                           Date: Dec. 14, 2004 
 
Project Safeguards Specialist 3:        Meera Chatterjee                                                  Date: Dec. 14, 2004 
 
Approved by: 
Regional Safeguards Advisor                                       Frederick E. Brusberg        Date:  12/23/2004 
Comments 
Sector Manager                                                           Anabela Abreu       Date:  12/20/2004 
Comments 
