                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                  CONCEPT STAGE
                                                       Report No.: 102323-IN
Date: December 29, 2015


I. BASIC INFORMATION
 A. Basic Project Data
 Country:                 India              Project ID:            P156867
 Project Name:            Skills Strengthening for Industrial Value Enhancement Program
                          (STRIVE)
 Task Team Leader:        Muna Meky
 Estimated Appraisal      June 30, 2016      Estimated Board        September 20, 2016
 Date:                                       Date:
 Managing Unit:           GED06              Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                                                 Financing
 Sector:                  Vocational Training (100%)
 Theme(s):                Human Development, Public Sector Governance,
                          Financial and Private Sector Development
 Is this project processed under 0P 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or No
 OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crisis and Emergencies)
 Financing
 Total Project    US$28.75 million for the Total Bank Financing:        US$28.75 million
 Cost:            TA (US$538.75 for the                                  for the TA (US$
                  Operation)                                            268.75 million for
                                                                           the Operation)
 Financing Gap: 0.00
 Financing Source                                                                Amount
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                    US$270.00 million
 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)              PforR: US$240
                                                                                   million
                                                                    Technical Assistance:
                                                                        US$28.75 million
 Total                                                                 US$538.75 million
 Environmental            C
 Category
 Is this a Repeater       No
 project?

                                                                                          1
 .

      B. Project Objectives

      The Operations Development Objectives is to improve the relevance and efficiency of
      vocational training provided through ITIs and apprenticeship

      C. Project Description

      India has become the world's fastest growing large economy. India’s Gross Domestic Product
      (GDP) grew by 7.3% in 2014-15 steadily recovering from a low of 5.1% in 2012-13. Growth
      was largely supported by robust consumption growth on the expenditure side and strong
      growth in the services sector, averaging more than 9% between 2012 and 2015, on the
      production side. Consumer inflation is firmly under control, averaging below 5% in the
      current fiscal year to date, down from double digit growth observed in second half of 2013.
      With growth, poverty has declined rapidly from 38.9% in 2004-05 to 21.6% in 2011-12 (1.90
      PPP/day) at a pace significantly faster than that witnessed in earlier periods. Poverty reduction
      was supported by increase in non-farm wage employment, especially in construction, greater
      rural-urban integration, and higher rural wage growth.

      Going forward, India growth prospects remain very bright. One million youth will enter the
      labor market every month for the next two decades and India will soon have one of the
      youngest and largest working age populations in the world. These demographic dynamics and
      a rising age-savings profile are likely to generate significant volumes of savings and
      investment over the coming years. The average schooling of the working age population –
      and, consequently, worker productivity – will increase by at least a full year by 2030 even
      with no further improvements in the educational attainment of today’s youth (i.e., simply due
      to the fact that younger cohorts are better educated) and could rise much faster if further
      progress is achieved on the education agenda. The proportion of population living in urban
      areas is expected to rise to 40 percent in 2030 from around 30 percent today, reinforcing
      productivity-boosting agglomeration effects. Combined, these effects are likely to form the
      foundations of India’s strong growth for decades to come.

      To realize these benefits, further efforts will be required to harness the full potential of the
      demographic transition. A striking feature of India’s labor market is the extremely low (31
      percent) female labor force participation. More than 50 million of India’s young women are
      neither studying nor working. In addition at present, 4.9% of working age people are
      unemployed and 82% work without any written job contract,[1] more than 70 percent work in

[1]
  Fourth Annual Employment & Unemployment Survey Report (2013-14); Labour Bureau, Ministry of Labour &
Employment, Government of India

                                                                                                         2
      firms with less than 10 employees, and more than 75 percent have no access to any social
      security benefits – attesting to the large size of the informal sector and a relative scarcity of
      “good? jobs. These challenges could inhibit India’s ambition to further modernize its
      economy by attracting resources to dynamic, high-productivity manufacturing and services
      sectors. To address these, the Government has taken important steps towards a reform agenda
      focused on job creation through improving the business environment, particularly in the
      manufacturing sector. The “Make in India? campaign launched by the Prime Minister in 2014
      has identified reforms in energy supply, access to finance and upgrading skills as key
      priorities.

      India’s workforce is becoming increasingly more educated. In 2009, the GoI set an ambitious
      goal to improve access and quality to education through the Right of Children to Free and
      Compulsory Education (RTE) Act. India has more than doubled its primary enrolments since
      the passage of the RTE Act. The Net Enrollment Ratio (NER) in primary schools is 99.8%
      and gender parity has been achieved. Secondary education has also seen impressive growth in
      access where Gross Enrollment Rates have gone up from 58% to 74% in the last 5 years. GoI
      is now increasingly focused on improving the literacy and numeracy competency of students
      in basic education and improving the quality of secondary education, especially in
      mathematics and science. The government is also focused on providing job-relevant skills
      training as part of workplace readiness training for those who complete secondary education.
      Pre-employment job-specific skills are broadly offered at three levels: (i) short term training
      programs (3-6 month) provided by a range of Ministries, States and private sector providers,
      (ii) long term training programs at the certificate level offered through Industrial Training
      Institutes (ITIs) and through apprenticeship training, and (ii) long term training programs at
      the diploma level through Polytechnics. [2]

      Long-term training below higher education assumes a central function in developing the
      necessary cadre of comprehensively skilled technicians for the development of a globally
      competitive manufacturing sector as envisioned in the “Make in India? campaign of the
      government. With their focus on technical skill areas, ITIs and apprenticeship programs form
      the backbone of the long-term training infrastructure in India. Recent data shows that the
      trainees from ITIs are better placed to secure employment and earn a substantial wage
      premium (18% in 2011-12) over those who have only completed Class 10 education.[3]
      However, the resources for skills development provided by the relatively large ITI network in
      India and potential apprenticeships, remain under-utilized and the quality of the training
      supply is perceived to be not aligned with the development needs of India and the skills

[2]
    India is also expanding the range of vocational education courses available in secondary schools (Grades 9-12),
though this is currently on a small scale and these courses are taken alongside a larger number of general education
subjects.
[3]
    Employment rates at ITIs are also high at around 60% compared to 30% for short-term training courses offered as
part of five largest government-funded schemes

                                                                                                                  3
requirements in the labor market. To strengthen the ITIs’ capacities of developing skilled
personnel needed for increased competitiveness in manufacturing and other sectors the GOI
focusses on (i) wide implementation of a robust quality assurance framework is widely
implemented; (ii) modernized workplace learning programs are modernized; (iii)
systematically deepened partnerships with industry; and (iv) systems for increasing the
accountability and hence performance of ITIs.

The World Bank Program support (Program for Results (PforR)+Investment Project
Financing(IPF)) consists of two categories of activities: (i) institutional training, and (ii)
trainers. The proposed operation will use a hybrid instrument, combining PforR and IPF
mechanisms for financing. The estimated cost of the program is over 5 years and Bank’s
contribution will be 240 million. Under the operation, US$28.75 million will be dedicated to
financing a specific set of technical assistance (TA) activities.

Program Funding:
Results Area 1: Improve and broaden workplace learning. To support India making better
use of its vast learning and training opportunities at workplaces STRIVE under this results
area will (a) increase the number of young labour market entrants going through modernized
apprenticeship training, and (b) improve on-the-job training (OJT) opportunities for ITI
trainees. To enhance the employability of graduates from long-term TVET courses, the
introduction and/or improvement of OJT in cooperation with companies will be supported.
Funds will be used for mobilization of companies, introduction of quality assurance
instruments for OJTs and other means of quality enhancement. For both apprenticeship
training and OJT, capacity development of company supervisors will complement other
interventions.

Results Area 2: Increasing the performance and labour market relevance of ITIs.
Sub-result 2.1: Introducing performance incentives for ITI modernization and improved
industry interface. The STRIVE program will support MSDE's cluster approach of node and
affiliate ITIs, with 2 to 3 clusters consisting of 5-8 ITIs identified in each State. Funds may be
used for the introduction of new courses (in cooperation with companies) which includes
necessary facility and equipment upgrading, capacity building of placement cells and career
guidance and mobilization initiatives, and improve infrastructure, where appropriate, that will
enable youth with disabilities to access ITI training.

Sub-result 2.2: Technology-driven broadening of the scope of ITIs and improving the quality
of learning. STRIVE is designed to boldly introduce Digital India in the skills development
eco-system.




                                                                                                 4
Sub-result 2.3: Operationalizing the outcome-based quality assurance framework for training
delivery and management of ITIs. To accelerate the reform towards labour-market orientation
in the skills development eco-system, STRIVE will fund the development of National
Occupational Standards (NOS) and competency-based curricula for ITI courses, and teaching
and learning material

Results Area 3: Improved relevance and efficiency of instructors’ training. The MSDE
has started a process of revising the training system and qualification structure for instructors
in the skills development system. STRIVE will support interventions in the following areas:
(a) Technology-led training systems for pre and in-service training; (b) Performance
management system for instructors; and (c) Institutional capacity building.


Technical Assistance Funding:
Areas to be supported under the Technical Assistance include (i) policy development and
regulatory reform, (ii) program implementation support through National and State Project
Management Units, (iii) piloting innovative interventions focused on improving training and
employment outcomes for girls, and (v) Monitoring and Evaluation activities including
impact evaluations, tracer studies, qualitative assessments, and third party validation studies
to allow for improving scheme design.


D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known):

The TA support primarily consists of consultancy services and evaluation studies and
therefore no significant, long term or adverse environment or social issues are anticipated
from the proposed interventions/activities. The activities proposed under TA are not likely to
have any adverse or significant environmental impact.

Social safeguard issues, including any significant, long term or adverse impacts or risks are
not anticipated under this operation as this TA primarily consists of consultancy services and
evaluation studies. OP 4.12 is not triggered as no resettlement is envisaged due to the
implementation of the activities under this TA. OP 4.10 is stated as “To be Decided (TBD)?,
keeping in view that the TA is related to the activities of the Program. No adverse impact is
envisaged due to the implementation of the activities under this project and no tribal
community will be excluded from benefits of communication and behavior programs.

E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Not Applicable as the program does not support infrastructure development. GoI and state


                                                                                                5
 governments have well developed laws and policies that covers environment and social
 issues. The TA will support capacity building and monitoring the identified gaps to strengthen
 the system.


 F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Pyush Dogra, Senior Environment Specialist, GENDR

 Mridula Singh, Senior Social Development Specialist, GSURR

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
  Safeguard Policies    Triggered?
 Environmental               No       OP 4.01 is not triggered for this project as interventions
 Assessment OP/BP                     cover capacity building and there will not be any
 4.01                                 adverse impact.
 Natural Habitats            No        OP 4.04 is not being triggered for this project as no interventions are en
 OP/BP 4.04                            habitats, including those defined as ‘critical’ under the policy.
 Forests OP/BP 4.36          No       OP 4.36 is not being triggered for the TA as no
                                      interventions are envisaged in forest areas and therefore
                                      no conversion/degradation of this natural resource is
                                      expected to occur.
 Pest Management OP          No       OP 4.09 is not being triggered for this project as
 4.09                                 biological/environmental control methods or reliance on
                                      synthetic chemical pesticides is not envisaged.

 Physical Cultural           No       The implementation of the project/program is not likely
 Resources OP/BP                      to affect religious structures of local significance or
 4.11                                 other physical cultural resources.

 Indigenous Peoples         TBD       This TA primarily consists of consultancy services and
 OP/BP 4.10                           evaluation studies. OP/BP 4.10 is stated as “To be
                                      Decided (TBD)?, keeping in view that the TA is related
                                      to the activities of the Program. The Program will not
                                      have adverse impacts rather it will support the
                                      enhancement of skills of people, including the excluded
                                      groups.
 Involuntary                 No       OP 4.12 is not triggered as no resettlement is envisaged
 Resettlement OP/BP                   due to the implementation of the activities under this
 4.12                                 TA.

 Safety of Dams              No       OP 4.37 is not being triggered for this project as there is
 OP/BP 4.37                           no construction of new dams or activities that are

                                                                                                    6
                                        concerned with safe functioning of existing dams.

    Projects on                No       OP 7.50 is not triggered as the project supports skill
    International                       development and the TA will complement the core
    Waterways OP/BP                     investment.
    7.50
    Projects in Disputed       No       OP 7.60 is not being triggered as the project is not
    Areas OP/BP 7.60                    proposed in any disputed area.

.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

     A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS
         June 20, 2016


     B. Time from for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
        needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage
        ISDS.

         Not applicable. The TA will support capacity building, hiring of required consultancy,
         and thematic studies




IV. APPROVALS
    Task Team Leader:           Muna Meky
    Approved By:
    Regional Safeguards         Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed                  Date:
    Advisor:
    Practice Manager:           Name: Keiko Miwa                           Date:




                                                                                                  7
