                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA14706
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-May-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-May-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                               Project ID:    P127974
                            Project Name:      North Eastern Region Power System Improvement Project (P127974)
                            Task Team          Rohit Mittal,Kwawu Mensan Gaba
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          25-May-2015                         Estimated   25-Jun-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEEDR                               Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%), Corporate
                                              governance (33%), Other public sector governance (17%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     953.10           Total Bank Financing:                   470.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                     483.10
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                        470.00
                              Total                                                                                        953.10
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed project development objective is:

                           To increase the delivery of electricity at the boundaries of the power distribution network in the
                           participating states in the North Eastern Region.


                                                                        Page 1 of 12
                         3. Project Description
                         The project covers the: (i) strengthening/ augmenting of intra-state transmission and distribution
                         network in the six states (Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura) of NER to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         facilitate increased availability of power; and (ii) development of institutional capacities for the
                         efficient and sustainable operation of the sector.

                         The project shall be implemented through POWERGRID in association with six NER States. After
                         commissioning, the project will be owned and maintained by the State Governments. The project
                         would be implemented over a seven year period and has two components, namely: (A) Priority
                         investments for strengthening of intra-state transmission, sub-transmission and distribution systems;
                         and (B) Technical Assistance for Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building of power utilities
                         and departments.

                         (i) Component A: Priority investments for strengthening of intra-state transmission, sub-
                         transmission and distribution systems (Total cost: US$ 937.7 million, of which US$ 468.8 million
                         financed by IBRD). This component will include priority investments in strengthening and
                         augmenting the intra-state state transmission, sub-transmission and distribution networks by
                         upgrading old and constructing new 220 kV, 132 kV, 66 kV and 33 kV lines and associated sub-
                         stations in each of the six participating states. These investments will increase the power transfer
                         capability of the transmission network, and improve the electricity supply within the state, by
                         allowing them to draw more power from the national grid, especially their allocated share of power
                         from central sector generating stations. This component will be implemented by POWERGRID, with
                         the support of states.

                         Each of the participating States along with CEA, which is the national planning body for the
                         electricity sector in India, and POWERGRID have drawn-up a long list of candidate sub-projects
                         based on current network constraints faced by the states, expected load growth and expected
                         availability of new generation in the coming years. Out of this long list of potential/ candidate sub-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         projects, identified sub-projects which meet the Bank’s readiness criteria will be financed and
                         implemented under the project.

                         (ii) Component B: Technical Assistance for Capacity Building and Institutional Strengthening
                         (CBIS) of power utilities and departments (Total cost: US$ 14.3 million). At the request of GoI and
                         the States, this component will provide support for capacity building of power utilities and
                         departments across the six participating States. Although the power sectors in the NER States are
                         below the national averages in terms of size and performance, their performance and capacity vary
                         across states. Some have done relatively better in specific areas, such as development of regulatory
                         institutions, and use of IT systems. In that context, a capacity building and institutional strengthening
                         (CBIS) plan has been developed for each state, on the basis of a state-specific diagnostic study
                         complement with detailed discussions with key stakeholders of the state. The main focus of CBIS
                         plan is to strengthen core skills of the utilities in the key areas of utility operations and management,
                         to help it achieve efficiency and improvement in service delivery to consumers and ensure the
                         sustainability of assets created under the project through developing adequate Operations and
                         Maintenance (O&M) practices. Increase in revenue generation (through improvement in metering,
                         billing and collection systems and processes), load management, procurement management,
                         operation and maintenance practices, financial management, human resource management, are some
                         of the focus areas of the CBIS plan.



                                                                       Page 2 of 12
                         The activities planned to be undertaken under this component include (i) review of the O&M
                         practices and development of an O&M manual; (ii) development of procurement manual; (iii)
                         development of standard specifications; (iv) preparation of a finance and accounts manual; (v)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         network planning through load flow studies; (vi) preparation of a human resource manual and
                         policies for recruitment/ promotion/ transfers/ training and development; (vii) preparation of a
                         roadmap for gradual and focused adoption and implementation of IT applications; (viii) trainings
                         (national and international) on technical, procurement, contract management, environment, health
                         and safety, financial management, social aspects etc.; (ix) knowledge exchange visits to other states/
                         countries to interact and exchange ideas with their better performing utilities. This component would
                         be fully financed by GoI and procurement of the consultancies to be financed under this component
                         would be carried out as per GOI / POWERGRID rules and regulations and the states would be
                         responsible for the implementation of the various initiatives developed under the program within
                         their day-to-day systems and processes. During implementation, the Bank will provide technical
                         support (as needed) to the states for the finalization of the scope of work for the specific activities,
                         the review of the consultant deliverables, and the development of the recommendation
                         implementation plan.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The North East Region (NER) stretches across the eastern foothills of the Himalayan mountain
                         range. Geographically the region is connected to the other parts of the country through a small
                         “chicken neck” corridor in the state of West Bengal. With a total population of 45.6 million (2011
                         census), the sparsely populated region of the North East accounts for about 3.7 percent of India’s
                         total population and covers 7.9 percent of India’s total geographical area. The vast majority of the
                         region’s population lives in rural areas, accounting for 82 percent of the total population as against
                         the national average of 69 percent (2011). The project is proposed to be located across six states
                         (Assam, Manipur, Mizoram, Meghalaya, Tripura and Nagaland) of the North East region of India.

                         A large part of the region is hilly and, recognized as one of the globe’s biodiversity hotspots. Forests
Public Disclosure Copy




                         cover about 56% of the total land area and some are among the most dense in the region. The region
                         has many havens for a variety of flora and fauna, some of which are endemic and others recognized
                         to be threatened at various levels. Of particular attention are numerous corridors/areas of migration
                         of elephants and birds, 46 already recognized national parks and sanctuaries, and other important
                         conservation areas, which transmission lines may need to traverse.

                         The North-East Region is known for its rich cultural heritage and ethnic diversity where over 160
                         scheduled tribes reside, representing about 12 percent of the total tribal population of India. Close to
                         442 languages and dialects are spoken in the region, and almost every community has its own
                         distinct culture and historical context (unique language, customs, traditional and religious beliefs,
                         arts and crafts, etc.).

                         Agriculture remains the backbone of the region’s economy, contributing close to 26 percent of the
                         regional GDP (2008) and provides employment to over 75 percent of the population, with a
                         predominance of agricultural workers being women. The region’s literacy rates of 81 percent for
                         males is slightly lower than the national average of 82 per cent, while the female literacy rate of 75
                         percent is substantially above the national average of 65 percent (2011 Census).

                         The legal and policy framework governing land ownership and settlement pattern varies across the
                         proposed project region in the six states. It recognizes both community and private ownership that is


                                                                       Page 3 of 12
                         determined by the traditional practices of the tribal groups in the region.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Gaurav D. Joshi (GENDR)
                         Suryanarayan Satish (GSURR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental                Yes            The project activities are likely to have impacts on the
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                       natural environment during implementation o and
                                                                     operation of the schemes.Hence, this policy is triggered.
                                                                     As part of the environmental assessment, in line with
                                                                     state-specific Environmental and Social Policies and
                                                                     Procedures (ESPP), biodiversity impact assessment, will
                                                                     also be undertaken, wherever sensitive areas are
                                                                     identified.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP       Yes            Some of the project activities have the potential to affect
                         4.04                                        Natural Habitats as some components of the project may
                                                                     pass through relatively pristine area. Hence, this policy
                                                                     has been triggered to ensure that appropriate management
                                                                     plans are developed in advance for handling any such
                                                                     situations.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36           Yes            Some project activities will be carried out in Forest areas
                                                                     and could affect their health. Hence, this policy has been
                                                                     triggered. However, it is confirmed that there shall be no
                                                                     commercial logging undertaken. Mitigation aspects will
                                                                     be however covered in the overall assessment and form
                                                                     part of the ESPP . This is handled through the scheme-
                                                                     specific assessment (IEAR).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No                  No chemicals are expected to be used for control of pest/
                                                                     weeds.
                         Physical Cultural            Yes            The project will involve some civil works and chance
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11                        finds cannot be ruled out. Hence, this policy has been
                                                                     triggered. However, as with other policies, measures to
                                                                     address its requirements are expected to be within the
                                                                     ESPP documentation.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/       Yes            Tribal population in the six states is quite high - 94.4
                         BP 4.10                                     percent in Mizoram, 86.5 percent in Nagaland, 86.1
                                                                     percent in Meghalaya, 35.1 percent in Manipur, 31.8
                                                                     percent in Tripura and as low as 12.4 percent in Assam. A
                                                                     Tribal People Development Framework has been prepared
                                                                     to enable preparation of Tribal Development Plans.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes                The civil works will require lands. Methods to secure
                         OP/BP 4.12                                  lands have been developed. As regards Involuntary
                                                                     Acquisition,a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has
                                                                     been prepared to enable the preparation of Resettlement
                                                                     Action Plans.



                                                                       Page 4 of 12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Safeguard Issues - Environment
                              The conversion of forest land to non-forest use in biodiversity rich area of the north east is the
                              most visible and significant issue in the project as it is practically unavoidable given that in all
                              states except Assam, where the forest cover is over 35 percent - above the national goal of 33
                              percent, forests cover more than 70 percent of the geographical area. Some of these areas are
                              already identified as biodiversity rich and protected under law with designation of national parks
                              and wildlife sanctuaries. Additionally, some other areas are recognized as important but more
                              development activities are allowed – such as elephant corridors, and community reserves. Siting of
                              transmission line and towers, though more flexible than other projects will cause local impacts in
                              such areas. Other key issues in substations include stability of hill slopes due to the construction of
                              the facilities, and changes to local drainage as well as management of chemicals– like transformer
                              oil and SF6, a potent greenhouse gas. In addition, location-specific issues related to harm to birds
                              from electrocution and/ or collision have to be addressed. There could be noise and related
                              concerns if the substations are sited close to inhabited areas. Some concerns related to physical
                              cultural resources which may also be linked to ecological resources like sacred groves are another
Public Disclosure Copy




                              feature of the north east which are to be addressed in project design and implementation.

                              If mitigation measures are not implemented, other significant issues can be disturbance to wildlife
                              inside/ outside of protected areas, and discharge of chemicals. Workers health and safety issues
                              can be significant during construction but will be necessarily limited to that period. Inadequate
                              facilities for the workers can cause local problems – environmental and social, if the local
                              infrastructure is shared between workers from outside and the local population dependent on these
                              resources for the duration of implementation.

                              Safeguard Issues – Social
                              Major social safeguard aspects relate to: land and tribals. Project does require lands for: (i)
                              erection of pole to draw lines; and (ii) construction of sub-stations for transmission and
                              distribution of power. The former does not entail permanent acquisition of lands, but, creates some
                              temporary disturbances demanding a Compensatory Plan (Compensatory Plan for Temporary
                              Disturbance or CPTD). The latter, however, does require lands on a permanent basis. In NER,
                              land tenure is quite unique. Lands could be owned privately by either individuals or by the
                              ‘village’. Additionally, customary rights too may prevail on forest lands. Proper land titles may or
                              may not exist in all the cases. Further, many of the non-title lands, especially in the hill areas, may
                              belong to tribals. So, interventions to secure lands in the hill areas will have to be necessarily
                              associated with an interface with the tribals, and their local institutions.


                                                                         Page 5 of 12
                           The tribal people live in contiguous areas unlike other communities. So, an area approach has been
                           adopted for administrative and developmental purposes. Towards safeguarding the interests of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           tribals (their land and culture), certain areas are covered and are governed through provisions of
                           the Sixth Schedule under the Indian Constitution. At present, the Schedule applies in four states: it
                           almost fully covers Meghalaya and partly the states of Assam, Mizoram and Tripura. Areas and
                           states not covered by Sixth Schedule provisions - Nagaland and Manipur - also have laws
                           respecting the autonomy of traditional ways of self-governance and protecting from outside
                           interference.

                           The Sixth Schedule provides for administration of certain tribal areas as autonomous entities. The
                           administration of an autonomous district is to be vested in a District Council and of an
                           autonomous region, in a Regional Council. These Councils are endowed with legislative, judicial,
                           executive and financial powers. So, project management necessarily had to take due note of and
                           comply with the local governance and administrative regulations.

                           As lands required are rather small and bestowed with flexibility in terms of location, large scale
                           significant impacts such as relocation and/ or livelihood changes are not envisaged.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Indiscriminate diversion of forest land, without the implementation of measures laid down in
                           respective clearances from the authorities, there can be long-term impacts on the forest and
                           biodiversity. These could range from loss of habitat for individuals to hindrance to movement in
                           safe corridors. Inappropriate handling of chemicals like transformer oils, and SF6 can cause
                           pollution impacts at the local or wider scale. If care is not taken while siting substations, there can
                           be long term impacts on the local drainage as well as stability of slopes in some hilly locations. No
                           other long term impacts in the project area are anticipated in light of currently known activities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           While long terms impacts are likely to occur, they will be mostly positive. Improvement in the
                           availability of power is expected not only to boost the local economic development, but also may
                           lead to improvement of quality of life as it could lead to better transport and communication
                           facilities, besides enabling of modern gadgets such as cooker, stoves and other entertainment
                           means such as television, radio etc.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The No Project Option in respect to the proposed project implies that the status quo is maintained.
                           This option may be considered most suitable alternative from an extreme environmental and
                           social perspective as it ensures non-interference with the existing conditions, however, this option
                           will imply the community, the region as well as the country as a whole is deprived of the
                           development and economic opportunities that will emanate from the availability of electricity
                           supply. This will also render very little technological advances and low skill development and
                           inadequate employment opportunities. The no project option thus is the least preferred option from
                           the socio-economic and environmental perspective.

                           There are few realistic options (other than to augment the intra-state transmission and distribution
                           grid) to provide reliable and economic electricity supply to households in the project areas. In the
                           absence of grid augmentation, the most probable alternative is continued and higher use of diesel
                           based generators for meeting the power demand which is expected to increase manifold as per the

                                                                      Page 6 of 12
                           18th Electric Power Survey (EPS) estimates of GoI. Another more difficult alternative could be
                           the use of decentralized renewable energy (RE) sources in the form of solar home systems or mini/
                           micro-grids. However, according to feasibility studies conducted by the team under a different
Public Disclosure Copy




                           energy access project (PREPARE), the cost of using decentralized RE based power is much higher
                           when compared to grid based power. Cost of using solar home systems or solar mini-grids (along
                           with 2 day battery autonomy to maintain reliability of supply) is upwards Rs. 25/kWh compared to
                           grid based power supply where the average cost of supply varies between Rs. 8-12/kWh.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           For ensuring compliance with the safeguard policies viz., safeguards management, the project has
                           adopted a framework approach as all the investments have not been identified as yet. Each of the
                           six participating states has been enabled to prepare a customized set of Environment and Social
                           Policy and Procedures (ESPP) document. This is a generic document and serves as a framework,
                           and can be adopted for all power transmission, sub-transmission projects.

                          Essentially, the state-specific ESPP preparation is based on POWERGRID’s ESPP, which has
                          been reviewed and accepted by World Bank for Use of Borrower Systems or UCS (Report No.
                          49022-IN, Project Appraisal Document, Fifth Power System Development Project, August 25,
                          2009), but incorporates due requirements of India’s new “The Right to Fair Compensation in Land
                          Acquisition, Resettlement and Rehabilitation Act, 2013” (LARR 2013) as well as Indian
                          Constitution’s provision related to Scheduled (Tribal) areas in NER.

                          ESPP’s implementation require systematic consideration of alternative alignments for minimizing
                          adverse impacts on the environment and people. For lines at least 3 different alignments, and the
                          shortest distance (Bee line) are compared on environmental, social and financial parameters,
                          before selecting the final alignment. In cases where warranted, longer alignment is chosen, even
                          when the financial cost is high, in order to minimize impacts on the environment or local
                          population. For example, in Tripura, for one line (Udaipur – Bagafa), length will be increased by
Public Disclosure Copy




                          about 5 km in order to avoid a wildlife sanctuary area. For sub-projects in Mizoram, the alignment
                          for the transmission line has been chosen to take advantage of the RoW already acquired for the
                          improvement of the road between Chwangte – S. Bungtlang supported under another Bank
                          financed project to minimize adverse impacts.

                          The ESPP’s social content embodies a synthesis of Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) (as per
                          OP 4.12) and a Tribal Peoples’ Planning Framework (TPF) (as per OP 4.10). In cases wherein
                          lands are to be acquired and/ or that there are tribal peoples in the sub-project area, the framework
                          will be adopted and a social assessment is carried out to enable preparation of a Resettlement
                          Action Plan (RAP), and/ or Tribal People Development Plan (TDP). The ESPP lays bare the
                          modalities for undertaking the Social Assessment (SA) as well as the preparation and
                          implementation of RAP and TDPs. All the above are captured in a Social Management Framework
                          for each state, culled out of the respective ESPP. However, at the same time, the project
                          preparation does recognizes that two of the participating states (Nagaland and Mizoram) enjoy
                          special constitutional safeguards and the LARR Act of 2013 may not be applicable till such time
                          the respective states endorse national legislation. So, in such a situation, lands will have to be
                          secured through either voluntary donations or outright purchases based on negotiations with the
                          land owners. Measures have been drawn to ensure that such transactions are voluntary and not
                          subject to any external pressures. A unique Compensatory Plan for Temporary Disturbance
                          (CPTD) has been designed to compensate for the temporary disturbances likely to occur as a result


                                                                    Page 7 of 12
                           of the erection of poles/ towers for transmission lines.

                           The ESPP’s environmental content provides guidance in the management of environmental issues,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           has specific requirement of considering several alternatives for scheme configuration and
                           configuration before determining the optimum solution. Criteria for selection include presence of
                           forests, protected wildlife areas, human settlements, and other important features in the area. It
                           also takes into account provisions for environmental management and has incorporated some
                           additional features like the compensation for tree cutting in Nagaland’s non-reserved forests, and
                           requirement of biodiversity assessment, in specific cases, outside protected areas. These
                           procedures will be followed for each scheme and documented in its Initial Environmental
                           Assessment. The extent of the implementation of the EMP, incorporated in the contract
                           documents, and compliance with all conditions laid down in clearances, such as for diversion of
                           Forest land, will be confirmed when the Final Environmental Assessment Report is prepared.

                           Detailed arrangements for extensive consultations with stakeholders as well as disclosures have
                           been made under the project.

                           Implementation of the project is primarily the responsibility of POWERGRID. POWERGRID has
                           extensive experience of working with Bank safeguards policies (and other multilateral agencies
                           such as ADB) and is currently implementing Fifth Power System Development Project as a pilot
                           under the Use of Borrower Systems. POWERGRID has established a Central Project
                           Implementation Unit (CPIU) at Guwahati working exclusively for this project. At the state level
                           Project Implementation Units (PIUs) are being set up. Additional contractual staffing is also
                           planned to augment resources to manage environmental and social aspects. In order to ensure that
                           the Utilities are able to take up the operation and maintenance after implementation, for each state,
                           a Project Coordination Unit (SPCU) has been established with staff from the Utility in respective
                           states. SPCUs will coordinate with POWERGRID staff so that the knowledge abo ut ESPP use
                           during preparation and implementation of schemes can be transferred to the states. Each Utility is
                           also developing its own organizational structure to manage environmental and social aspects for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           post-implementation phase. The capacity building plan for the project includes specific activities
                           to ensure that Utilities’ staff are trained on managing environmental and social issues throughout
                           the project cycle.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Stakeholder consultation has been taken up as an integral part of the project and viewed as a
                           continuous two way process, involving promotion of public understanding of the processes and
                           mechanisms through which problems and needs are investigated and solved. Consultation has
                           helped to obtain local and traditional knowledge that would be useful for decision-making and
                           provide an opportunity for the public to influence project in a positive manner thereby creating a
                           sense of ownership and improve transparency and accountability of decision-making.

                           The stakeholders for the project include who are directly or indirectly related to the project and
                           include the following:
                           i.       Ministry of Development for North Eastern Region, GoI;
                           ii.      State Power Utilities in four states - Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya and Tripura;
                           iii.     State Department of Power – Nagaland and Mizoram;
                           iv. State Governments in participating states – Departments of Power/ Energy, Finance, Tribal
                           welfare;


                                                                      Page 8 of 12
                           v.        District Collector;
                           vi. District Panchayat/ Gram Panchayats;
                           vii. District Councils;
Public Disclosure Copy




                           viii. Village Council;
                           ix. Self Help Groups/ Community Based Organizations/ Community Development Organizations;
                           x. NGOs in project area;
                           xi. Local communities including women;
                           xii. Project Affected Persons including tribals;
                           xii. POWERGRID;
                           xiii. Project management units at Guwahati and state capitals of participating states.

                           A variety of consultations have been held during the preparation itself. The draft ESPPs are being
                           made available on the respective states’ (utilities’) website for comment. Subsequently, the
                           Executive Summary of ESPP have been translated into local language and a state level public
                           consultation workshop has been/will be held in each state. The final ESPPs will be re-disclosed in
                           the Info shop and in-country with translations. In addition, the development of each scheme has
                           involved/will involve extensive consultations as a part of the scheme specific assessment of
                           environmental and social impacts.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                        04-Feb-2015
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                     04-Feb-2015
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        ////
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 9 of 12
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                                 04-Feb-2015
                           Comments: For ensuring compliance with the safeguard policies viz., safeguards management,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                        the project has adopted a framework approach as all the investments have not been
                                        identified as yet. Each of the six participating states has been enabled to prepare a
                                        customized set of Environment and Social Policy and Procedures (ESPP) framework
                                        document. The ESPP envisages a two stage EA process. The procedures detailed in
                                        ESPP will be applied for each scheme/sub project and documented as part of the
                                        Initial Environmental Assessment Report (IEAR) and verified in the Final
                                        Environmental Assessment Report.

                                        The draft ESPP for participating State Power entity(ies) in Tripura has been
                                        disclosed in-country on February 4, 2015; for Meghalaya on March 10, 2015; for
                                        Manipur on March 26, 2015; for Assam on April 20, 2015; for Nagaland on April 30,
                                        2015 and for Mizoram on May 12, 2015.

                                        IEARs for the first set of identified sub-projects in the State of (i) Tripura has been
                                        disclosed in-country on April 20, 2015; (ii) Meghalaya has been disclosed in-country
                                        on May 8, 2015; (iii) Nagaland has been disclosed in-country on May 20, 2015; (iv)
                                        Assam has been cleared and is in the process of in-country disclosure; and (v)
                                        Manipur and Mizoram are presently under review. IEAR for the second set of
                                        identified sub-projects in the State of Meghalaya is also presently under review.

                                         The executive summaries of the six draft ESPPs that have been disclosed have been
                                         submitted on May 18, 2015 to the SECPO (for distribution to the Executive
                                         Directors) with the cover memo from the Country Director and are currently under
                                         review of SECPO.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       04-Feb-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    04-Feb-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                             04-Feb-2015
                           Comments: The draft ESPP for participating State Power entity(ies) in Tripura has been
                                         disclosed in-country on February 4, 2015; for Meghalaya on March 10, 2015; for
                                         Manipur on March 26, 2015; for Assam on April 20, 2015; for Nagaland on April 30,
                                         2015 and for Mizoram on May 12, 2015.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       04-Feb-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    04-Feb-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                             04-Feb-2015
                           Comments: The draft ESPP for participating State Power entity(ies) in Tripura has been
                                         disclosed in-country on February 4, 2015; for Meghalaya on March 10, 2015; for
                                         Manipur on March 26, 2015; for Assam on April 20, 2015; for Nagaland on April 30,
                                         2015 and for Mizoram on May 12, 2015.


                                                                    Page 10 of 12
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?


                                                                     Page 11 of 12
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Rohit Mittal,Kwawu Mensan Gaba
                            Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                       Date: 24-May-2015
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Julia Bucknall (PMGR)                         Date: 26-May-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
