                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                INITIATION/CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                    Report No.: 121880
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:            4 December 2017


I. BASIC INFORMATION
 A. Basic Program Data
 Country:                      India                 Project ID:           P165488 (GU), P162849 (PE)
 Project Name:                 Energy Efficiency Scale-Up Program
 Task Team Leaders:            Defne Gencer, Ashok Sarkar, Simon Stolp, Don Purka
 Estimated Date of             February 2018
 Approval:
 Managing Unit:                GEE06                 Lending               PforR, IPF Guarantee
                                                     Instrument:
 Sector(s):                    Energy and Extractives
 Theme(s):                     Energy Efficiency (861)
 Fragile and/or Capacity Constraints [None]
 Financing (in USD Million)
                                                      Total Bank           300 (80 Guarantee, 220
 Total Project Cost:           1,496
                                                      Financing:           PforR)
 Total Co-financing:           1,276                  Financing Gap:
     Financing Source                                                                            Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT: Department of Economic Affairs                                                320
     OTHERS: IFIs, bilateral, commercial financing                                                     956
     Total                                                                                           1,276
 Environmental Category        B
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred         No
 project?

 B. Program Objectives
1.    Program Development Objective. The program development objectives are to scale up energy
savings in residential and public sectors, strengthen EESL’s institutional capacity, and enhance its access
to commercial financing.

 2.   The PDO level outcome indicators of the Program would focus on market transformation of select
 energy efficient appliances and equipment, development of sustainable business models in new Energy
    Efficiency (EE) market segments, raising commercial financing and institutional strengthening.

    3.    Key Results. The operation combines a Program for Results instrument and an IPF Guarantee
    instrument. Under the PforR, there are four Results Areas, whose achievement will be measured through
    six Disbursement Linked Indicators. The Results Areas are:
                (i) Results Area 1: Energy savings and EE market transformation in the residential sector
                (ii) Results Area 2: Energy savings and EE market transformation in public street lighting
                (iii) Results Area 3: Development of sustainable business models in new EE market
                      segments
                (iv) Results Area 4: Institutional strengthening for sustainable EE scale-up.

    For the IPF component, the key results on the amount of commercial financing leveraged by the IBRD
    guarantee will be quantified, measured and reported as a PDO outcome indicator.

    C. Project Description
    4.    The Government of India has requested World Bank financing to support EESL in the
    implementation of its growing program, covering priority energy efficiency (EE) initiatives.
    5.    The proposed operation by the World Bank would support the Program to be implemented by
    Energy Efficiency Services Limited (EESL) for EE market transformation in residential and public
    sectors. The proposed operation comprises a US$220 million Program for Results (PforR) loan and a
    US$80 million loan/bond guarantee to support EESL in raising commercial financing for scaling up its
    EE programs. The scope of the Program proposed for support includes Government of India’s (GoI)
    “Unnat Jyoti by Affordable LEDs for All? (UJALA) initiative implemented by EESL, covering Light
    Emitting Diode (LED) lightbulbs, LED tubelights, and ceiling fans; and the “Street Lighting National
    Program? (SLNP). The proposed PforR operation would support the scale up of EE market
    transformation under UJALA and SLNP; as well as the incorporation of sustainability elements into
    EESL’s newer business areas and institutional strengthening of EESL for sustainable scale-up. In
    addition, through the provision of an IPF loan/bond guarantee, the operation will enhance EESL’s
    access to commercial financing markets which would further scale investments in UJALA and SLNP.
    6.    The Program is primarily focused on scaling up deployment of energy efficient appliances and
    equipment in the residential and public sectors. The interventions planned are expected to result in
    substantial environmental and social benefits. Adverse effects that are sensitive, diverse and
    unprecedented on the environment and people are not expected currently. However, planned efforts are
    essential to ensure that the Program interventions will result in sustainable social and environmental
    benefits. As required by the Bank Policy on Program-for-Results Financing (July 2015), an
    Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) was conducted to assess the adequacy of
    Program environmental and social systems and identify specific measures. This ISDS relates to the IPF
    component supporting EESL (i.e. the guarantee) proposed to raise commercial financing for
    investments proposed to be made under the Program, namely UJALA and SLNP.
.
    D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
    known)
    7.     UJALA and SLNP will be implemented nationwide, both in urban as well as rural areas. The
    project is supporting deployment of energy efficient LED lightbulbs, which, in case of UJALA are sold
    to consumers and in case of SLNP, are installed by replacing the existing conventional streetlights, and
    to a limited extent, supporting electrical systems and light poles. The nature of activities (especially in
case of SLNP), requires more focus on occupational health and safety aspects relating to installation of
equipment, more than the project locational aspects. Under this nationwide program, it is possible that
specific project locations can be in urban and rural areas in proximity to the coasts, forests and other
natural habitats. While it is not envisaged that the project activities will infringe into such areas, such
characteristics are of importance especially for handling the wastes generated from the project activities.
Since exact project locations are not yet known, the safeguards management approach will be based on
exclusion principles for avoiding environmental risks.


E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Management
8.     As part of its past experience in accessing financing from different multilateral and bilateral
financing institutions, EESL has already prepared an Environmental, Occupational Health & Safety, and
Social (EHSS) Manual. The manual mainly covers UJALA and SLNP, and includes relevant Standard
Operating Procedures (SOPs), which are intended to be integrated into EESL’s operations as part of
these programs. While many of these SOPs are have been integrated in to EESL operations, a clear
mandate with specific monitoring and institutional mechanism for safeguards management is yet to be
established by EESL. EESL has initiated this process by designating an EHSS officer and initiated the
process of disseminating EHSS internally within EESL and for the external stakeholders including
vendors and contractors. As part of the preparation of the proposed DLI, the need to strengthen internal
institutional capabilities was identified, and EESL agreed to establish an Environmental and Social
Management/ Sustainable Development Department. The establishment of this Department was
included as a Disbursement Linked Indicator (DLI), against which IBRD financing would be disbursed,
under the proposed PforR. This Department will be strengthened to the extent that it can also address
the IPF requirements under the guarantee product.

9.     By incorporating a dedicated and full-fledged unit or department to focus on environmental and
social sustainability of program operations, it is expected that EESL will be able to manage the program
impacts. EESL will also prepare a guidance document incorporating the guidelines for screening of
activities under various programs.

10. Certain activities which would be supported through IPF guarantee may result in adverse impacts,
if not properly planned and managed. The potential risks that can emerge in case of improper planning,
execution and management of various programs are: (i) inappropriate management of wastes polluting
the environment and posing risks to health and safety, (ii) effects of inappropriate lighting quantities and
placement decisions on natural habitats, flora fauna and cultural heritage, and (iii) occupational and
public safety risks for workers and the communities. The challenge lies in proper conception of the
projects and programs in line with applicable legislation, ensuring compliance to the country’s
environmental regulations and giving requisite attention to incorporate these comprehensively in
technical design, program planning, implementation and operations.

Since the exact location of all program activities are not yet known and some activities under EESL’s
Program may have short and long-term implications, the environmental safeguards category at this stage
has been determined as “B?. The environmental safeguard policy that it triggers is Environmental
Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01). The Project will have minor and/or temporary adverse environmental
impacts. Main project benefits are associated with significant energy and cost savings due to the use of
energy efficient LED bulbs and avoided environmental stress due to it replacing the CFLs which are
widely in use today.

11. Social impacts resulting from the activities envisaged under the IPF guarantee are positive. Social
    risks from this project are determined as low. OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) is not triggered while
    OP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples) is triggered out of precaution should the project move to areas with tribal
    populations. Mitigation measures included in the Tribal Development Plan include activities such as
    public consultations, information dissemination regarding the program and active participation of
    communities in the program as well as benefit sharing, where possible.
.
    F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
    Addepalli Sita Ramakrishna, Senior Environmental Specialist, GEN06
    Deepa Balakrishnan, Environmental Specialist, GEN06
    Gitanjali Chaturvedi, Senior Social Development Specialist, GEN06

.
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
    Safeguard Policies       Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
    Environmental         Yes                The IPF operation would utilize IBRD resources for raising
    Assessment OP/BP 4.01                    commercial financing to support EESL’s Program. EESL’s
                                             program focuses on scaling up the deployment of LED
                                             lightbulbs and other energy efficient appliances under UJALA
                                             and SLNP, covering locations in both urban and rural areas
                                             across India. IPF Guarantee would support only the
                                             deployment of LED bulbs, tube lights and ceiling fans under
                                             UJALA Program, and SLNP. The proposed project will have
                                             significant positive impact as the lifecycle environmental
                                             impacts of LED bulbs are significantly less, when compared to
                                             that of the alternatives, such as incandescent or CFL bulbs.
                                             Moreover, EESL’s initiatives will have significant positive
                                             impact on the environment because of significant energy
                                             savings it stands to generate by replacing less efficient options.
                                             Some of the Program activities, if not managed systematically
                                             are expected to have impacts on the environment. These
                                             include placement of temporary kiosks for distribution of
                                             bulbs, quality of the lighting products, and disposal of wastes. .
                                             These aspects would assume importance when the project
                                             locations (urban and rural settlements) are in the proximity to
                                             sensitive areas. Hence, there is a need for systematic
                                             safeguards management with pre-defined framework for risk
                                             mitigation, if any. While such aspects are covered by and large
                                             under existing EHSS manual of EESL, there is a need to
                                             update the same to establish an Environmental Management
                                             Framework (EMF) with relevant screening and impact
                                             assessment procedures, and Environmental management
                                             measures complying with World Bank requirements including
                                             occupational health and safety aspects
    Natural Habitats OP/BP No                The UJALA and SLNP programs will be implemented in
    4.04                                     existing settlement areas and are not envisaged to infringe in to
                                             any of the natural habitats. However, to avoid doing harm to
                                             sensitive areas, the borrower will be advised to incorporate
                                             exclusion principles to avoid natural habitats in the vicinity of
                                             the settlements, if any. It is recommended that EESL prepares
                                             an EMF complying with OP 4.01 to define exclusion
                                             principles.
    Forests OP/BP 4.36       No              The project is not expected to have any impacts or harm to
                                             forests and do not involve in any forest based commercial
                                             activities or logging.
    Pest Management OP       No              Pest Management aspects would not be applicable and hence
    4.09                                     not triggered
    Physical Cultural        TBD             Program locations are not yet known. As part of project
    Resources OP/BP 4.11                     preparation, the need for triggering OP 4.11 will be determined
                                             based on whether the program will include activities which
                                             would have an impact on Physical or Cultural Resources. In
                                             the event the Program decides to exclude activities that are
                                             concerned with / in or near physical / cultural resources, this
                                             policy will not be triggered. Irrespective of triggering the
                                             policy, the proposed EMF shall integrate considerations for
                                             physical and cultural resources including chance find
                                             procedures.
    Indigenous Peoples       Yes             Program locations are not yet known. The policy is triggered
    OP/BP 4.10                               as a precaution in the event that the program is scaled up to
                                             include states with tribal populations such as Chhattisgarh,
                                             Jharkhand, and/or states in North East India, this policy will be
                                             triggered. A Tribal Development Plan is therefore included as
                                             a measure to comply with World Bank requirements.
    Involuntary              No              Planned activities do not involve land acquisition that would
    Resettlement OP/BP                       lead to physical resettlement or loss of assets or access to
    4.12                                     resources.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP No                  The program activities envisaged under IPF are not expected
    4.37                                     to have any impact on the Safety of Dams. Hence, this policy is
                                             not triggered.
    Projects on International No             The project relates to energy efficient bulbs and appliances
    Waterways OP/BP 7.50                     which does not involve waterways and hence the International
                                             Waterways policy is not triggered
    Projects in Disputed     No              The project will not be implemented in international disputed
    Areas OP/BP 7.60                         territories.
.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

       A. Will an Appraisal stage ISDS be required? [Y/N] Yes
          i.   Explanation: During appraisal stage, specific activities to be financed by IPF resources are
               expected to be more clear.
        ii.    If Yes, tentative target for preparing the appraisal stage ISDS December 4, 2017

       B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
        ESMF has to be prepared. The current EHSS manual of the borrower has many of the requirements
        for the proposed ESMF. The preparation of ESMF by the borrower is ongoing and the draft ESMF is
        expected to be ready for bank review and processing for disclosure by the end of November, 2017

        C. The specific studies, their timing and disclosure should be documented in the appraisal-stage
        ISDS. ESMF for the project


.
IV. APPROVALS
    Task Team Leaders:                     Name: Defne Gencer, Ashok Sarkar, Simon Stolp, Don Purka
    Approved By:
    Regional Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maged Hamed                                           Date: 30 November 2017
    Practice Manager:                      Name: Demetrios Papathanasiou,                    Date: 3 December 2017
                                           Pankaj Gupta



    1
      Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) World
    Bank Public Disclosure and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to
    potentially affected persons.
