Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC413 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: January 16, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P083789 
Project Name: Rural Electricity Access 
Task Team Leader: Andrea Ryan Rizvi 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
October 18, 2004 
Estimated Board Date:  
June 17, 2005 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument:  
Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Samuel Thangaraj (Sr Social Development Specialist), 
Sanjay Srivastava (Environmental Specialist) 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 50 
IBRD: 0 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY 
10 
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 5 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives 
 
 
Project development objectives are to:  (i) demonstrate sustainable institutional models for increasing 
access to electricity services in rural areas; and (ii) contribute to growth of rural incomes and improved 
delivery of social services through supply of electricity services.  The success of the project shall be 
measured by the following outcomes:  (i) institutions with the capacity to support, the development of 
new rural electricity suppliers; (ii) a number of sustainable rural electricity service delivery schemes in 
two states; and (iii) initiation of new projects to replicate and scale up successful models of rural 
electricity service delivery, especially for the poor.   
 
C. 
Project Description  
 
The proposed operation would be demand driven with rural electricity subprojects initiated by a variety of 
actors (e.g., entrepreneurs, NGOs, local institutions, community associations, and utilities).  These 
‘subproject sponsors’ will design rural electrification projects, prepare business proposals and compete 
for a capital subsidy from a state level fund to be established under the project.  To develop capacity of 
local actors, the project will provide social intermediation and business development assistance aimed at 
facilitating the development, implementation and management of rural electricity subprojects.  Subsidies 
will be awarded based on clear objective criteria.  All subprojects must demonstrate that they will be 
financially sustainable (i.e., able to recover the costs of operation and maintenance and fixed costs less 
capital subsidies).  It is expected that the maximum value of subsidy for a subproject will be capped at a 
proportion (up to 80%) of total subproject costs, with the balance of investment capital to be met from 
other sources (e.g., consumer contributions, private equity, commercial loans, and local government 
contributions). Competition for subsidies will be open to all technology types (grid, off-grid, renewable 
Page  2
 
 
and conventional).  Global Environment Facility (GEF) funding will be secured to provide additional 
subsidy to make renewable energy technologies more cost competitive. 
 
A key feature of the project will be activities that maximize synergies between rural electricity services 
and rural development to optimize development impact.  Support will be provided to integrate electricity 
subprojects with rural development interventions, to develop linkages between electricity and poverty 
reduction(e.g. matching grants for credit schemes that fund connection costs for poor households), and to 
coordinate electricity service with other sector investments (e.g., water supply, telecommunications). 
 
The Project will also support the implementation of reforms and  invest in capacity building of 
institutions to deliver proposed subsidies.  To ensure coordination of activities with GOIs national 
program, and to prepare for national scale- up, this support will be extended to all States.  Learning and 
innovation will be a key theme of the operation, focusing on the creation of sustainable rural electricity 
suppliers, the design of institutions to efficiently administer subsidies, and the development of positive 
synergies between electricity service delivery and poverty alleviation.   
 
 
D.  Project location  
 
The proposed project will initially be focused in the rural areas of two States in India.  The States of 
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh were selected as potential candidate states during project preparation in 
consultation with GoI, however this choice has yet to be confirmed.
 
 
E. 
Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies  
 
Environment.  
The project will utilize GEF grant funds to promote environmentally friendly energy 
generation options, thus in general the Project will serve to reduce the need and dependence on more 
conventional energy sources.  The precise nature of environmental impact during construction and 
operational stage of each subproject will vary, depending on the location, scale and the size of the 
investment components. While the renewable options such as solar PV are likely to have insignificant 
environmental impacts, the potential environmental impacts of distributed generation using biomass 
gasification or diesel technologies  would need to be mitigated following standard operating procedures 
and good practices.  
 
There are Government of India requirements that may be relevant to the project to mitigate potential 
environmental concerns arising from distributed generation facilities, particularly those using diesel 
technologies. The environmental safeguard requirements in the project would be addressed by developing 
an environmental framework outlining procedures to mainstream environmental best practices in the 
design and implementation stage of the investment component.  The borrower’s institutional capacity to 
effectively follow and implement the procedures and environmental best practice, would be assessed and 
outlined in this framework exercise which will be undertaken during project preparation.   Technical 
assistance and training will also be provided during project implementation to periodically assess and 
enhance the capacity of implementing partners to plan and implement  investments in an environmentally 
responsible manner. 
 
Social.  
Physical activities to be undertaken in the project include the extension of existing distribution 
lines and transformer units along village roads to provide electricity service to remote villages.  Land 
acquisition will generally not be required.  In some instances however there will be a need to establish 
small, community based distributed generation facilities (e.g. solar photo-voltaic panels and diesel 
generators) which could have some land needs.  It is proposed that where required, small parcels of land 
for siting generation facilities be provided as a voluntary donation by Panchayats/villages to “service 
Page  3
 
 
providers” (e.g. private entrepreneurs and NGOs) in exchange for access to electricity and its associated 
social and economic benefits.  The proposed project will have in place a “social screening” process to 
ensure that (i) the donated land would be free of squatters, encroaches or other claims or encumbrances; 
(ii) the land required to meet “technical project criteria” is identified with the community and not solely 
by the line department, project authorities and/or “service providers” and (iii) the process of voluntary  
provision  of land is verified and confirmed through “witness statements.” The social screening will be 
the responsibility of “service providers”.  The Project Authorities will review
 
these screenings to ensure 
that they have been completed in accordance with requirements and will be responsible for submitting 
quarterly reports to the Bank for review.   
 
In case voluntary provision  of land involves physical displacement and adverse social impacts such as 
loss of livelihood, verification of voluntary acceptance of community devised migratory measures will be 
obtained, through transparent and participatory process,  from those to be adversely affected.  An 
important aspect of such community based arrangement would be that service providers would provide 
appropriate guarantees of public access to services to be provided by them.  
 
In view of these, there will be a limited requirements for Borrower’s institutional capacity for safeguard 
policies and it will be put in place on the basis of the findings of Social Assessment which would be 
completed prior to project appraisal. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[Y] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
The project is likely to support several distributed generation options some of which (such 
as solar PV) are likely to have insignificant environmental impacts, but some others such 
as biomass gasification and diesel  etc may have varying levels of environmental impacts 
(during construction and operation stage), depending upon the specific project location, 
scale and the size of the investment components.  The project would require an 
environmental framework outlining procedures and practice  for mainstreaming into 
project design to mitigate residual environmental impacts.
 
 
 
 
[N] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[N] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[N] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[Y] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[N] Forests 
(
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[N] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[N] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 – 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[N] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
 
 
[N] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A. 
Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared.   
 
The PAD-stage ISDS will be prepared simultaneously with the PAD and will be based on the findings of 
Social Assessment which will, among others, identify adverse social impacts, if any, and also guidelines 
for preparing and implementing IPDPs through a participatory process. Social Assessments in Rajasthan 
and Uttar Pradesh are likely to be completed by June 2004 which would also provide necessary input to 
finalize a Social Safeguard Framework for the project.  
 
The environmental framework outlining procedures to mainstream environmental best practices in the 
design and implementation stage of the investment component would be completed by June 2004 and 
would be the basis for developing a PAD –stage ISDS and QER. 
 
B. 
For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS 
 
C. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
 
 
The specific time frame for launching and completing safeguard related studies would be stated in the 
PAD-stage ISDS. 
Page  5
 
 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
  
 
Task Team Leader: 
Andrea Ryan Rizvi 
Date 
Approved by: 
  
  
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
Date 
Comments 
  
 
Sector Manager:  
Penelope Brook 
Date 
Comments 
 
 
 
