INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.:
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: August 5, 2005
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country: India                        Project ID: P090163
Project Name: FaL-G Bricks Project    Task Team Leader: Kirtan C Sahoo
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 28,  Estimated Board Date (ERPA Signed):
2005                                  December 20, 2005
Managing Unit: SASES                  Lending Instrument: CN-Carbon Offset
Sector: Other Industry (100%)         Theme: Climate Change (P), Other
Environment and Natural Resources Mgt
(S)
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Sanjay Srivastava and Sam Thangaraj
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): IBRD NA
Other financing amounts by source: Private Equity Contribution: US$ 1.48 Million
Commercial Financing   : US$ 3.46 Million
B. Project Objectives
The global environment objective of this project is to reduce the emissions of greenhouse gases
by increasing the market penetration of a more climate-frienclly brick manufacturing technology.
The development objectives of the project include the creation of business opportunities for
small enterprises using a more climate-friendly technology, including the possibility of more
stable employment for seasonal brick workers, and improving the environmental sustainability of
construction materials in the country.
The use of the FaL-G technology for making fly ash bricks will significantly reduce the levels of
local air pollution (including large amounts of dust and particulate matter) and greenhouse gases
while also reducing the level of denudation of fertile topsoil which occurs during traditional clay
brick production. The project will displace the demand for fossil energy (primarily coal) by the
plants because the FaL-G process does not require sintering. The project will also reduce the
environmental impact associated with the disposal of potentially harmful by-products of power
plant operation such as fly-ash by utilizing these waste products as a building material. The
project also has positive employment aspects, as it will create business opportunities for small
entrepreneurs who wish to open new FaL-G brick making units and will improve employment
opportunities for brick workers who will now have more opportunity for year-round (as opposed
to seasonal) work in peri-urban areas.
1



The principal beneficiaries of the project include:
o The local community in the 200 proposed plant sites who will be exposed to reduced
negative environmental impacts which could occur from the traditional clay brick
manufacturing process, such as land degradation and local air pollution
o The local community, including small enterprises, who will have increased business
opportunities and the local workers who will experience an improvement in employment type
from seasonal work to year-round employment.
o  The industrial and utility sectors which will benefit from the reduced cost and environmental
impacts of fly ash disposal due to increased off-take by the fly-ash brick manufacturers.
o The global community will benefit from the reduction in GHG emissions
C. Project Description
The FaL-G project aims to promote fly ash bricks as an alternative to burnt clay brick within the
construction sector in India by facilitating establishment of about 200 FaL-G plants in various
parts of the country. The project will promote only small scale plants (production capacity
ranging from 2 to 6 million bricks per year) with a view to create business opportunities for the
small enterprises.
This project will result in sale of 800,000 ERs to the Community Development Carbon Fund of
the World Bank. The sponsors have agreed to further enhance the community benefits of the
project by ensuring implementation of health insurance schemes for the workers and evolving a
mechanism to discourage employment of child and bonded labor in FaL-G plants.
Institutional Framework
The project will be promoted jointly by the Institute for Solid Waste Research & Ecological
Balance (INSWAREB) and Eco Carbon Private Limited (ECPL). INSWAREB is a non-profit
and non-governmental organization (NGO), based at Visakhapatnam in the state of Andhra
Pradesh in India engaged in research and development in the field of building materials.
INSWAREB will provide technology know-how, O&M and logistical support to the micro
enterprises under the project.
ECPL, a commercial entity based in Hyderabad, will be responsible for the carbon transaction
aspects of the project. ECPL will play the role of a bundling entity (on behalf of the individual
entrepreneurs) and would be the key counterpart for the CDCF project. ECPL will provide
services along with INSWAREB, to catalyze the adoption of new production plants, supervise
their operations, coordinate and bundle monitoring and verification procedures with the
accredited agency and transfer the ERs to the World Bank or its nominees under a mutually
acceptable mechanism. In order to act as a bundling agency and have rights to sell the emission
reductions achieved by individual entrepreneurs, ECPL proposes to acquire the rights to these
emission reductions by entering into legal agreement with individual entrepreneurs.
2



The Community Development Carbon Fund (CDCF) of the World Bank will purchase the ERs
generated from the bundled activity and has already entered into an agreement with ECPL in this
regard.
The individual micro enterprises are responsible for mobilizing the required resources to set up
their individual plants and to market and sell their products. To assist the enterprises in
overcoming the initial market barriers, INSWAREB will conduct regional awareness programs
and workshops involving different brick user groups. The project will further explore how the
hard currency revenue stream provided by the Emissions Reduction Purchase Agreement may
further increase the financial attractiveness of the project and increase the appraisal rating of the
individual loan applications.
ECPL proposes to develop an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and
use carbon credits as a leveraging tool for influencing better environmental and social
management at plant level above and beyond the intrinsic environmental benefits associated with
this new brick manufacturing technology. ECPL also proposes to use ESMF implementation as a
condition for the entrepreneurs to become members in the bundling program.
Success of the proposed arrangement largely depends upon the credentials and capacity of ECPL
to discharge its obligations on all aspects of the project including technical, financial,
managerial, legal etc. There are also potential market and company risks which could negatively
impact the projected emission reduction figures from FaL-G brick use. These aspects would be
closely examined during project preparation.
D. Project location
The project proposes to target the following eight Indian states: Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh,
Kamataka, Orissa, Uttar Pradesh, Delhi, Punjab and Madhya Pradesh. FaL-G plants are likely to
be set up in the vicinity of thermal power plants in order to have an easy supply of fly ash. The
location of individual FaL-G plants will be decided by the entrepreneurs in consultation with the
project sponsors considering various market, regulatory, economic, social and environmental
factors.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
FaL-G brick production plants will be implemented by entrepreneurs who are likely to have
initially limited understanding and insufficient capacity to handle environmental and social
issues. Therefore, ECPL has proposed to develop an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) and use carbon credits as a leveraging tool for influencing better
environmental and social management at plant level above and beyond the intrinsic
environmental benefits associated with this new brick manufacturing technology. ECPL also
proposes to use ESMF implementation as a condition for the entrepreneurs to become members
in the bundling program. Entrepreneurs' capacity to implement safeguard measures will need to
be further assessed during project preparation and necessary measures will be taken to ensure
3



effective implementation of mitigation measures to address environmental and social issues
associated with the operation of FaL-G plants.
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment is triggered considering the potential for cumulative
environmental and social impacts of anticipated activities during construction and operational
phases of FaL-G projects, particularly if clusters of FaL-G plants emerge. The proposed
environmental review will include, but will not be limited to, the following potential
environmental issues requiring mitigation:
*  Social and environmental issues associated with sourcing of raw materials including
water required to produce fly ash bricks;
*  Social and environmental issues associated with transport and handling of different raw
materials at plant sites;
*  Occupational health and safety hazards (viz. exposure to air pollution) associated with
use and handling raw materials at the plants;
*  Issues related to siting/locations of proposed 200 facilities/plants (particularly, if they are
close to residential areas potentially causing air pollution concerns for the public);
*  Disposal of waste material; and
*  Cumulative impacts of 200 micro-facilities to be developed as part of the project.
It is expected that other environment safeguard policies on natural habitat, forestry, pesticides
and cultural properties are not likely to be triggered. However, the environmental review will
examine applicability of any such policies and recommend appropriate measures, if found to be
applicable.
On the social front, employment of contract and bonded labor, including child labor, is believed
to be a common practice in India in the traditional brick industry (clay bricks). Although FaL-G
brick activities are different from that of the clay brick activities, the possibility of the similar
practice of labor employment will be reviewed and suitable measures will be put in place to
ensure that such practices are not followed in the plants under this bundling program.
Applicable?  Safeguard Policy
PP________ .If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
[XI     Environmental Assessment (gP/BP 4.01)
OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment is triggered considering potential
environmental and social impacts associated with construction and operation of
FaL-G plants.
I I     Natural Habitats (11/BP 4.04)
Brick plants will not be located in areas of biodiversity value or in protected
habitats.
[ ]     Pest Manauement (OP 4.09)
4



I ]      Involuntary Resettlement (QLP/BP 4.12)
[ TBD]    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)
Applicability of OD 4.20 Indigenous Peoples will be assessed during project
preparation. Since the project area is widespread and the target states for FaL-G
program also includes states having tribal population, possibility of FaL-G plants
being located in tribal areas will be examined during project preparation. In case
of OD 4.20 getting triggered, suitable plans will be developed for the benefits of
the tribal communities.
[ ]      Forests (OP/BP 4.36)
[ ]      Safety of Dams (PP/BP 4.37)
[ I      Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)
I ]      Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)
[ ]      Proiects on lnternational Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)
Environmental Assessment Category:
[]A [x]B []C []FI []TBD
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
In light of the issues (actual and potential) identified in the earlier section and the fact that the
FaL-G technology has significant potential for scaling up, there is a need to understand the
sector-specific environmental and social issues associated with fly ash brick manufacturing and
the associated risks. There is also a need to identify the specific environmental and social issues
associated with operation of the typical FaL-G plant and develop suitable operational guidelines
to minimize and mitigate the environmental impacts associated with plant operation.
A study has been commissioned to identify and analyze the above mentioned issues as a basis for
developing suitable operational guidelines and management plans for addressing the issues.
Based on the outputs an environmental and social framework will be developed for the project.
A revised ISDS will be prepared before appraisal of the project.
IV. APPROVALS
Signed and submitted by:                                       . I
Task Team Leader:             Kirtan C Sahoo                   f         X  /  /°
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does n1ot intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
disputed areas
5



Approved by:                                  `     WI 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Brederickusber  Tsbe
Comments                 Lf-4~ redeIick
Sector Manager:              Jeffrey S Racki
Comments                  , J    S
6



