Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1410 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/09/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P090592 
Project Name: Punjab Rural Water Supply and Sanitation 
Task Team Leader: Ghanasham V. Abhyankar 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: July 14, 2006 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (50%);Sanitation (50%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
100.00
100.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective will be to assist GoP in increasing rural communities access 
to improved and sustainable RWSS services.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed operation would part finance GoP?s 5-year medium term RWSS improvement 
program, such that Bank financing will be only for the reform program whereas GOP will 
finance ongoing schemes for first 2-3 years (till their completion) as well as some reform 
programs (with GoI support).  However, as part of the new 5-year Mid Term RWSS program, 
GoP will forthwith stop financing any new schemes under the old top-down approach.  The 
Program?s main components will be:  
 
(a) 
Institution Building: covering program management, capacity building of implementing 
and support agencies and sanitation and hygiene promotion  
 
(b) 
Community Development and Infrastructure Building; and  
 
(c) 
 Sector Development Programs: covering TA for developing long term policies and 
plans, strengthening M&E and expanding current approaches like O&M management contracts 
etc.  
 
Page  2
The project will be implemented in the rural areas of all the 17 districts of Punjab.  Villages will 
be included in the project by adopting a self-selection process, a prerequisite of demand-
responsive development.  The project is expected to directly benefit about 5 million rural people 
(33% of the State?s rural population).  
 
Current service delivery responsibility is centralized with DWSS managing activities from 
concept to O&M management.  In the near future too, DWSS will have to be the central 
institution to deliver the program in the absence of NGOs and CBOs in the sector, and since 
decentralization to PRIs is yet to gain strength in Punjab.  Thus, the future program institutional 
model (implementation arrangements) will consist of (i) rural local governments with user 
groups responsible for upgradation and management of all single village village RWSS facilities 
and for intra-village facilities of multi village schemes; (ii) DWSS  responsible for managing 
common infrastructure of more complex complex multi-village water supply schemes, but with 
improved fiscal and operational performance, and for providing capacity support to local 
governments.   The feasibility of internally reorganizing the existing DWSS would be evaluated 
whereby the functions of policy making, regulation and service delivery are separated and a 
business like relation established between service provider and customers.  
 
To design the project, further information and analysis requirements have been identified.  
These include: (i) developing a RWSS medium term program, (ii) assessment of current 
safeguard and fiduciary systems and identification of minimum strengthening requirements, and 
(iii) designing appropriate service delivery models (PHRD grant of US$ 450,000 has been 
approved).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Rural Areas of Punjab state of India   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Department of Water Supply and sanitation of GOP has strong  engineering and environmental 
management expertise. However, this needs to be supplemented with institutional/ social 
expertise, particularly, to conduct stakeholder consultations and dissemination thereof. Early 
during the project preparation, this will be further assessed and capacity building reqirements if 
any will be included as an integral part of the project design.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An Integrated Environmental and Social Assessment Study will be conducted to identify the 
environmental and social issues related to the different components of the project, and to develop 
an appropriate framework for addressing them. A Comprehensive Social and Environmental 
Management Framework along with a  checlist will be devised for application to all the selected 
sub-projects. This study will also review the rural drinking water and sanitation sector policies 
and institutions, and recommend measures for addressing  key concerns in the sector.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/01/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  02/01/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1. Environmental Assessment Study  
 
2.
Social Assessment Study  
 
3.
Sanitation and Hygiene Promotion  
 
4.
Integrated Environment and Social Assessment Management  Framework   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ghanasham V. Abhyankar 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Sonia Hammam 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
