                           Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet

Section I ­ Basic Information

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: October 15, 2004                             Report No AC714

A. Basic Project Data

A.1. Project Statistics

Country: India                                Project ID: P077856

Project: Lucknow to Muzaffarpur National      TTL: Piers A Vickers
Highway Project

Total project cost (by component): Single component of Highway Upgrading - US$809
million

Appraisal Date: May 30, 2004                  Loan Amount($m):

                                              IBRD: 620

Board Date: December 21, 2004

Other financing amounts by source:              ($m.)

Managing Unit: SASEI                          Sector: Roads and highways (100%)

Lending Instruments: Specific Investment
Loan

Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency        Yes? [ ]          No? [X]
recovery?

Environmental Category: A                     Safeguard classification: S1

A.2. Project Objective:

        The project development objective is for road users to benefit from an improved
journey between Lucknow and Muzaffarpur. This project will be the fourth Bank loan to
support the Government of India's (GOI) National Highway Development Program
(NHDP), which seeks to upgrade to four lane standard 13,000 km of the core national
highway network, including the Golden Quadrilateral (linking Delhi, Kolkata, Chennai
and Mumbai) and the East-West and North-South Corridors. The project will finance the
upgrading of a 482 km national highway stretch between Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh and
Muzaffarpur, Bihar on the East-West Corridor.

A.3. Project Description

Highway upgrading: The national highway sections proposed for upgrading to 4-lane
divided carriageway under the project are all located along a 513 km continuous stretch
between Lucknow and Muzzafarpur along the East-West Corridor in the states of Uttar
Pradesh and Bihar. The project includes improving the existing two lane carriageway
through construction of two additional lanes, rehabilitation of existing carriageway, as
well as the construction of necessary railway over-bridges, flyovers, service lanes,
pedestrian over/under bridges, junction improvements, cross drainage structures and
safety/noise barriers. The loan will also finance new short bypasses at Ayodhya,
Barabanki, Ramsanehighat and Katra Chowk.

        The route is divided into five homogenous sections: (i) Lucknow-Ayodhya (126
km); (ii) Ayodhya-Gorakhpur (117 km); (iii) Gorakhpur-Gopalganj (106 km); (iv)
Gopalganj-Muzaffarpur (134 km), and (v) Gorakhpur Bypass (40 km). The civil works
for the first four sections (total 483 km) are to be financed by the Bank, while the
Gorakhpur Bypass will be financed by the GOI. As the Gorakhpur Bypass is considered
an integral part of the stretch between Lucknow and Muzaffarpur, its EA and RAP has
been prepared and will be implemented in the same manner as for the rest of the project
financed by the Bank.

        The project is to be implemented by the National Highway Authority of India, a
statutory body mandated to develop, maintain and manage key portions of the national
highway network on behalf of the Government of India.


A.4. Project Location and Salient Physical Characteristics relevant to safeguard
analysis:

        The project is located on the National Highway 28, between Lucknow and
Muzaffarpur. NH28 is part of the East-West Corridor from Silchar in Assam in the north
east and Porbander in Gujarat on the west coast. The project road traverses 8 districts of
Uttar Pradesh (Lucknow, Barabanki, Gonda, Basti, Faizabad, Sant Kabir Nagar,
Gorakhpur and Deoria) and 3 districts of Bihar (Gopalganj, East Champaran and
Muzaffarpur). The population density in these two states (and all the 11 districts
traversed) is high, the economy primarily agricultural and the level of poverty very high.

        The highway lies below the lower periphery of the Terai ("lowlands", foothill
valleys of Eastern Himalayas), but no stretch of the highway is within 50 km of the Terai
Arc, which is one of the Global 200 eco-regions. The highway does not pass through any
national park or wildlife sanctuary. Protected areas close to the highway include Bakhira
Wildlife Sanctuary (18 km from the highway) Udaipur Bird Sanctuary (25 km) and
Valmiki National Park (40 km). There is only one stretch of Reserved Forests for about 1
km along the road in Uttar Pradesh. The Bihar section of the highway is located in the
flood plains of several rivers and is currently overtopped frequently by seasonal floods.

        The highway passes very close to the World Heritage site of Kushinagar. These
2,500 year old Buddhist excavations at Kushinagar are about 400 m away from the
highway. The highway bypasses Ayodhya-Faizabad, which are historical settlements and
major pilgrimage centers. Devasharif Dargah (25 km from the highway) and Gorakhnath

Math (10 km from the highway) are also important religious places.




B. Check Environmental Category A [X], B [ ], C [ ], FI [ ]

Comments: The project has been categorized as `A' considering the socio- economic
impacts , important heritage sites and cultural properties along the highway. Most of the
environmental impacts are local and reversible, and can be mitigated and managed
through good environmental management practices. Important cultural properties, like
the World Heritage Site in Kushinagar will be protected and enhanced where feasible.

C. Safeguard Policies Triggered

                                                                        Yes                        No

Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                                [X]                        [ ]

Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            [ ]                      [X]

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                [ ]                      [X]

Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03-)                          [X]                        [ ]

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                   [X]                        [ ]

Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                             [ ]                      [X]

Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      []                      [X]

Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              [ ]                      [X]

Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                              [ ]                      [X]

Projects on International Waterways
                                                                         [ ]                      [X]
(OP/BP/GP 7.50)




*
 By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties'
claims on the disputed areas

Section II ­ Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management

D. Summary of Key Safeguards Issues.

D.1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

Environment Assessment (OP 4.01): The main environmental issues in the project are:
(i) unavoidable felling of a large number of roadside trees (about 74,000), (ii) impairment
to or worsening of the local and regional drainage and flood situations, if the road works
are not properly designed and built, (iii) unavoidable conversion of some fertile
agricultural land to right of way and road carriageway, (iv) the potential for poorly
planned or managed development induced by the improved highway, especially close to
important sites like Kushinagar, (v) possible impacts on aquatic flora and fauna in the
rivers and rivulets that the project highway traverses, and (vi) construction related
temporary impacts such as dust from the haul roads, pollution from the plants and
machinery. . These potential impacts will be avoided, minimized and/or mitigated
through sound management practices as detailed in the Environmental Management
Plans. Community resources that are impacted will be either shifted or re-built to a
better condition than before the project, with local communities encouraged to commit to
their upkeep. On the positive side, a large section of the highway will use a very
significant quantity of fly ash from nearby thermal power plants in embankment
construction; and a number of roadside community assets and environmental resources
will be enhanced by the project.

Involuntary Resettlement (OP4.12). The project road passes through a total of 527
villages and 12 districts in two states, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. The project includes by-
passes at Ayodhaya (12.4 km), Katra Chowk which is a junction of SH and NH (minor
realignment), Barabanki (11.7 km) and Ram Sanehighat (7.6 km). Since the legal ROW
varies between 18 - 90 meters, additional land will be acquired to meet the design
specifications - 401 ha of private land will be acquired and 41 ha will be transferred from
other government departments. The land acquisition and affects on structures, both of
titleholders and non-titleholders, will have an adverse impact on 33,880 families totaling
about 150,000 people. Approximately 6,998 families will be displaced, out of which
1,352 will become landless1. Incomes of affected families will be significantly affected
by the loss of agriculture land and access to commercial activities (See Annex 10 for
further details).

Cultural Property (OPN 11.03): The project traverses an area of rich history, and
potentially involves impacts on archaeological chance finds, particularly near the heritage
sites of Ayodhya-Faizabad, Gorakhpur and Kushinagar. Kushinagar, a World Heritage
site, is 400 meters from the highway.




1Final figures will be available by negotiations as the joint verification is almost complete.

        In summary, there will be no significant and irreversible environmental impacts as
a result of the project. However, this is a large project that has impacts on a large
number of people which will require careful management.

D.2 Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.

        No adverse long-term environmental impact is anticipated due to future activities
on the highway. Due to road improvements, it is anticipated that some local drainage
problems will be resolved, and road safety would be improved. However, substantial
land and property development is expected to follow from the highway improvement.
Poor management of this development may create negative impacts in the medium term,
by way of additional stress on natural resources or by encouraging ribbon development.
Co-ordination is essential with the Archaeological Departments during construction and
operation periods to ensure that sites like Kushinagar benefit from an increased tourist
flow while being protected from adverse impacts of improvements to the road close to the
site.

D.3. Describe the treatment of alternatives

        This project will widen the highway largely along the existing alignment only.
Route alternatives have only been investigated for short by-passes at Ayodya, Barabanki,
Ramsanehigat and Katra Chowk where technical, cost, social and environmental
considerations were all factored into the decision on the final alignment. For the rest of
the project, during the detailed feasibility studies and the EA and SIA, several cross-
sectional, structural and geometric design alternatives were considered. The factors
which have influenced the designs of various components of the road improvements
include resettlement, tree cutting, loss of arable land vis-à-vis the traffic-carrying
performance of the highway, and impacts on cultural properties. As far as feasible,
concentric widening has been adopted in the built up stretches to minimize impacts on
properties and land acquisition.

D.4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

Environmental Assessment OP 4.01: The borrower has carried out a detailed EA, and
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) have been prepared for each contract package.
The EMPs include mitigation and enhancement measures for all identified impacts, and
form a part of the construction contract documents. About 630,000 trees are to be
planted in forest blocks or within the Right of Way (ROW). An independent review of
the EA has been carried out and its finding have been incorporated in the appropriate
documents.

Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12: The borrower has prepared an Resettlement and
Rehabilitation (R&R) entitlement framework that covers all project affected people. The
framework addresses the nature of entitlements to be given to titleholders and non-

titleholders, including for affected sharecroppers, squatters, and vulnerable encroachers.
A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has been prepared which is consistent with the R&R
entitlement framework for the project. Resettlement will be necessary where residential
and/or commercial buildings will be fully demolished or made uninhabitable.
Rehabilitation will help improve or restore the standard of living of affected persons.
The RAP provides free plots for those willing to settle at resettlement sites and alternate
arrangements for others losing shelter. It also includes provisions for relocation of
common property resources and enhancement of existing structures. Effective preventive
plans for raising awareness on sexually transmitted disease, facilitating convergence of
national and state health programs and road safety awareness will be implemented
through contracting with suitable NGOs over the life of the project.

Cultural Property OPN 11.03: Although no protected monuments will be directly
impacted, detailed plans have been prepared to safeguard important locations such as
Kushinagar, smaller affected temples and other common property resources that have
been identified during the EA to be culturally significant. The measures include
construction management practices as well as environmental enhancements. These
measures have been included in the EMPs which will be incorporated into the contract
documents.

Borrower Capacity: This is the fourth Bank loan being made to a national highway
project being implemented by the NHAI. NHAI's safeguard management capacity has
developed to respond to the Bank's policies with increasing efficiency. NHAI had the
safeguard instruments for this project independently reviewed to ensure that these
conformed to the Bank's policies. The Authority is also in the process of getting an
Environmental Management System established for its entire organization reflecting the
increased importance it attaches to these key aspects of its operation.


D.5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Key Stakeholders. There are various stakeholders such as project affected people, non-
government organizations, district administration, officials from line departments, local
political representatives and others in the project area. The project has conducted
consultation with all stakeholders at different stages of project preparation and this
consultation will continue during implementation.

Methodology: The different methods of consultation utilized included door-to-door
personal interviews, village meetings, focus group discussions, and consultation with
experts and NGOs working in the area. At the village level, group discussions with
different social communities and especially women and other vulnerable groups were
also included. Workshops were also held at the district level to co-ordinate with line
agencies and important government departments.

Preparation stage consultations: Consultations began early in project preparation. These
were focused on potentially directly affected persons seeking to appraise them about the
proposed project and to identify social issues. Extensive discussions have been held at
the local level to finalize alignments for by-passes, widening along existing alignment,

location of underpasses / overpasses, median openings as well as determining the
requirement for service lanes. Consultations have continued with other line departments
such as Revenue and state Public Works Department to seek support through available
documents to establish the legal right of way and preparing land acquisition plans.
Furthermore, consultations have been held regarding entitlements for resettlement and
rehabilitation appropriate for affected and displaced people. The consultations have also
helped in finalizing income generation activities suitable to the skills and market
opportunities in the project area. The Executive Summary, translated into the local
language, has been available in the project affected districts in places accessible to the
public such as village panchayats, municipalities, district libraries, project offices, and
other places.

Implementation: During implementation of the safeguard instruments, the borrower will
conduct workshops to build further consensus on disbursement mechanisms of assistance,
relocation of displaced, common property resources, restoration of livelihood and on
other issues. The mechanisms to carry out these consultations are detailed in the
instruments.

F. Disclosure

Requirements                                                    Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:

Date of receipt by the Bank                                     02/24/2004

Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 03/15/2004

Date of submission to InfoShop                                  02/26/2004

For category A projects, Date of distributing the

Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors          02/28/2004

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:

Date of receipt by the Bank                                     02/24/2004

Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 03/15/2004

Date of submission to InfoShop                                  02/26/2004

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:

Date of receipt by the Bank                                     Not Applicable

Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 Not Applicable

Date of submission to InfoShop                                  Not Applicable

Pest Management Plan:

Date of receipt by the Bank                                     Not Applicable

Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 Not Applicable

Date of submission to InfoShop                                  Not Applicable

Dam Safety Management Plan:

Date of receipt by the Bank                                     Not Applicable

Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 Not Applicable

Date of submission to InfoShop                                  Not Applicable

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not
expected, please explain why.

N/a

Section III - Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (To be filled
in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment:                        Yes       No

                Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including
                                                                             X
                EMP) report?

                If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review
                                                                             X
                and approve the EA report?

                Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP
                                                                             X
                incorporated in the credit/loan?

                OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats:                              Yes       No

                Would the project result in any significant conversion
                                                                                      NA
                or degradation of critical natural habitats?

                If the project would result in significant conversion or
                degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats,
                does the project include mitigation measures
                acceptable to the Bank?

                OP 4.09 - Pest Management:                                  Yes       No

                Does the EA adequately address the pest management
                                                                                      NA
                issues?

                Is a separate PMP required?

                If yes, are PMP requirements included in project
                design?

                Draft OP 4.11 (OPN 11.03) - Cultural Property:              Yes       No

                Does the EA include adequate measures?                       X

                Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to
                mitigate the potential adverse impacts on physical           X
                cultural resources?

                OD 4.20 - Indigenous Peoples:                               Yes       No

                Has a separate indigenous people development plan
                been prepared in consultation with the Indigenous
                People?

                If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit
                review and approve the plan?

                If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the
                design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
                Social Development Unit?

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement:                      Yes    No

Has a resettlement action plan, policy framework or
                                                            X
policy process been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit
review and approve the plan / policy framework /            X
policy process?

OP/BP 4.36 ­ Forests:                                       Yes    No

Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional
                                                                   NA
issues and constraints been carried out?

Does the project design include satisfactory measures
                                                                   NA
to overcome these constraints?

Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
                                                                   NA
so, does it include provisions for certification system?

OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams:                                Yes    No

Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               NA

Have the TORs as well as composition for the
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed
and approved by the Bank?

Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?

OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways:              Yes    No

Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             NA

If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the
notification requirement, then has this been cleared
with the Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP
prepared and sent?

What are the reasons for the exception?

    Please explain:

Has the RVP approved such an exception?

OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas:                       Yes    No

Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on
the international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations                 NA
for dealing with the issue, been prepared, cleared with
the Legal Department and sent to the RVP?

Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the OP?

BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure:                                                    Yes No

Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's         X
Infoshop?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form    X
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?

All Safeguard Policies:                                                          Yes No

Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been X
prepared for the implementation of the safeguard measures?

Have safeguard measures costs been included in project cost?                     X

Will the safeguard measures costs be funded as part of project                   X
implementation?

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the             X
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures?

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the               X
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?

Signed and submitted by:

Task Team Leader:                 Piers Vickers

Project Safeguards Specialist 1:  Mridula Singh

Project Safeguards Specialist 2:  Sonia Sandhu
                                  Chand

Project Safeguards Specialist 3:  Tapas Paul

Approved by:

Regional Safeguards Coordinator:

Comments:

Sector Manager:

Comments:

