                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                   APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                          Report No.: 95968

Date prepared/updated: April 20, 2015

I. Basic Information
1. Basic Project Data

Country                      India                 Project ID                       P154990
Project Name                 Jhelum and Tawi Flood Recovery Project (P154990)
Task Team Leader             Saurabh Suresh Dani
Estimated Board Date         May 29, 2015
Managing Unit                GSURR                 Lending Instrument               IPF
                             General transportation sector (38%), General Water, Sanitation and Flood
Sector(s)
                             Protection Sector (28%), Health (22%), General Education Sector (12%)
Theme(s)                     Natural disaster management (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00
                                                                        Yes
(Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Project Financing Data (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost            250.00                     Total Bank Financing       250.00
Financing Gap:                -
   Financing Source                                      Amount
   Borrower/Recipient                                    0.00
   International Development Association (IDA)           250.00
Total                                                    250.00
Environmental Category B - Partial Assessment
Is this a Repeater           No
project?
Is this a Transferred        No
project?
2. Project Objectives

The project development objective is to support the recovery and increase disaster resilience in targeted
areas of the Project Implementing Entity, and increase the capacity of the Project Implementing Entity
to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible crisis or emergency

3. Project Description

Based on the Rapid Post-Disaster Damage and Needs Assessment results, restoration works underway,
and discussions with the government, the project will focus on restoring critical infrastructure using
international best practice on resilient infrastructure. Given the region’s vulnerability to both floods and
earthquakes, the infrastructure will be designed with upgraded resilient features, and will include
contingency planning for future disaster events. Therefore, the project aims at both restoring essential



                                               Page 1 of 15
services disrupted by the floods and improving the design standard and practices in the state to increase
resilience.
Project Components. The project has seven components: (i) Reconstruction and strengthening of
critical infrastructure (US$60 million); (ii) Reconstruction of roads and bridges (US$80 million); (iii)
Restoration of urban flood management infrastructure (US$50 million); (iv) Restoration and
strengthening of livelihoods (US$15 million); (v) Strengthening disaster risk management capacity
(US$25 million); (vi) Contingent Emergency Response (US$0 million); and (vii) Implementation
Support (US$20 million).
Component 1 – Reconstruction and Strengthening of Critical Infrastructure
The objective of this component is to support the reconstruction/restoration of damaged public
buildings, such as hospitals, schools, higher education buildings, fire stations, and selected block and
district offices, and other important public buildings. It will include the restoration of partially damaged
structures and the reconstruction of fully damaged structures, including equipment and furniture.
The component will finance infrastructure and equipment damaged by the disaster, and improvements
to current structures to increase resilience. Assessments will be carried out to determine the extent of
structural integrity and retrofitting/reconstruction needs. For hospitals, the reconstruction will be
focused on replacement of damaged specialized medical equipment, setting up specialized equipment
on higher levels which will entail strengthening the structural integrity of buildings in order to be able
to sustain the heavy load. For some hospitals, special diagnostics and pathology sections/extensions
will be built since existing structures will be unable to sustain the load of heavy equipment on higher
levels. Some older hospitals will also require retrofitting in order to ensure seismic resistance. The
component will also finance the repair and reconstruction of damaged higher education, fire station, and
other public buildings, including the procurement of equipment/furniture, etc.
Component 2 – Reconstruction of Roads and Bridges
The objective of this component is to restore and improve the connectivity disrupted due to the disaster
through the reconstruction of damaged roads and bridges. The infrastructure will be designed to
withstand earthquake and flood forces as per the latest official design guidelines. The affected areas
will benefit by the restored access to the markets thereby increasing the economic growth in these areas
and timely access to health and education services. Restoration of roads will also serve as supply/rescue
lines in the event of disaster.
The component will finance support the reconstruction of about 300km of damaged roads and
associated drainage works, retaining walls, breast walls and other structures to increase resilience. It
will also finance the restoration and improvement of about 40 damaged bridges, designed to be seismic
resilient (per the guidelines of the Bureau of Indian Standards) and with regard to topography and
hydrology (per the guidelines of the Indian Roads Congress, the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways), and projected demographic changes.
Component 3 – Restoration of Urban Flood Management Infrastructure
The objective of this component is to strengthen and reinforce existing weak and vulnerable flood
control infrastructure. Investments will primarily include rehabilitation/renovation of storm water
pumping stations in Srinagar city, and replacement of the power equipment, switch/ panel boards at
elevated places, and related investments for improvement and increased resilience
Component 4 – Restoration and Strengthening of Livelihoods
The flood resulted in damage to infrastructure and assets such as workshops, stores, tools, raw material,
and finished product stocks, which severely impacted non-farm livelihood in urban centers. In addition
to the direct impact on livelihood, the sector is an important contributor to tourism in the region. This
component will support:
Subcomponent 4.1 - Restoration of physical and productive assets. To finance the restoration of the
training workshop and display building within the premises of the main handicraft & handloom market


                                               Page 2 of 15
in Srinagar and the School of Design, as well as damaged productive assets in livelihood training
institutions and affected craftsman families.
Subcomponent 4.2 -Technical assistance for risk proofing non-farm livelihood. To finance: i)
vulnerability assessment of non-farm livelihoods and to identify opportunities for increased resilience;
and ii) developing options to increase access to finance and insurance for non-farm livelihood
Component 5 – Strengthening Disaster Risk Management Capacity
The objective of this component is to enhance the capabilities of government entities in managing
disaster risks, enhancing preparedness, and achieving resilient recovery. This component will entail the
following:
Sub-component 5.1: Capacity building for disaster management (US$17 million). To finance
strengthening of the disaster management systems in the state by augmenting the capacity of
stakeholders and institutions. The activities will include: i) capacity building of the state disaster
management authority by strengthening its institutional and organizational structure, staffing, and
resources and funding of training programs and regular drills for the emergency operations center staff
and Disaster Management Officers at the district and higher government levels; ii) setting up and
capacitating the Disaster Response Force, and upgrading capacity of their services; iii) setting up a
Decision Support System (DSS) and Emergency Operation Centers to integrate and analyze
information from multiple sources in an integrated geo-spatial system.
Sub-component 5.2: Technical assistance for risk reduction and response preparedness (US$8 million).
To finance activities such as: i) preparation of a Hydro-meteorological Resilience Action Plan focusing
on extreme weather events to develop resilience solutions/recommendations and a robust, fail-safe
EWS in the region including optimum use of strengthened networks and facilities; ii) River
Morphology Study for some key rivers impacted by the disaster and to analyze and identify critical
protective infrastructure works needed for river bank strengthening; iii) Urban vulnerability assessment
study with specific focus on seismic risk mitigation to undertake detailed urban vulnerability analysis
and model various risks for effective mitigation planning and disaster response preparedness; iv)
Upgrading design guidelines and material specification for construction in seismic zones in order to
carry out an update of current construction design standards and material specifications to align them
with national and international best practices; v) Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance (DRFI) to work
out options to increase the resilience of the government’s financial response capacity to secure cost-
effective access to adequate funding for emergency response, reconstruction, and recovery.
Component 6 – Contingent Emergency Response
Following an adverse natural event that causes a major natural disaster, the government may request the
Bank to re-allocate project funds to support response and reconstruction. This component would draw
resources from the unallocated expenditure category and/or allow the government to request the Bank
to re-categorize and reallocate financing from other project components to partially cover emergency
response and recovery costs. This component could also be used to channel additional funds should
they become available as a result of the emergency.
Component 7 – Implementation Support
This component would finance incremental operating costs of the Project, including the operation of the
Project Management Unit (PMU) and Project Implementation Units (PIUs). In addition, the component
will include consultancies required for the preparation and supervision of specific activities, trainings,
exposure visits and knowledge exchange programs, etc
Project Beneficiaries. The primary beneficiaries would be the communities in the districts that were
affected by loss of public service infrastructure that will be restored and improved under the project. By
strengthening disaster risk management systems and institutions, the project will benefit the entire
affected region.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to safeguard analysis


                                               Page 3 of 15
The project activities will be implemented in twenty two (22) districts affected by floods in Jhelum and
Tawi rivers in Srinagar and Jammu regions. According to Census of India - 2011, the flood affected
region has a population of 12.5 million, with a density of 56 persons per sq.km and a sex ratio of 883
females per 1,000 men. The literacy level is 67.16 per cent with men having a literacy rate of 76.75 per
cent, while female literacy is 49.12 per cent.
The region is basically agrarian. Agriculture occupies an important place in the economy of the region
whereby nearly 70 per cent of the population derives their livelihood directly or indirectly from the
sector. In addition, this is also a tourist and pilgrimage destination. Every year, more than 10 million
tourists visit the region, a majority of who are religious pilgrims visiting the holy shrines of Vaishno
Devi, Amarnath, Hazratbal shrine and the Buddhist monasteries of Ladakh.
The region, owing to its geographical and geo-climatic setting, is a multi-hazard prone region that has
experienced natural disasters like earthquakes, floods, landslides, avalanches, high velocity winds, and
snowstorms. Most parts of the Srinagar Valley and northern districts fall in Seismic Zone V. The rest of
the southern districts fall in the Seismic Zone IV. Floods and flash floods are also frequent. Floods
generally occur in the summer when heavy rains are followed by snowmelt. Flooding of the river
Jhelum is the main cause of floods. Floods also occur occasionally in Jammu and neighboring districts.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra, Senior Environment Specialist, GENDR
Satya N. Mishra, Social Development Specialist, GSURR

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered


                Safeguard Policies Triggered                         Yes          No          TBD

Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                 

Specific interventions envisaged under the project such as those for strengthening of critical
infrastructure, road transportation, flood control and restoration of livelihoods may have some
potential adverse environmental impacts in the project area. Such impacts will depend upon the
location, nature and magnitude of interventions. Identification of sub-projects and their
environmental screening will help identify possible environmental impacts.
OP 4.01 has been triggered to facilitate creation/strengthening of mechanisms whereby sub-projects
can be planned, designed and maintained in an environmentally sound manner through integration of
appropriate approaches into the over-all decision making process of the project.

Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                         

While the proposed project interventions are not likely to cause significant conversion or damage to
natural habitats, OP 4.04 has been triggered for this operation. The proposed activities such as
reconstruction of roads and bridges, and flood management infrastructure might have impacts on
natural habitats, flora and fauna and the local natural ecosystem. Activities such as strengthening of
existing embankments, channel improvements, dredging and other activities might have potential
impacts on surrounding natural habitats. Management measures, particularly diligence in appropriate
site selection would also be required for avoiding/minimizing disturbances, particularly during the
planning and design stage.

Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                  

OP 4.36 has been triggered for this project as some interventions are envisaged in/around forest
areas. Activities envisaged under the project include, but not limited to, minor realignment of roads

                                              Page 4 of 15
                 Safeguard Policies Triggered                           Yes          No          TBD

and change of bridge locations may result in impact on adjoining forest area/s.

While no significant conversion/degradation of this natural resource is expected to occur, screening
mechanism that has been formulated for the project enables in early identification of such issues.
Based on the screening result, site assessment and the availability of alternative sub-project site/s,
further decision about inclusion/exclusion of a specific sub-project/s will be made. No commercial
logging will be supported under the project.

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                            
OP 4.09 is not being triggered for this project as biological/environmental control methods or
reliance on synthetic chemical pesticides is not envisaged.

Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                
The implementation of the project/program is not likely to affect religious structures of local
significance or other physical cultural resources. Impacts, if any would be addressed through
appropriate design interventions. Since some civil works are involved, ‘chance finds’ at work sites is
a likely impact that has to be managed through appropriate provisions in the relevant (safeguards as
well as bidding) documents.

Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          

OP 4.10 is triggered in view of the presence of tribal groups in Rajouri district affected by floods.

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                    
OP 4.12 is triggered keeping in view of the likelihood of IR impacts emerging out of civil works such
as roads, bridges and public buildings proposed to be built as a part of the project.

Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                          
OP 4.37 is not being triggered for this project as there is no construction of new dams or activities
that are concerned with safe functioning of existing dams.

Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-                                   
Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
   describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project will target areas that were hit hardest by the devastating floods in the state. Given the
magnitude of damage caused by flooding and associated landslides, the project is designed to provide
reconstruction and recovery support to affected areas in which public infrastructure and service delivery
were impacted severely. It is expected that it will yield benefits and livelihood opportunities through
provision of high priority reconstruction and rehabilitation of public infrastructure in the worst affected
areas of the state in addition to enhancing state’s capacity in dealing with future disasters.
The major activities proposed to be financed under the project include: (i) reconstruction and
strengthening of public buildings such as schools and hospital infrastructure, (ii) reconstruction of roads

                                               Page 5 of 15
and bridges, (iii) restoration of urban flood infrastructure, (iv) restoration and strengthening of
livelihoods, (v) strengthening disaster risk management capacity, (vi) contingency emergency response,
and (vii) project management support.
Environment Issues/Impacts: Interventions proposed under Components 1, 2 and 3 have a bearing on
the approach and design of environment management and safeguard aspects of the project. While the
project is expected to benefit the flood affected communities through restoration of infrastructure and
strengthening of disaster risk management capabilities of the state, the proposed investments are likely
to generate some adverse environmental impacts. Since the proposed activities/works would be largely
carried out in the environmentally sensitive mountainous terrain of the state that is marked by various
degrees of vulnerability and ecological features, there are some issues and risks that need to be
managed through appropriate planning and upfront care during the sub-project selection and
preparation phase. Specifically, due diligence during site selection and appropriate engineering/design
is required for most sub-projects/activities owing to the challenges emanating from difficult terrain and
climatic conditions.
Potential adverse impacts on account of activities/works proposed under Components 1 to 3 of the
project may include: (i) direct/indirect environmental and social impacts resulting from poor site
selection and inappropriate engineering/designs; (ii) impact on the drainage pattern of the area,
including risks from future flood events; (iii) felling of trees and clearance of vegetation for sub-project
construction; (iv) impact on certain/specific fauna (outside the protected areas, including habitats;
nesting/breeding areas; movement zone); (v) safety and health concerns for general public from
construction activities; (vi) occupational health and safety concerns for workers involved in
construction; (vii) inconvenience and temporary disruption to services and access to certain public
places and facilities; (viii) impacts due to construction material (sand, water, earth, aggregate) sourcing
and transportation; (ix) concerns arising out of improper disposal of debris and other construction
wastes and; (x) slope fragility and stabilization issues.
No long term, adverse or irreversible impacts are anticipated as the proposed activities are largely
associated with reconstruction and strengthening of flood damaged infrastructure. In view of the
potential impacts on the environment, Bank’s OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment, OP 4.04 on
Natural Habitats, OP 4.36 on Forests and OP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources have been triggered,
and the project is designated as Category B.
Social Issues: The damaged public buildings including schools and hospitals will be reconstructed
within the existing premises. The reconstruction and strengthening of the affected rural roads, bridges
and urban flood infrastructure, to be carried out within the existing alignments, may occasionally
involve some involuntary resettlement impacts on land owners, lease holders, traditional occupiers, and
squatters. Therefore, OP 4.12 has been triggered.
OP 4.10 has been triggered in view of the presence of scheduled tribe groups (mostly nomadic Gujjar
cattle herdsmen) living in the flood affected districts such as Rajouri where some of the activities are
likely to be undertaken.
The project with its support for restoring the affected livelihoods of the artisans and weavers will
benefit positively poor and vulnerable households engaged in craft based income activities mostly in
rural areas.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
   the project area.

The long-term impacts will be generally positive as the project will help in rebuilding the damaged
public buildings such as schools and hospitals apart from roads, bridges and urban flood control
infrastructure reducing the vulnerability of the people from similar disasters. This will stimulate or
bring economic and social development in the flood affected areas. Most significantly, the reduction in
the vulnerability of the affected communities in the state to the adverse impacts of floods and other
climate related hazards would be a desirable long term impact.


                                               Page 6 of 15
The restoration of livelihoods through replacement of damaged assets and infrastructure will benefit the
artisan households affected by the floods. This intervention is likely to minimize impoverishment risks
of this income groups which has lost raw materials, equipment and finished products due to the floods
in September 2014. Improvement in urban flood infrastructure would reduce the exposure of people to
hazardous environmental conditions caused due to drainage problems and urban flooding.
Further, the experience gained during the project implementation may help the implementing agencies
to address environmental and social issues more systematically in their regular operations. The project ’s
treatment of environmental and social issues specifically with regard to the approach used for screening
sub-projects can set an important precedent for non-project activities/areas now and in the future.
At the same time, long-term/indirect adverse environmental and social impacts may result if road and
flood control infrastructure are designed and/or implemented without due considerations to local
environmental and social features.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
   impacts.

Most of the project interventions are related to restoration/reconstruction of damaged infrastructure,
facilities and public spaces, albeit with an attempt of building better and more resilient assets/systems,
wherever possible. Since this is an emergency operation and specific locations and sub-projects have
not yet been chosen,
The appropriate selection of a site for a sub-project plays an important role in minimizing the overall
adverse impact of the disasters economically, environmentally or socially. This is an emergency
operation and specific activities to be undertaken under this project have not been identified as yet,
though the key sectors of intervention have been agreed upon. The key activities proposed to be
undertaken as a part of this project, namely reconstruction of public buildings, restoration and
strengthening of damaged roads, bridges and urban flood control infrastructure will be carried out in-
situ. While preparing specific activities, project alternatives and implementation methodologies shall be
decided upon in line with provisions set forth and agreed in the ESMF.
A detailed or limited environmental impact assessment study (as the case may be depending on findings
from the screening exercise) may be required for specific sub-projects/activities. These sub-projects
will undergo an analysis of alternatives, especially in terms of their proposed location and/or design as
required under standard EA practice. For sub-projects requiring regulatory clearances, alternative site/s
will be explored, and for those with no viable alternatives, permissions will be sought in line with
regulatory requirements.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
   assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

Environmental and Social Management and Safeguards Instrument: In order to ensure effective
environmental management in a scenario where multiple sub-projects/activities are proposed at
different locations across the state and their specific locations are not known (at this stage of project
preparation), an approach involving preparation, application and implementation of an Environment
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been adopted for the project. It includes: (a)
Environment and Social Screening approach and methodology; (b) Environment and Social Assessment
for certain type of sub-projects, if and as necessary (determined by the screening results); (c) guidelines
and generic management measures for all category of works/activities proposed under the project.

Environment Management and Safeguards
The EMF serves as a comprehensive and a systematic guide covering policies, procedures and
provisions, which will be integrated in the over-all project cycle to ensure that the environmental
concerns/issues are systematically identified and integrated into the project/sub-project cycle. It will
guide the integration of environment, health and safety aspects within the decision making and
implementation process of various sub-projects/activities. It will also support compliance with

                                               Page 7 of 15
applicable laws and regulations of GoI and the state government apart from meeting the requirements of
the relevant Bank policies.
In line with Bank policy requirements, the EMF provides clarity on the following: (i) policy triggers for
the project; (ii) the screening criteria to be used for sub-project identification and selection; (iii) list out
comprehensively a range of likely environmental impacts for the various types of works/activities
envisaged under the project and; (iv) applicable national/state policy and regulatory requirements; (v)
the measures to mitigate the identified environmental risks/issues; (vi) assessment of the institutional
capacity of the implementing agency and measures for filling capacity gaps; and (vii) an estimate of the
budget needed for the implementation of the EMF and related instruments. The EMF provides a list of
activities that cannot be financed, and screen out activities that correspond to Category A projects, or
that may trigger additional safeguards policies.
To avoid, minimize and mitigate adverse impacts, generic/standard activity-specific Environmental
Management Plans (EMPs) have been developed, which form a part of the EMF. Activity-specific
EMPs will help in addressing various construction and operation-stage impacts. However, critical
environmental issues, which may result on account of improper site selection (an important factor of
consideration in an ecologically sensitive hilly terrain), would be considerably avoided and/or
minimized by effectively using results from the Environment Screening Exercise. This will ensure that
no sub-project with the likely possibility of creating significant or irreversible adverse impact on
environment is taken-up without a proper study (environment assessment/analysis). Accordingly, sub-
projects or activities without significant or irreversible adverse impacts will be selected for investment
under Phase I while others, which are located in/close to environmentally sensitive zones will be either
dropped from the project scope or will be considered only after duly completing the required
assessment/s. This over-all environment management approach for the project has been elaborated
below and will include the following key steps:
(i)   The sub-projects will be selected after detailed/appropriate level of assessment, including
      consultation with concerned key stakeholders. However, any activity/work having significant
      adverse, irreversible and long term impacts will be excluded from the scope of the project. For
      this, after identification of proposed works, an Environment Screening Exercise using well-
      established methodology and process will be carried out.
(ii) Environment screening, which helps in early identification of key environmental issues at the sub-
     project level. The screening process forms the first step in the environment management process
     for the project and will be carried out in parallel with the project identification/engineering
     feasibility studies for the sub-projects under consideration for inclusion in the project. Proposed
     investments will be screened and sub-projects with no significant adverse environmental impact
     would be identified for implementation under the project.
(iii) If required, for specific sub-projects/activities (as identified from the screening results), an
      Environment Assessment (EA) and sub-project specific Environment Management Plan (EMP)
      will be prepared in accordance to Bank’s OP 4.01. The EA will include an assessment of baseline
      conditions, analysis of alternative options, assessment of potential impacts, identification of
      mitigation measures and preparation of sub-project specific environmental management plans.
(iv) Based on screening results, if a sub-project does not require an EA, the generic/standard activity-
     specific EMP, developed as part of the EMF, will apply. These generic/standard activity-specific
     EMPs provide over-all guidance on avoidance, minimization and mitigation measures to be
     adopted during the planning/selection, design, implementation and operation stages of a sub-
     project.
(v) Integration of Environmental Requirements in Bidding Documents. The considerations/
    requirements will be mainstreamed as part of the over-all decision making and execution process.
    For environment, health and safety requirements to be followed by the Contractor during
    construction, the requirements in form of conditions/specifications will be integrated into the
    Bidding Documents and Bills of Quantities (as required/relevant) will be provided for.
The EMF describes institutional arrangements, including roles and responsibilities of various players

                                                 Page 8 of 15
and monitoring requirements, required for effectively managing the environmental aspects of project
planning and execution. Also, mid-term and end-term project assessment/evaluation will be undertaken
by the PMU and the report will be shared with the Bank.

Social Safeguards Management

Safeguards Framework Preparation: A Social Management Framework (SMF) has been prepared as
per the Bank requirements, and the Client has disclosed the said document incorporating the comments
provided by the Bank. The client has no experience of having implemented a project recently by
applying Bank’s safeguard policies. However, it has experience in managing social safeguards in
infrastructure projects implemented with financial support from the Asian Development Bank (ADB).
The Social Management Framework (SMF) prepared for the JTFRP includes a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF), an Indigenous People’s Development Framework (IPDF) and Gender Equity and
Social Inclusion (GESI) Guidelines. The RPF sets out principles and procedures for carrying out social
screening, and preparing and implementing Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) based on safeguards
categorization during screening.
 The IPDF (i) lays down identifying and addressing IP related impacts through social screening, (ii)
records consultations carried out for the project, (iii) sets out a framework for free, prior, and informed
consultations with the primary stakeholders including the tribal people for implementing sub-projects,
(iv) charts out specific strategies for ensuring that positive benefits are delivered to the tribal groups
living in project area by addressing their socio-economic needs in a culturally sensitive manner and
through their participation, and (iv) measures to mitigate adverse impacts, if any, compliant with Bank
safeguards policy. The GESI guidelines set out actions to be taken to ensure equal participation of
women and men beneficiaries without discrimination and recommend actions for targeting women and
vulnerable people with better outreach.
Existing Legal and Policy Framework: The recently legislated Right to Fair Compensation and
Transparency in LA and Resettlement and Rehabilitation Act of India (RFCT-LARRA, 2013) is yet to
be ratified by the Provincial Government. The Project Implementing Entity’s Land Acquisition (LA)
Act (1990) sets out procedure for compulsory land acquisition, which is not at par with the RFCT-
LARR, 2013 in terms of the compensation package offered. However, the procedure under Section 19-
20 of the Client’s LA Act (1990) Rules allow “Acquisition through Private Negotiations? providing
“replacement value? as agreed with the affected land/lease owner through a high powered negotiations
committee headed by the Deputy Commissioner of the concerned district and including the Member of
the Legislative Assembly. Land acquisition is carried out through special LA-Collectors assigned the
responsibility at the district and specific project areas. The provincial government has established no
generic Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy, however, has promulgated R&R Policies for specific
projects including those aided by the Asian Development Bank (ADB). The provincial government has
in place specific legislations, polices, and schemes for protection and welfare of the scheduled tribes,
women, children, and other vulnerable groups.
Gender Equality and Social Inclusion: The project strongly emphasizes attention to gender equity
and social inclusion in the implementation process. The proposed livelihoods component will support
restoration and strengthening of about 10,000 artisans and weavers, about fifty percent of whom are
women. The Women Development Corporation of the State will be a key stakeholder in the
implementation process. The restoration of public buildings including schools and hospitals will pay
special attention to the needs and interests of vulnerable people including children, women, and aged,
physically challenged, and other socially marginalized and vulnerable groups. The proposed disaster
risk reduction initiatives will similarly focus on equal participation of and benefits for women, children,
and other vulnerable groups. The gender equity and social inclusion outcomes of the project shall be
monitored with key performance indicators specified in the Results Matrix.
Citizen Engagement Strategy: The key elements of the citizen engagement strategy for this operation
include the following: (i) suo motu disclosure of important project related information by the
government on its website and at the appropriate local level under section 4 of the Right to Information


                                               Page 9 of 15
Act and disclosure procedures agreed with the Bank, (ii) framework for consultation with the key
stakeholders including the scheduled tribes (IPs) during planning, design and implementation of all sub-
projects; (iii) ensuring free, prior, informed consultation with the Scheduled Tribe groups and their
representatives for obtaining broad community support as a part of preparation of specific sub-projects
relevant to that area; (iv) upgrading the established Grievance Redress Mechanisms (GRM) at PIU and
PMU levels to meet specific grievance redress requirements of this operation; (v) promoting
community based risk reduction initiatives with the participation of and networking with relevant
stakeholders including women, school children, youth, civil society organizations, and local bodies.
Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM). The established GRMs of the state and relevant PIUs shall be
upgraded with guidelines agreeable to the Bank as Senior and Field level GRMs at PMU and PIU
levels. In case of land acquisition, there is a multi-layered GRM with the LA-Collector, District
Collector, Revenue Divisional Commissioner, and Finance Commissioner (Department of Revenue)
responsible for hearing and resolving grievances relating to the award of compensation. The Committee
for Acquisition through Private Negotiations is constituted by the Deputy Collector of the concerned
District, elected Member of the Legislative Assembly, District Superintending Engineer, Executive
Engineer concerned, and District level officer of the intending department, and the Chairperson of the
relevant Notified Area Council. The Project will have district level GRMs will be the second level
GRM, chaired by the District Collector or her/his nominees, and PIU representatives. At the PMU level,
the Project Steering committee shall be the highest body to entertain and resolve appeals against
decisions of lower GRMs. The state has an online GRM helpline, which will also entertain grievances
related to the project.
Grievance Redress Service of the World Bank: Communities and individuals who believe that they
are adversely affected by a World Bank (WB) supported project such as this operation may also submit
complaints to the Grievance Redress Service (GRS) established by the World Bank. The GRS ensures
that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address project-related concerns. Project
affected communities and individuals may also submit their complaint to the WB’s independent
Inspection Panel, after having brought the complaint to the World Bank's attention through its GRS.
Information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank’s Grievance Redress Service is available
at http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. Information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank
Inspection Panel is available at www.inspectionpanel.org.

Institutional Capacity and Implementation Arrangements

Institutional Capacity: The client has limited previous experience in applying Bank’s safeguard
policies in development projects (previous Bank funded operations in the state were closed nearly 10
years back) but has some experience in implementing infrastructure projects supported by the Asian
Development Bank (ADB) for which it has in place an Environment Management Framework (EMF)
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), IPF, GAP and activity-specific RAPs, IPPs, GAPs and
Environment Management Plans (EMPs). To implement these instruments, it has established an SPV
called Economic Reconstruction Agency (ERA) supported by consultants.

Implementation Arrangements for the Project
A Project Steering Committee (SC) will be set up for the over-all strategic guidance and monitoring of
the project. It will be headed by the Chief Secretary and will comprise all concerned line departments,
and additionally the departments of Finance, Planning, Environment/Forests and Social Welfare. The
SC will formally approve the project investments and help coordinate the activities of various
departments, including in obtaining required approvals/clearances for the Project. This shall be done
through semi-annual review meetings, where the SC shall: (a) review the budget; (b) review progress
against the defined milestones; (c) review critical findings of the audit and evaluation reports and; (d)
provide such guidance, as it may deem necessary for the project.
A Project Management Unit (PMU), housed within the Relief & Rehabilitation Department (R&RD),
will be responsible for overall project management, coordination, and reporting, and for implementation
of Component 5. The PMU will also be responsible to carry out procurement of goods, services, and

                                              Page 10 of 15
small scale works for other components, with technical inputs from the relevant line departments. The
PMU will be responsible for:
   Overall project management and reporting.
   Coordination with PIUs and line departments in approval of designs, assisting the PIUs in
    preparation of: DPRs, bidding documents, tendering schedules, etc.
   Appointment of technical assistance consultants and other safeguards management support for the
    implementing agencies.
   Quality Assurance through third party audits.
   Maintaining MIS and Quarterly reporting.
   Progress reporting, financial management, monitoring and reporting.
   Implementation of Component 5.
   Ensuring compliance with agreed implementation procedures and other Bank requirements,
    including environment and social management activities.
   Grievance redress.
Three Project Implementation Units (PIUs) that will be set-up at the beginning of the project. During
project implementation, additional PIUs might be set-up depending on the volume of investments and
capacity. The three PIUs are: (i) Roads and Building Department (R&B), will be responsible for all
civil works under Components 1 and 2, and it will receive technical inputs from the Departments of
Health, Higher Education, Fire, and others as relevant depending on the nature of the civil works;
(ii) Srinagar Municipal Corporation (SMC) will be responsible for implementation of
Component 3 and it will be assisted by the Urban Environment Engineering Department
(UEED) for technical inputs and procurement of goods, works, and services in line with its
official responsibilities and capacity; and (iii) Industry & Commerce Department (I&CD) will
be responsible for implementation of Component 4 with support from other agencies.The PIUs
will be responsible for:
   Preparation of Detailed Project Reports including technical designs, surveys and investigations, etc.
   Tendering, bid evaluation, contract award, contract management, etc.
   Financial Management
   Environment/Social management and safeguards compliance.
   Progress and expense reporting to the PMU.
   Coordination with line departments for design, implementation, and hand-over arrangements.
   Grievance redress.
Line departments will provide technical inputs to the PIUs as relevant, in line with their sectoral
responsibility. In line with their capacity and, as agreed by the PMU and the respective PIU, they will
also carry out procurement of goods, works, and services.
Monitoring: The PMU will put in place a monitoring mechanism that includes photo identification and
geo-referenced tracking system for works. The PIUs will be responsible for feeding the required
information into the system.
Implementation and Quality Monitoring Arrangements for Safeguards

A Social and Environment Management Unit (SEMU) with Social Development and Environment
Specialists will be established as part of the Project Management Unit (PMU) for JTFRP. The PIUs will
have similar arrangement with social and environment specialists. The Client has proposed to establish
social and environment safeguards management capacity at the PMU and PIU levels with mobilizing
officers having relevant experience and skills.



                                              Page 11 of 15
The Client has initiated steps for appointing two of its officers earlier managing the Social
Development Unit and Environment Unit for the ADB funded project as its Social Development and
Environment Specialists at the PMU to be established at the Department of Relief and Rehabilitation
for this project. The PMC hired to support client in designing and implementing activities under this
project will have social and environment specialists. The PMU will hire social and environment
management consultants, as necessary, to carry out social and environment screening and impact
assessments, prepare and implement activity/sub-project specific safeguard instruments acceptable to
the Bank.
While the PMU and PIUs will be responsible for internal monitoring, the Project Implementation
Quality Audit Consultants will have social development and environmental expertise to provide
external monitoring support.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Stakeholders: The primary stakeholders include the intended beneficiaries and people affected by the
proposed activities – Project Beneficiaries including health facility users, school children, people using
the damaged roads and bridges planned to be reconstructed, city dwellers exposed to hazardous
conditions due to urban floods, the affected artisans and their associations, local bodies like village
Panchayats, municipalities, local NGOs, and people likely to be affected due to IR impacts. The
secondary stakeholders will include the Department of Relief and Rehabilitation, implementing
departments and agencies, Public Works Department, Industries, Forest Department Revenue and
Social Welfare.
Consultations: Stakeholder participation is/will be central to design and implementation of the project
and provides for information sharing, consultation and collaboration measures. A consultation
framework has been laid out in the EMF, and SMF (RPF, IPF and GESI guidelines) to ensure proper
consultation and participation of stakeholders at the various stages of project preparation and
implementation. The ESMF (EMF and SMF) provide for preparing sub-projects with free, prior and
informed consultations including with the tribal stakeholders affected by the floods.
Community/stakeholder consultations will also be carried out during the implementation stage of the
project. In accordance with the applicable Bank policies, public consultations at the local level (in areas
where specific investments will be made) will be carried out. The consultation process for the project
will include a range of formal and informal on-site discussions, focus group discussions/meetings and
targeted stakeholders. The public consultation process is being designed in a way that: (i) affected
people are included in the decision making process; (ii) public awareness and information sharing on
project alternatives and benefits is promoted; and (iii) views on designs and solutions from the
communities are solicited. The sub-project specific assessments and Action Plan/s, where required, will
be prepared in consultation with affected/concerned communities and the draft/s will be disclosed to
solicit feedback.
Expert opinion on specific issues related to the over-all design/components of the project and
applicability of environmental regulations will be sought, including through meetings/workshops.
Outputs from this process will be integrated into the project/sub-project design, where technically
feasible.
Disclosure. The ESMF (EMF and SMF) has been disclosed by the Project Authority through their
website on April 21, 2015. The same has been disclosed through the Bank’s Infoshop on April 22,
2015. Other relevant project documents (including screening reports and sub-project specific plans) will
be disclosed on the website and at other places accessible to the general public/interested
individuals/groups in line with the requirements of Bank’s Operational Policies and at the field office/
community level in compliance with the Right to Information Act. Community level disclosure will
cover public disclosure of beneficiary lists, safeguard action plans, key instructions and relevant contact
addresses. The project sites will have display boards indicating the project logo, year of construction



                                              Page 12 of 15
initiation and completion, funding agency, and contact details to provide suggestions or record
grievance.




B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                        March 27, 2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                     April 21, 2015
"In country" Disclosure                                                            April 21, 2015
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process/Social Assessment
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                        March 27, 2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                     April 21, 2015
"In country" Disclosure                                                            April 21, 2015
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework (as part of SA)
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                        March 27, 2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                     April 21, 2015
"In country" Disclosure                                                            April 21, 2015
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
Pest Management – Not Applicable/Policy Not Triggered.
Physical Cultural Resources - Done - Covered under ESMF

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Not Applicable

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level

 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?   Yes    []      No    [ ]       NA   [ ]
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager
                                                                 Yes       [  ]    No     [ ]      NA   [ ]
(SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in
                                                                  Yes      []      No    [ ]       NA   [ ]
the credit/loan?

 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or
                                                          Yes              [ ]      No    []       NA   [ ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation
                                                                     Yes   [ ]      No    [ ]       NA   []
of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include


                                                Page 13 of 15
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes     [ ]    No   [     ]   NA   [ ]
Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes     [ ]    No   []       NA   [         ]
Are PMP requirements included in project design?                   Yes     [ ]    No   [     ]   NA   [ ]

OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural
                                                          Yes             []     No   [ ]       NA   [ ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the
                                                            Yes           []     No   [ ]       NA   [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?

OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Yes              [ ]    No   [     ]   NA       [ ]
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or
                                                                 Yes      [ ]    No   [ ]       NA       [ ]
Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been
reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit Yes         [   ]   No   [ ]       NA   []
or Sector Manager?

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/
                                                                   Yes    [  ]   No       [ ]   NA   [     ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or
                                                                   Yes    []     No       [ ]   NA       [ ]
Sector Manager review the plan?

OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and
                                                                    Yes   [ ]     No       [ ]   NA   []
constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome
                                                                  Yes     [ ]     No       [ ]   NA   []
these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it
                                                                   Yes    [ ]     No       [ ]   NA   []
include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes    [ ]     No       [ ]   NA   [ ]
Have the ToRs as well as composition for the independent Panel of
                                                                  Yes     [ ]     No       [ ]   NA   [ ]
Experts been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and
                                                           Yes            [ ]     No       [ ]   NA   [ ]
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World
                                                                  Yes     [ ]    No       [ ]   NA   [ ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible Yes   [ ]    No       [ ]   NA   [ ]
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies


                                               Page 14 of 15
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures Yes    [ ]   No   [ ]     NA       [ ]
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in
                                                                 Yes     []    No   [ ]     NA       [ ]
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project includes
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to Yes          []    No   [ ]     NA       [ ]
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project Yes   []    No   [ ]     NA       [ ]
legal documents?

D. Approvals
 Signed and submitted by                                  Name                             Date
 Task Team Leader                                     Saurabh S. Dani                April 21, 2015
 Environmental Specialist                               Neha Vyas                    April 20, 2015
 Social Development Specialist                        Satya N. Mishra                April 20, 2015
 Approved by
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator                    Francis V. Fragano               April 22, 2015
   Comments
 Sector Manager                                 Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst            April 21, 2015
   Comments




                                              Page 15 of 15
