                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                         Report No.: 108898

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: September 22, 2016

   I.      BASIC INFORMATION

1. Basic Project Data

Country:                India                Project ID               P158435
Project Name:           IPF Component of Skill India Mission Operation (SIMO)
Task Team               Shabnam Sinha and John D. Blomquist
Leader(s)
Estimated Appraisal     September 22, 2016    Estimated Board          December 8, 2016
Date                                          Date
Managing Unit           GEDDR                 Lending Instrument        Investment Project
                                                                        Financing
Sector(s)               Vocational Training (80%); Adult literacy/ non-formal education
                        (20%)
Themes                  Education for the Knowledge Economy (80%); Improving Labor
                        Markers (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or No
OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?

Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      US$50 million for     Total Bank Financing:   US$50 million for the
                         the TA (Total cost of                         TA (Total cost of the
                         the Operation is                              Operation is
                         US$4.257 billion)                             US$4.257 billion)
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                                       Amount
Borrower                                                               US$3,057
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                  US$1,000
Others (Private Sector through CSR)                                    US$200
Total                                                                  US$4,257
Environmental            B
Category:
Is this a Repeater       No
project?

2. Project Development Objective(s)

India has become one of the world's fastest growing knowledge based economies due to
immensely abundant human capital. However, given the changing demands arising out of shifts

                                               1
in the labor force from primary to secondary and territory sectors, there is still a need to further
develop the existing low skills levels which pose a challenge to the country’s growth and global
competitiveness. A large population in the productive age-group requires significant effort in
ensuring that the group is indeed productive. Preparing the economy to absorb the large mass of
population coming into the workforce requires ensuring that they are skilled to meet the
requirement of the sectors that will employ them. Globalization, advances in Information
Technology and trade liberalization in India have led to a series of changes in the Indian labor
market in terms of growth of skilled based work force.
Despite the emphatic stress laid on education and training in this country, there is still a shortage
of skilled manpower to address the mounting needs and demands of the economy. In response,
the Government of India has been striving to initiate and achieve formal/informal skill
development of the working population via education/vocational education/skill training and
other upcoming learning methods. While a range of government and private institutions offer
skill training programs, these programs suffer from inadequate quality and relevance, lack of
coordination within the sector, and insufficient attention to labor market outcomes. In addition,
the current training capacity is grossly inadequate to respond to the country’s needs.
In this background, Government of India has identified skill development as one of the priority
sectors and has taken up several initiatives to meet the challenge of expansion of training
capacity with speed, high quality standards and sustainability. One such key initiative is the
World Bank assisted Skill India Mission Operation (SIMO), currently under preparation. This
aims to enhance the access, quality and relevance of training programs for the needs of the labor
market in a growing economy.
The SIMO will support implementation of the Government’s strategy outlined in the 2015
National Policy for Skill Development and Entrepreneurship, with focus on all skill development
(SD) programs, delivered at national and state levels, except those delivered by Industrial
Training Institutes (ITI) which are supported through another Bank operation (Skills
Strengthening for Industrial Value Enhancement - STRIVE). The objective of the proposed
operation will be to enhance institutional mechanisms for skill development and increase
access to quality and market relevant training for the work force. SIMO is targeted at 400
million Indian people who are planned to be trained by the year 2022 with special emphasis on
reaching women, poor and other excluded communities. Apart from these groups, the key
stakeholders of SIMO include: the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE)
and its associate agencies at the national level, and, the State Skill Development Missions
(SSDMs) and their associate agencies in the various states.

3. Project Description

The key interventions of SIMO relate to capacity building of the institutions and small scale
infrastructure works which are expected to result in substantial social and environmental benefits
to the unemployed/ unemployable youth, at large, especially, those belonging to the poor and
vulnerable sections. Hence, adverse impacts that are sensitive, diverse and unprecedented on the


                                                 2
environment and/or people are not foreseen. However, planned efforts are essential to ensure that
project interventions do result in sustainable social and environmental benefits.

Further, the lending instruments adopted for SIMO are twofold: one, Program for Results
(PforR) operation which covers the bulk of the credit; and the other Investment Project Financing
(IPF), meant to support the Technical Assistance component. Consequently, the social and
environmental management have been planned separately for the two lending streams. This
report relates to safeguard compliance with respect to the Technical Assistance Component of
SIMO. It may also be noted that a comprehensive assessment of the Environmental and Social
Systems (ESSA) has been carried out by the World Bank’s Task Team as required for the PforR
component and a separate report has been prepared.
The PforR component of SIMO focuses on the following results areas:
      Result Area 1: Institutional Strengthening at the national and state levels for planning,
       delivery and monitoring of high-quality market relevant training. : The main objective of
       this Results Area is to strengthen institutional mechanisms to plan and monitor the
       delivery of high quality-market relevant training.
      Results Area 2: Improving quality and market relevance of skill development programs.
       The objective of this Results Area is to ensure that all TPs have access to packages of
       technical resources and materials that can help them to improve the quality of their
       program offerings, and labor market transitions of trainees.
      Results Area 3: Improving access to and completion of skills training for female trainees
       and other disadvantaged groups. The objective of this Results Area will be to identify
       innovative and replicable methods to (a) enhance access to high quality training, through
       tailoring interventions, program offerings, service delivery for socially excluded groups
       (such as women, scheduled tribes, scheduled castes and persons with disabilities) and (b)
       integrate constraints and needs of socially excluded groups into the planning, monitoring
       and delivery of skills development programs.
      Result Area 4: Expanding skills training through Private-Public Partnerships (PPPs). A
       Skills Fund will be created to engage in a PPP arrangement to pool private financial
       resources for skilling interventions. Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funds can be
       used for SD activities and the Government envisages providing incentives to induce
       companies to channel their CSR funds towards training and enter into a partnership.

Technical Assistance Component:
Technical Assistance component aims to strengthen the capacity of MSDE, its participating
agencies and State Skill Development Missions (SSDMs) to help them to achieve the SIMO
objectives. It will support, among others, the following activities: program management,
including the establishment of a Program Management Unit (PMU), coordination, and
communication; technical support for Monitoring & Evaluation, including independent
evaluations and third party verifications; access to international expertise and best practices;
supporting SSDMs in devising successful pilots for addressing needs of the disadvantaged
sections and improve implementation capacity especially of low income states; and
strengthening of the National Skill Development Framework (NSDF) governance mechanism.

                                               3
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)

The project is expected to be spread across all the states in the country. The TA support primarily
consists of consultancy services for supporting program management, conducting third party
validation of the achievement of Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs), conducting third party
assessments, evaluations of performance data and implementation activities; international
exposure visits for capacity building and pilot studies. Creation or augmentation of infrastructure
is not envisaged under the TA. Therefore no significant, long term adverse environment or
social impacts are anticipated from the interventions/activities of TA.
On the social front, no lands are to be secured as the interventions are exclusively ‘services’
oriented and devoid of civil works. However, the project is spread across the country and the
interventions could take place in the tribal areas. While no adverse impacts on tribals is expected,
project interventions has been designed such as to ensure ‘inclusion’ of tribals.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
    - Pyush Dogra, Senior Environment Specialist, GENDR
    - Suryanarayana Satish, Senior Social Development Specialist, GSURR

6. Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?            Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP        Yes                    OP 4.10 has been triggered.
4.01                                                        The TA component covers
                                                            consultancy services to support the
                                                            skill development program. The
                                                            interventions under this component
                                                            will not involve creation or
                                                            augmentation of infrastructure, or
                                                            other related field activities.
                                                            Considering the scope of the TA
                                                            component, environmental impacts
                                                            are not envisaged. Also,
                                                            considering the fact that an
                                                            Environmental and Social Systems
                                                            Assessment (ESSA) has been
                                                            undertaken, which includes an
                                                            action plan on environmental
                                                            management aspects, a separate
                                                            Environmental Assessment for the
                                                            TA component is not required.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No                    -
Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No                    -
Pest Management OP 4.09               No                    -
Physical Cultural Resources           No                    -
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/ BP 4.10        Yes                   The policy is triggered given the

                                                 4
                                                           Program is country-wide and the
                                                           beneficiaries could also include
                                                           students belonging to Scheduled/
                                                           Tribal Areas and/ or that TA
                                                           activities may have a bearing on the
                                                           Tribal Areas. A Social Assessment
                                                           has been carried out and a Tribal
                                                           People Planning Framework
                                                           prepared to be adopted, as
                                                           appropriate, during implementation
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No                    This policy has not been triggered
4.12                                                       given that project shall not finance
                                                           civil works involving compulsory
                                                           land acquisition, involuntary
                                                           resettlement, or causing restriction
                                                           of access to natural resources.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No                    -

Projects on International            No                    -
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP     No                    -
7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

TA component is designed essentially to provide soft support to the main SIMO program and
is expected to encompass the following elements: (i) Project Management Support including
external technical capacity support; (ii) Policy and other analytical as well as diagnostic
studies; (iii) national as well as international Observation Study Tours (OST) including
workshops, seminars etc.; and (iv) Information, education and communication campaign
(IEC). Given this activity portfolio, it is expected to result in substantial social and
environmental benefits to the society at large, especially, to the poor and vulnerable sections.
Adverse impacts that are sensitive, diverse and unprecedented on the environment and/or
people are not foreseen.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The interventions envisaged under the TA component of SIMO are not likely to have any
adverse environmental impacts.



                                                5
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Skill development is a highly diverse and multi-faceted activity. The type of programs offered
depends upon a variety of factors related to trainers, trainees, training providers, nature and
scale of trades. Even the strategy of implementation too varies substantially. So, project
characteristically will try and experiment with a variety of alternatives. These, however, get
unfurled during the implementation and are meant to enhance the effectiveness of the
intervention. No adverse impacts are envisaged from any of the alternative skill development
interventions.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
It is categorical that no construction activities or other related field activities will be supported
out of this fund. Hence, the component’s proposed interventions will not result in any adverse
impacts on people and/ or environment. But, the social assessments made during the project
preparation have established that there could be tribal people in the project areas and some of
the analytical studies may be specific to the tribal areas. However, full knowledge about the
interventions likely to take place during implementation does not exists at preparation, to
warrant a comprehensive planning. Given this situation, in accordance with the Indian
Constitutional Provision as well as World Bank’s Operational Policy (OP) on Indigenous
Peoples, 4.10, a Tribal Peoples Planning Framework has been prepared. This plan essentially
outlines consultative measures to be adopted while planning any Technical Assistance Activity
in the tribal areas and or related to tribals.

Among several socio-cultural groups, one notable group on the periphery of economic and
social progress are the tribal groups (or ‘Adivasis’). These people have been identified by the
constitution as ‘scheduled tribes’ (ST).1 There are an estimated 84 million tribal persons,
which accounts for around eight percent of India’s population of 1.2 billion. It is about 15%
— double that of their share in the total population of India. Tribal people also fare badly in
respect of human development indicators such as health and education. The tribal peoples’
poorer education and health indicators are attributed in the first instance to poverty, which in
turn, is a result of them being physically isolated, concentrated in remote hilly and forested
areas suffering from poor accessibility and practicing mostly subsistence agriculture, often
dependent on forest produce.

In response to the unique challenges faced by the STs, the Government of India (GoI) has
undertaken a number of measures over the years. The Constitution of India recognizes the
diversity of STs across India as well as other complex problems in terms of geographical
isolation, socio-economic backwardness, distinctive culture, poor infrastructure facilities,


1
  There are 645 distinct tribal groups recognized as STs in India. More than half the population are concentrated in
the states of Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Jharkhand, and Gujarat (the ‘central belt’ of India). A
second belt starts from the north, and comprises Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, and Uttarakhand to the
seven states in the north eastern region. The third is the southern belt with some STs in the south Indian states, as
well as islands of Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep.


                                                         6
language and religion, exploitation by various groups, and so on. In response, five broad
categories of safeguards2 are provided: (i) social – chiefly related to abolishing of un-
touchability; (ii) economic – chiefly provision of fifth and sixth schedule areas; (iii)
educational and cultural – reservations in educational institutions; (iv) political – provides for
reservation of seats in legislature; and (iv) services – reservations in appointments or of posts
in public employment. Thus India has both protective provisions to safeguard tribal people
from social injustices, as well as developmental provisions to promote their educational and
economic interests. Further, administrative provisions under the Fifth and Sixth Schedules
give special powers to the state for the protection and governance of tribal areas and
reservation provisions ensure due representation in legislative bodies and government jobs.
The introduction of Panchayats Extension Act to the scheduled areas (PESA) was enacted by
the Indian Parliament on Dec 24, 1996. This Act offers a provision for greater local control
over resources and decision making to the tribal people through institutions like Gram
Panchayat and Gram Sabha.

The Fifth Schedule consists of districts in the states of Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand,
Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Telangana, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Maharashtra
and Rajasthan which are dominated by tribal population. As per the constitution each of these
states is expected to form a Tribal Advisory Council. The Constitution further provides that it
shall be the duty of the Tribes Advisory Council to advice on such matters pertaining to the
welfare and advancement of the Scheduled Tribes in the State as may be referred to them by
the Governor.

The tribal majority regions of North East India, is the part of the Sixth Schedule of the Indian
constitution. It has a set of legal provisions are designed especially for tribal majority regions
in the North Easter hills of India. The Schedule provides for the constitutions of Autonomous
District Councils (ADCs) under which all the tribal chiefs and headmen were placed. The idea
was to provide a democratic voice to the tribal structures within the modern state.

The Fifth and Sixth Schedule of Indian constitution provides for self-governance by tribals.
Accordingly, measures to reach the tribal including conducting consultations and seeking
consent in respect of activities taken in these areas, have been specified.

India is well endowed with a variety of institutions at national as well as state levels, having a
well laid out training programs, but with varied capacities. Implementation arrangements, viz.,
systems and procedures do exist for outreach activities to create awareness and mobilization,
assessing the trainers, training programs and training infrastructure, to enable drawing
inferences on the adequacy, or otherwise, in ensuring effectiveness. A clear and definite
mandate does exist both at the national and state levels for ensuring the social inclusiveness
and capacity building of various agencies to address the social issues. National and state
legislations too provide for affirmative actions to ensure inclusion, among others, including
tribals.


2
       GoI,      Tribal      Constitutional   Safeguards       and   Protective   Measures   for   Tribals,
http://ncsc.nic.in/files/ncsc/new6/261.pdf


                                                           7
The TPPF sets out a framework to be adopted during implementation so as to ensure that tribal
communities are informed, consulted, and mobilized to participate in the project activities. The
Framework is intended to guide selection and preparation of, as well as contribute towards
undertaking policy and other analytical studies as well as in the conduction of diagnostic as
well as exploratory enquiries. Thus, this will provide a frame work of participation, as well as
management modalities, in the tribal and / or Left Wing Extremist areas in the preparation of a
Tribal People Plan during implementation.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

The primary stakeholders include the intended target population or beneficiaries of the project
being supported through the proposed operation viz.,-- trainees comprising men, women,
Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe, Minorities, Persons with Disability, and Other Backward
Castes– the training/ service providers, Training Institutions/ instructors, local employers,
local communities. Apex level stakeholders include the relevant state departments of
education, employment, labour, social welfare, tribals, and minority. Likewise, national level
stakeholders include: Ministry of Skills Development Entrepreneurship, National Skill
Development Corporation, Tribal Affairs; Women and Child; Minorities; and Social Justice
and Empowerment.

TPPF is premised on extensive consultations conducted with several stakeholders from
states:– Chhattisgarh, Tamil Nadu, Assam, Rajasthan and Odisha. The states were
representative in terms of geography and socio-economic-cultural development. Overall, the
selection of the training institutions met the following criteria:
    Representation from five zones of India: north, south, east, west and north-east.
    Service Providers from urban and rural areas as well as a mix of trades.
    A variety of terrain and access, such as remote and centrally located and hills and
        coastal areas.
    Women Centered Programs
    Low Income States
    Tribal Areas – Fifth Schedule and Sixth Schedule Areas
    Conflict Areas – Left Wing Extremist areas

Consultations have been held both at national and state level with various stakeholders
including government officials, industries associations, industries, training service providers,
trainers, and trainees. Draft TPPF has been disclosed through the website of MSDE and
disseminated widely across different states. Protocols to conduct consultations in the fifth and
sixth schedule areas during implementation will be developed depending upon the activity
undertaken. In general, this would include: selection of persons/ agencies to be consulted,
venue and timing for consultations, setting of agenda, making available relevant documents in
local languages, conduction of the consultative meeting as well as recording the proceedings
and subsequently disseminating the same. Bi-annual monitoring through local participation
(tribal leaders and other department) shall also be done.



                                                8
B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                              NA

Date of submission to InfoShop                                           NA

For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of
the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure

India                                                                    NA

Comments:

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                              September 5, 2016

Date of submission to InfoShop                                           September 30, 2016

"In country" Disclosure

India                                                                    September 7, 2016

Comments:

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including      Yes [ ] No [X ] NA [ ]

                                               9
EMP) report?

If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or            Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
Practice Manager (PM) review and approve the EA
report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP            Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to             Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
cultural property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate      Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [X]
the potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning              Yes [X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for           Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the      Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit or Practice Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a       Yes [X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been         Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the             Yes [X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been           Yes [X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader(s): Name:       Shabnam Sinha
                                 John Blomquist
Approved By

                                                10
Practice Manager/ Manager:   Name: Keiko Miwa   Date:




                                         11
