Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/03/2005 
Report No.:  AC1507
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P094513 
Project Name:  India: Emergency Tsunami Reconstruction Project 
Task Team Leader:  Shyamal Sarkar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 15, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: May 3, 2005 
Managing Unit:  SASEI 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Housing construction (90%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector 
(7%);Flood protection (2%);Health (1%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Natural disaster management (P);Other 
rural development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
465.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
217.80
217.80 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project will support the efforts of the governments of India, Tamil Nadu and 
Pondicherry to revive livelihoods and promote recovery in the tsunami-affected areas.  
Tamil Nadu and Pondicherry suffered most severely from the tsunami and thus are the 
primary focus of this project.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project would provide support to the GOI for assistance to (a) Tamil Nadu for 
reconstruction of housing and public buildings, and revival of livelihoods in fisheries, 
agriculture and animal husbandry, (b) Pondicherry for reconstruction of housing and 
revival of livelihoods in fisheries and agriculture and (c) both Tamil Nadu and 
Pondicherry for capacity building in housing reconstruction and coastal management as 
well as project implementation  
 
Total project cost is estimated at US$682.8 million, including contingencies, of which 
IDA funding of US$465.0 million, or about 68% of total, is proposed.  The remaining 
US$217.8 million, or about 32% of total, would be provided by the Government.  The 
estimated cost of different components will be reviewed regularly with GOI and the 
Page  2
Project States and adapted, as required, to reflect additional resources that might become 
available from different sources, particularly from the non-government sectors.  
 
Component 1: Housing Reconstruction (US$596.8 million, about 87.5% of total).  This 
component will have three sub-components: (i) provision of transit shelter as needed and 
upgrading of services in temporary shelter sites; (ii) repair and reconstruction of existing 
houses, construction of new houses and the necessary related services and community 
infrastructure such as access roads, internal roads, water supply, latrines, storm drains, 
electrification, rain water harvesting structure as necessary, and limited community 
infrastructure facilities such as community halls, anganwadi (nursery schools), primary 
schools, etc. in the habitations; and (iii) resettlement of the families affected by the 
Project.  
 
The project is expected to help repair or reconstruct about 140,000 damaged houses in 
Tamil Nadu and Pondicherry.  In addition, housing would be constructed for an estimated 
3,000 families currently encroaching on government land in Chennai and who may have 
to be resettled.  
 
Component 2: Restoration of Livelihoods (US$36.4 million, about 5% of total).  This 
component will finance activities to help revitalize livelihoods of affected families 
through (a) restoration of damaged fisheries infrastructure, such as harbors, patrol boats, 
etc., and reestablishment of safety-at-sea systems/ services; (b) restoration of damaged 
agricultural lands and horticultural lands, farm ponds and dug wells; (c) repair/ 
reconstruction of damaged infrastructure such as veterinary dispensaries and veterinary 
extension centers, as well as upgrading of  veterinary care services through training to the 
community based veterinary workers and farmers in animal husbandry activities; and (d) 
promotion of sustainable management of coastal land and water resources.  
 
Component 3: Public Buildings and Public Works (US$19.5 million, about 3% of total).  
This component will help finance small public works such as repair, reconstruction and 
upgrading of damaged hospitals, public health centers/ sub-centers, educational 
institutions, cyclone shelters and other public buildings, restoration of damaged river and 
drain banks, and plantation/ replanting of mangrove and shelter belts in Tamil Nadu.  
 
Component 4: Technical Assistance and Training (US$11.1 million, about 1.5% of 
total).  This component will finance (a) technical assistance and capacity building for 
housing reconstruction including preparation of detailed project reports, services in 
connection with land management, preparation of resettlement layouts and related 
infrastructure plans; training of masons in hazard resistance construction technologies, 
etc;. (b) preparation of social and environmental management plans in accordance with 
the agreed Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF); (c) community 
participation to ensure involvement of the affected communities; (d) studies for 
assessment of the vulnerabilities and longer term issues and the needs associated with 
coastal zone protection; (e) environmental studies on coastal water quality, ground water 
quality, pollution of tidal influenced water bodies and capacity building among various 
stakeholders and hazard risk management, with special focus on the vulnerabilities 
Page  3
(including economic aspects) with Nagapattinam district of Tamil Nadu and Karaikal 
region of Pondicherry; and (f) updating the management plans under the Coastal 
Regulation Zone Notification, etc.  
 
Component 5: Implementation Support (US$19.0 million, about 3% of total).  This 
component will help finance project management and incremental operating costs 
associated with project implementation, including financial audits, quality assurance and 
technical audits, project monitoring and evaluation, continuous social and environmental 
impact assessments.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located in the State of Tamil Nadu and Union Territory of Pondicherry in 
southern India. The project locations in Tamil Nadu are spread over in 13 coastal 
districts, namely, Cuddalore, Nagapattinam, Thirunveli, Kancheepuram, Kanyakumari, 
Thirvallur, Pudukottai, Thanjavur, Rmanathanpuram, Villipuram and Chennai and two 
enclaves- Pondicherry and Karaikal in the union territory of Pondicherry.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg (SASES) 
Mr I. U. B. Reddy (SASES) 
Mr Bilal H. Rahill (SASES) 
Mr Pramod K. Agrawal (SASES) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Most project activities are unlikely to entail any significant environmental and/or social 
issues, except for larger resettlement colonies (particularly in urban areas) and repair of 
infrastructure such as jetties, among other things. An Environment and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) has been developed to support a due diligence process 
to avoid causing harm or exacerbating social tensions, and to ensure consistent treatment 
Page  4
of social and environmental issues across sectors of intervention. The ESMF shall assist 
the executing agencies in screening all the subprojects for social and environmental 
issues and/or impacts, in accordance with applicable laws regulations and the Bank?s 
safeguard policies.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The Project will contribute to a broader developmental and addressing of vulnerability 
issues in the India's coastal areas through up-grading housing and infrastructure in the 
coastal communities and improve local living conditions.  Furthermore, the technical 
assistance will contribute to improvement in the policy framework for the fishing 
industry and identification of alternative and more diversified livelihood opportunities for 
the coastal communities that would improve their income stability in the longer-term. In 
addition, the project envisages awareness raising about improved coastal land 
management.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
One of the significant concerns after the tsunami was that replacement/potential up-
grading of the fishing fleet may further exacerbate the depletion of the fish population in 
the coastal areas due to over fishing.  In order to address this issue, it was decided that the 
Project will finance only up-grading of fishing infrastructure such as harbors and will not 
finance any renovation/replacement of damaged boats and trailers.  While selecting the 
sites for reconstruction of houses to the Tsunami affected people, efforts will be made to 
indentify the vacant government lands, followed by waste private lands to avoid the 
private land acquisition and thus minimize the acquisition of productive private lands.  
This process will help avoid or minimize adverse impacts on land owners.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Relief Commissioner Offices in the revenue departments of Tamil Nadu and 
Pondicherry are the nodal departments for overseeing the implementation of the project 
activities through district administrations. The Relief Commissioner's offices as well as 
district administration have sufficient capacity and familiarity to deal with land 
acquisition matters.  However, they have limited or no experience in dealing with 
environment and social issues in the context of Bank-supported operations. Therefore, 
they will mobilize technical capacity in the form of Project Management Consultants to 
support oversee the preparation and implementation of environment and social 
management plans.  The discussions with the governments have been positive in 
addressing the safeguard aspects of the project, but additional training will be provided 
together with technical support during the early period of project implementation. 
Safeguards capacity will be assessed during early part of project implementation and 
necessary measures taken to ensure the needs of the project.   
 
Page  5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include Tsunami affected people, district administration and state 
government, NGOs, Civil society organization working in the project area, project 
affected people, local village panchyats, multilateral financial institutions and NGO who 
are assisting the reconstruction activities.  All these stakeholders will be consulted during 
the social assessment and preparation of safeguard related mitigation or management 
plans.  The Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) is based on a 
strong participatory approach in undertaking all key activities in the reconstruction 
program. The implementing agencies will ensure that the all stakeholders particularly the 
affected people will be consulted in a meaningful way and allow them to participate in 
the consultation process. The consultations will be carried out in a way appropriate for 
cultural, gender based and other differences among the stakeholders.  The implementing 
agencies will initiate the consultations as early as possible in the sub-project cycles and 
provide the relevant material in a timely manner. The views and needs of vulnerable 
groups will be given due consideration while finalizing the plans.   The ESMF and other 
safeguard related documents will be disclosed in the Bank's Info shop as well as the state 
Government's web sites and will be made available in other public places accessible to 
the local people and NGOs.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/19/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/22/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/21/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/19/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/22/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/21/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
Page  6
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Shyamal Sarkar 
05/02/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bilal H. Rahill 
05/02/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr I. U. B. Reddy 
05/02/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/02/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
05/02/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Sonia Hammam 
05/02/2005 
Comments:   
Page  7
