Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
PROJECT APPRAISAL STAGE 
Report No.:  AC495 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: January 22, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Indonesia 
Project ID: P071296 
Project Name: URBAN SECTOR 
DEVELOPMENT AND REFORM PROJ 
Task Team Leader: Aniruddha Dasgupta/ Hiroaki 
Suzuki 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 16, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: June 15, 2004 
Managing Unit: EASUR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood 
protection sector (68%);General transportation 
sector (20%);Sub-national government 
administration (12%) 
Theme: Municipal governance and institution 
building (P);Municipal finance (P);Access to urban 
services for the poor (P);Infrastructure services for 
private sector development (P);Decentralization (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Farida Zaituni, Isono Sadoko 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): IBRD/IDA: 105.0 ; GOI/ULGs ($m.): 18.0 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives  
The project development  objective  is to strengthen local governance and improve urban services in order to 
enhance the quality of life of people in the participating municipalities. To achieve this, the project focuses on 
developing an enabling local institutional environment through reforms and investments, and creating new national 
facilities for supporting broad local government reforms and institutional strengthening. 
  
More specifically, at the local level, the project will support improvements in municipal governance by:  
(i) 
adopting public participation in key municipal decision making processes;  
(ii) 
adopting extensive public information disclosure policies; 
(iii) 
strengthening strategic planning capacities; 
(iv) 
reforming procurement and financial management practices;  
(v) 
building institutional capacities; and 
(vi) 
supporting priority public investments for improving service delivery, strengthening local economic 
development and alleviating poverty. 
 
At the central level, the project will support the Urban I 
nstitutional Development Program (UIDP) promoting broad municipal reforms and capacity building and the City 
Performance Rating System (CPRS) for benchmarking and rating municipal performance. 
 
C.  Project Description  
The proposed project will support strengthening local governance and improving urban services to emhance the 
quality of life of people in the twenty participating ULGs by: (i) helping them undertake reforms in the core areas of 
good governance, namely accountability, transparency, public participation, strategic planning, public procurement 
and financial management; (ii) strengthening their institutional capacities; and (iii) financing priority investments for 
improving public services. At the central level, the project will provide assistance for improving the policy 
environment, regulatory frameworks and institutional structures for promoting and monitoring local government 
reform and capacity development. 
 
D.  Project location  
The project will be located in 20 urban local governments (ULGs), namely : Kota Palu, Bau-Bau, Kediri, Blitar, 
Bogor, Palembang, Pontianak, BandarLampung, Semarang, Yogyakarta, Kabupaten Sleman, Kota Batam, Solo, 
Makasar, Depok, Cimahi, Bekasi, Kabupaten Musi Banyuasin, Kabupaten Muara Enim, and Kota Banjar Baru.  
Page  2
 
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies  
 
The Executing Agency and some of the urban local governments have experienced with various investment projects 
(particularly IUIDP-type of projects) that cover a wide spectrum of environmental impacts and land acquisition and 
resettlement. Therefore, it relatively has an understanding on the GOI’s regulations and Bank’s requirements on 
environmental management and resettlement. At the urban local government level, the technical agencies and the 
environmental management agency ( BAPEDALDA) have staff with certain level of capacity, although this varies 
across different ULGs. NGOs and members of civil society at the ULG level have different levels of capacity in 
understanding environmental management. With regard to land acquisition and resettlement, the majority of ULGs 
will still have to increase their awareness and capacity to meet the Bank’s requirements, through intensive 
socialization, dissemination and field training. NGOs and civil society members at the ULG level have limited 
capacity in understanding the Bank’s requirements on land acquisition and resettlement. There is a need to improve 
the understanding of the ULGs and relevant members of stakeholder forum that the whole cycle of land acquisition 
process – identification, social economic surveys, preparation of the Land Acquisition and Resettlement Plan 
(LARAP), and its implementation – should be integrated with the preparation of the mid-term development plan 
(PJM) and the annual budgeting process, in a participatory manner.
 
 As part of the capacity building component, the 
project will strengthen the capacities of sub-project managers and other staff, including BAPEDALDA staff, and 
NGOs as well as members of civil society, to prepare, implement and monitoring the environmental management as 
well as land acquisition and resettlement. 
 
 
 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] Environmental 
Assessment
 (OP
/BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats
 (OP
/BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management
 (OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[X] Involuntary 
Resettlement
 (OP
/BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[X] Indigenous 
Peoples
 (OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests
 (OP
/BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams
 (OP
/BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property
 (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
 (OP
/BP
/GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways
 (OP
/BP
/GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  3
 
 
[X] A   [ ] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
USDRP will support investments with a range from small to big sub-projects. While the recommended minimum 
size is about US$287, 000 (Rs. 2.5 billion), majority of the sub-projects are expected to be between US$500,000-
US$2 million. However, the USDRP could potentially finance larger sub-projects of US$5-10 million. Although 
most of the sub-projects are expected to have only limited environmental impacts, it is possible that some may 
generate significant impacts. The project is therefore classified as a Bank environmental category A. The USDRP 
will not finance first-year sub-projects that have significant impacts on environment and land acquisition and 
resettlement. Sub-projects that potentially may generate significant impacts on environment and land acquisition and 
resettlement will be implemented in the second year of project implementation onwards. 
 
The project will have to prepare an Environmental Management Framework and Land Acquisition and Resettlement 
Framework. Each sub-project, will have to prepare an EA and necessary environmental management instruments; as 
well as land acquisition and resettlement action plan (LARAP). 
 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A. 
Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared 
                January 28
th
, 2004 
 
B. 
For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS 
                      
 
C. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  The specific 
studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS 
                      Launching preparation of UKL/UPL January 15
th
, 2004 
                      Completing UKL/UPL February 28, 2004 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Aniruddha Dasgupta/ 
Hiroaki Suzuki 
January 28, 
2004 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator (EASES): 
Name          Glenn S. Morgan 
Date 
Comments                                 
Sector Manager (EASUR): 
Name           Keshav Varma 
Date 
Comments 
                                                          
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
 
