                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                    RESTRUCTURING STAGE
         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring

                                                                        Report No.: 106453

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:
                             .         15-Jun-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                        Indonesia            jProject ID:                 IP117323
 Project Name:                   Indonesia Power Transmission Development Project (Pl 17323)
 Task Team Leader(s):            Dhruva Sahai
                                                        -
 Estimated Board Date:           28-Jun-2016
                                                                                             '
                                                                                             '
 Managing Unit:                  GEE02                                                           -- -- -
 Sector(s):                      Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (I 00%)
 Theme(s):                       Infrastructure services for private sector development (40%), Rural
                                 services and infrastructure (40%). Urban services and housing.for the
                                 poor(20%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                    No
 (Rapid Re5ponse to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                 Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:        254.10                      Total Bank Financing:        1225.00
· Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                                      Amount
     Borrower                                                                                                29.10
     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                  225.00
     Total                                                                                                  254.10
 Environmental Category: A
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred           Yes
 project?

 2. Current Project Development Objectives
 The development objective of the project Is to assist the Borrower to meet growing electricity demand
 and improve the reliability of electricity supply in Java and South-Central Sumatra by strengthening
 the power transmission system.
  Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
The development objective of the project is to assist PLN to meet growing electricity demand,
improve the reliability of electricity supply, strengthen the power transmission system, and support the
preparation of hydropower projects.

3. Project Description
The Project has two components with a total investment cost estimated at US$ 255 million, each of
which is described below.

Component 1: Expansion and Construction of Transmission Substations in the Java-Bali System: This
component includes the expansion of four 500/150 kV and forty six 150 kV/20 kV existing substations
by adding one or two new transformers and associated equipment at each substation, and construction
of one new 150 kV /20 kV substation in Java.
Component 2: Upgrading and Expansion of Transmission Substations in South-central Sumatra: This
component includes upgrading five existing substations system from 150 kV to 275 kV by adding one
or two new 275/150 kV transformers and associated equipment at each substation, and expanding 16
existing 150 kV /20 kV substations by adding one or two new transformers and associated equipment
at each substation in south-central Sumatra system.

The original loan for the US$ 225 million Indonesia Power Transmission Development Project was
approved on July 10, 2010, signed on November 18, 2010 and became effective on May 30, 2011.
The project components are designed to address priority investments for the transmission and
sub-transmission systems in the Java Bali, and Sumatra networks. As of April 21, 2016, the project
has an undisbursed balance of US$ 133.44 million and is in problem status. The project has been rated
Moderately U[J.satisfactory for Implementation Progress. Implementation delays were encountered in
all six major contract packages of up to 18 months against the original contract schedules due to
inadequate contract management capacity, prolonged internal processes and reviews, and slow
decision making at PLN. The project has also realized savings due to a reduction in the scope of
work under the Sumatra substations, and the outcome of the competitive tender process by following
the Bank?s Procurement Guidelines and Procedures which were below those originally assessed. A
Level I restructuring is therefore proposed for the project to enable the use of US$ 80 million in
project savings for construction and development related to substation expansion, including the
installation and upgrading of transformers at additional locations. The restructured project will also
prepare the proposed Poko Hydropower Project (HPP) and will include an updated feasibility study
including geotechnical investigation, environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA), dispatching
of panel of experts, and, if the project is found to be feasible, prepare tender documents for
procurement packages. The safeguards instruments will be prepared and disclosed during the
implementation of the restructured project. It may be noted that the Poko HPP itself will be processed
as a separate stand-alone project/IPF for Bank financing.

The project is restructured to include the following new components to make use of the $80 million
savings:
a.       US$ 52.06 million for construction and development related to substation expansion,
including the installation and upgrading of transformers at additional locations in Java, Bali, and
Sumatra as per the scope of work provided in PLN?s letter of April 22, 2015.
b.       US$ 8 million to support the preparation of Poko HPP.

US$ 20 million of loan funds shall be canceled as agreed upon with PT PLN, and MOF.

The proposed project restructuring would also entail the extension of the project by 18 months through
June 30, 2018 to enable the completion of the planned activities. This would be the second extension
of the project. The restructuring is at the core of Government and Bank pro-activity to put this project
on a successful trajectory. In addition to the restructuring, there are activities to improve delays in
procurement and other implementation bottlenecks already underway. In particular, the Team has
worked with PLN to develop an action plan that covers the actions to be taken to remove
implementation bottlenecks, and the time by when these bottlenecks shall be removed. PLN is also
holding monthly management meetings to review progress against action plan targets, and is preparing
minutes to record the agreements reached and decisions taken to maintain the momentum towards
completing outstanding work under the contracts. The Task Team shall continue to monitor PLN?s
progress towards achieving the proposed completion dates under the action plan.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The Expansion, Upgrading and Construction of Transmission Substations:

The subprojects (including the proposed additional locations) are located in various provinces in Java,
Bali and in Sumatra. The key project activity is to install new transformers and associated equipment
in existing 500 kV, 275 kV and 150 kV substations. Prior to this restructuring proposal, there are eight
substations that have been upgraded/ extended. There are now 30 substations that will be either
upgraded or reinforced (24 in Java, 6 in Sumatera) through project savings.

Three types of subprojects have been identified during the implementation of IPTD I: (i) subprojects
implemented within the existing fence of an existing substation and no land acquisition involved
(thirty six subprojects); (ii) subprojects implemented adjacent to an existing substation site, requiring
some land acquisition in four substations in Sumatera and (iii) the Millennium subproject involving
the construction of a new substation but not involving land acquisition because the land was
transferred to PLN without costs from the owner of the industrial zone, to which the substation will
supply electricity.

It is expected that for the proposed addition allocations, salient physical characteristics are still the
same and the existing safeguards measures and safeguards instruments (EMP) are adequate to mitigate
poten~ial adverse environmental impact.


Environment screening has identified the following potential impacts of these subprojects: (i) impacts
during construction associated with movement of men, machinery and materials (noise, dust, chance
find of cultural artifacts, prohibition of PCBs, worker exposure to electromagnetic fields (EMF) where
an existing substation is present); (ii) impacts during operation including worker health and safety
issues associated with EMF, noise and possible transformer cooling oils.

Land acquisition process, including public consultation and satisfactory compensation for the
population residing in the project area is the main social issues in the project. Since land acquisition is
limited, impacts on the individual PAP is normally modest and limited in the acquisition of small piece
of land or cutting down of few trees. Of the total 30 subprojects proposed by the loan saving, none will
involve land acquisition as the activities are only up-rating and extension of the existing substations.

Site visits and screening undertaken by the task team has determined that Indigenous Peoples as
defined by OP 4.10 are not present in, nor have collective attachment to the project area.

Preparation of Poko HPP

The proposed Poko HPP is a dam-tunnel-type hydropower scheme to be developed upstream of the
Mamasa River (a tributary of the Sadang River) in South Sulawesi, Indonesia (see Figure I below).
However, the impacted area of the proposed Poko HPP will be extended into West Sulawesi Province.
PLN, the project owner, has requested the Bank to finance the development of the Poko HPP through
direct-lending to PLN.

The restructured IPTD project savings will be used to support PLN to prepare the Poko HPP including
an updated feasibility study (FIS; JICA had prepared an F/S in 1997 which is outdated) including
geotechnical investigation, develop safeguards documents such as the ESIA and environmental and
social management plan (ESMP), and, if the project is deemed feasible through due consideration to
the environmental and social impacts, prepare tender documents for the procurement of works and
goods contracts. It may be noted that the terms of reference (ToR) for the ESIA will be prepared to
satisfy not only the Bank's policies, but also the requirements of the Indonesian regulation on Analisis
dampak lingkungan (AMDAL). This is an effort to streamline the two documents in order to avoid
confusion of having two separate environmental management documents during implementation. The
safeguards instruments will be prepared and disclosed during implementation of the restructured
project.

The involvement of the Bank is critical for the responsible development of the cascade of hydropower
projects in the Mamasa River basin.

Downstream of the proposed Poko HPP on the Mamasa River, is an existing dam-tunnel-type scheme
called Bakaru I HPP (126 MW; the dam is called the Garugu Dam) commissioned in 1991. Bakaru I
HPP had been designed and built to accommodate the expansion of another 126 MW (Bakaru II HPP)
by constructing a parallel headrace tunnel from the Garugu Dam and expanding the existing power
house to accommodate additional generating units. KfW is committed to finance this extension known
as Bakaru II HPP.

Furthermore, a recent Bank-financed study on the hydropower potential of the Mamasa River
identified a scheme which takes the tailrace water from Bakaru I HPP (and the proposed Bakaru II
HPP) into a headrace tunnel for an installed capacity of 146.5 MW further downstream. This scheme
is referred to as Bakaru III HPP.

By using IPTD project savings for the preparation of Poko HPP, the Bank can effectively support PLN
to optimize the development of the basin and to minimize the overall impacts on the environment and
society. The ESIA expected to be financed by the IPTD's project savings will include the preparation
of a cumulative impact assessment to ensure that basin-wide consideration is reflected in the design
and operation oft he proposed Poko HPP and the other existing and proposed HPP in the same basin.
Poko HPP itself will be processed as a separate stand-alone project/IPF for Bank financing.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Krisnan Pitradjaja Isomartana ( GEN2A )
Ninin K. Dewi ( GSURR )
Penelope Ruth Ferguson ( GENDR )
Sulistiowati Ms. ( GSURR )

6. Safeguard Policies                         Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01           Yes             The substation upgrading or extension,
                                                              from the IPTD savings project will have
similar potential adverse environmental
impacts as the IPTD project. They are
construction related impacts (noise, dust,
prohibition of PCBs, worker exposure to
electromagnetic fields (EMF) where an
existing substation is present, etc.) and
impacts during substation operations-
mostly related to health and safety
aspects. The project related to
substation extension/upgrading after
restructuring will continue to use the
current ESMF to screen subprojects and
prepare specific instruments such as
ESIA or ESMP, where required, based
upon screening.

The restructured project shall also
finance technical studies and safeguards
document preparation (ESIA, ESMP) for
the Poko HPP, which will be processed
as a separate stand-alone project for
Bank financing. The construction of
Poko HPP will have significant,
irreversible, and large scale potential
environmental and social impacts. Thus,
it is a Category A project. The potential
impacts of the proposed project will be
assessed in the ESIA, which will be
financed by the restructured IPTD
project. The ToR for the ESIA will be
prepared and submitted to the Bank for
review. Since the Indonesian regulation
on AMDAL requires the consultant to
prepare a detailed KA AND AL (detailed
ESIA ToR) including specific
methodologies on sampling and analysis,
and to conduct consultations based on
the KA ANDAL/detailed ToR, public
consultations will be held after the
consultant is mobilized. The task team
supports the harmonizing of the ESIA
and AMDAL, and agreed that convening
consultations based on the KA
ANDAL/detailed TOR satisfies the
relevant Bank policies. The ESIA will be
submitted by PLN to the Bank for
review. Once the Poko HPP is processed
separately for Bank financing, the ESIA
will also be submitted to and reviewed
by the Bank and will be disclosed locally
                                    and in the Bank's Infoshop to meet the
                                    Bank's disclosure requirements.

                                    The updating of the feasibility study on
                                    Poko HPP includes geotechnical
                                    investigation involving drilling of
                                    approximately 10 bore holes, excavation
                                    of one or two adits (small tunnels) for
                                    in-situ tests, and use of explosives for the
                                    seismic refraction survey. World Bank
                                    Group EHS (Environmental Health and
                                    Safety) General Guidelines and specific
                                    Guidelines for Mining shall be used to
                                    manage, mitigate and monitor potential
                                    impacts of this study especially related to
                                    ?Special Hazard in Underground Mining
                                    and Use of Explosives. The ToR for the
                                    updating of the feasibility study, which
                                    includes the sub-contracting of
                                    geotechnical investigation, shall be
                                    reviewed by the Bank's Safeguards
                                    Specialist.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The restructured project will finance the
                                    preparation of Poko HPP. This project
                                    will have potential adverse impacts on
                                    natural habitats (forest areas, river
                                    systems, freshwater aquatic ecosystem,
                                    terrestrial flora and fauna, etc).
                                    Assessing impacts on natural habitats
                                    will be included in the ToR for the ESIA
                                    and mitigation measures will be included
                                    in the ESMP or could include a separate
                                    stand-alone Biodiversity Management
                                    Plan depending upon the scale of
                                    impacts on natural habitats.

                                    The substation upgrading/extension
                                    component financed by this project will
                                    not cause adverse impact to natural
                                    habitats as the projects are mostly
                                    located at existing substation locations.
                                    This project component will continue to
                                    use the current ESMF from IPTD.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   The restructured project will finance the
                                    preparation of Poko HPP. This could
                                    lead to an investment decision which
                                    would result in potential adverse impact
                                    to natural forests. The information
                                    available at this stage from PLN revealed
                                               that no protection forest norconservation
                                               forest will be directly impacted by the
                                               project. The ToR for the ESIA has
                                               included an initial screening study that
                                               will include the investigation of sensitive
                                               areas such as natural forests. Mitigation
                                               measures will be included in the ESMP
                                               or could include a separate stand-alone
                                               Biodiversity Management Plan
                                               depending upon the scale of impacts on
                                               natural forests.
                                               In addition the ESIA study will also
                                               assess forest health and forest-dependent
                                               communities, if any.

                                               For the existing IPTD project, substation
                                               upgrading and extension will not cause
                                               an adverse impact to forest areas as the
                                               projects are mostly located at existing
                                               substation locations.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No    The restructured project will not
                                               purchase pesticides or cause potential
                                               increase in pesticide use from the
                                               technical studies funded under the
                                               project, nor from the substation
                                               upgrading/extension project.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes   The restructured project will finance the
                                               preparation of Poko HPP that could
                                               cause potential impact on PCRs. The
                                               ToR for the ESIA will include a
                                               requirement to assess and manage PCR
                                               aspects under the project.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            Yes   There is no new substation that will be
                                               built under the saving loan. All activities
                                               are extension and up-rating of the
                                               existing substations. The substations
                                               themselves have been operated for years
                                               and no issues reported regarding the
                                               impact of their operations to the
                                               surrounding areas. As the existing IPTD,
                                               the restructured project will not create
                                               any issue on indigenous peoples.

                                               Based on a preliminary screening
                                               process and site visits to the Poko HPP
                                               site, indigenous peoples as defined by
                                               OP4.10 were not identified. However,
                                               screening for indigenous peoples as
                                               defined in OP4. l 0 must still be
                                            conducted in the ESIA to confirm this,
                                            and that may result in the need to prepare
                                            an IPP.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12   Yes   The existing IPTD project has minor
                                            impact on the resettlement, with only
                                            one LARAP provided for the 4
                                            substations in Sumatera area. The lands
                                            which were mostly acquired through
                                            direct negotiation is almost 100%
                                            finished with no major issue encountered
                                            during its implementation.

                                            For the restructured project, it is
                                            confirmed that none of the 30 (thirty)
                                            subprojects will need land acquisition as
                                            the activities are extension and up-rating
                                            of the existing substations.

                                            The restructured project will prepare the
                                            Poko HPP which will involve land
                                            acquisition and resettlement. A recent
                                            KfW-funded study to optimize the
                                            cascade development of Poko and
                                            Bakaru HPPs (February 2015) made
                                            preliminary assessment that at the
                                            proposed full supply level of Poko
                                            HPP?s dam at 820 m, 153 households
                                            (677 people) in the proposed reservoir
                                            area will need to be resettled. The
                                            following areas need land
                                            acquisition/LARAP: dam site and
                                            hydropower facilities, reservoir, access
                                            road, transmission line, and quarry.
                                            Since layout of site requirements could
                                            change during basic design and as
                                            watershed management impacts are
                                            specified, each LARAP should include a
                                            description of the process for preparing
                                            and implementing future LARAPs in
                                            case there is any change on alignment of
                                            the project or need for added land
                                            acquisition.
                                            PLN will prepare the LARAPs with its
                                            own financing. Once the Poko HPP is
                                            processed separately for Bank financing,
                                            the LARAPs will also be submitted to
                                            and reviewed by the RSS and will be
                                            disclosed locally and in the Bank?s
                                            Infoshop to meet the Bank?s disclosure
                                            requirements.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                     Yes              The policy is triggered. The restructured
                                                               project will finance the preparation of
                                                               Poko HPP and will trigger OP 4.37 on
                                                               Safety of Dams. The ToR for the
                                                               updating of the feasibility study will
                                                               include provisions to adhere to OP 4.37,
                                                               and relevant sections of dam safety will
                                                               be included in the ESIA. As per OP 4.37,
                                                               the restructured project will also be used
                                                               to recruit a panel of experts which will
                                                               be fielded at key milestones of the
                                                               feasibility study and the preparation of
                                                               EISA and LARAP.

                                                               The substation upgrading and extension
                                                               component will not have activities
                                                               related to Dam Safety.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No                   The existing IPTD project and the
7.50                                                           proposed restructured project will not
                                                               have projects that are located in
                                                               international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60         No               The existing IPTD project and the
                                                               proposed restructured project will not
                                                               have projects that are located in disputed
                                                               areas.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
While the restructured project itself will not finance the development of any hydropower projects, the
studies and assessments financed by this project for Poko HPP can lead to an investment decision to
develop Poko HPP which would potentially have significant, large scale and irreversible adverse
environmental impacts on natural habitats or critical natural habitats such as forest area (production or
protection forest), river system, freshwater aquatic ecosystem, terrestrial flora and fauna etc. Also it
will have significant social impacts as the project will involve resettlement and potential impacts to
PCRs, Indigenous people (to be confirmed through ESIA survey) and Dam Safety. It is a therefore
considered a Category A project.

In addition, the updating of the feasibility study includes geotechnical investigation involving drilling
of approximately 10 bore holes, excavation of one or two adits (small tunnels) for in-situ tests, and use
of explosives for the seismic refraction survey. The World Bank Group?s EHS Guidelines for
"Mining" shall be used to manage, mitigate and monitor the potential impacts of this study especially
those related to ?Special Hazard in Underground Mining? and ?Use of Explosives?.

For the substation extension/upgrading, based on the documents furnished by PLN and the current
implementation of the ESMF, the Bank has concluded that impacts from IPTD sub-projects for
extension and upgrading are likely to be modest, non-sensitive and reversible, and in every case,
 mitigation measures can be designed to reduce the negative impacts.

  Expected impacts during construction include (i) increased level of dust and noise from the use and
  movement of machinery; (ii) non-toxic solid waste during construction; (iii) oil spill or leakage from
  machinery or transformers; (iv) prohibition of PCB and (v) worker health and safety from existing
  EMF. Impacts during operation include (i) oil leak from transformers; (ii) fire and emergency
  preparedness; (iii) solid waste and (iv) worker health and safety.                1

  For substation extension/upgrading using project savings, the current ESMF will continue to be used.
· The template for Environment Management Plans (EMPs) under the ESMF have been used for all
  subprojects under IPTD and it is found to be adequate in addressing and mitigating potential
  environmental adverse impact from the project. The template for LARAP and IPP are also available in
  the ESMF. A Land Acquisition and Resettlement Plan (LARAP) has been prepared for four
  substations in Sumatra that require land acquisition for the IPTD project. The EMPs and LARAP have
  been reviewed by the Bank and found to be satisfactory.

 PL N's Emergency Preparedness and Response procedures and Worker Health and Safety requirements
 under its transmission projects were reviewed by the Bank team and found to be consistent with
 international good practice.
 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
 the project area:
 No long term adverse impact is envisaged from the extension/upgrading components of the
 restructured project. The reinforcement of substations will result in improvement of power supply
 adequacy and quality in the project areas, which is an ingredient for economic growth and household
 quality of life. However, for Poko HPP construction, which the restructured project will only support
 the preparation of, there are potential indirect and /or induced impacts from the project that need to be
 taken into account during ESIA preparation such as biodiversity impacts, potential illegal logging by
 local community in the forest area by using the project?s access road, social impacts such as camp
 followers and HIV/AIDS. RSS will review the ToR of the ESIA to ensure these potential indirect and
 or long term impacts are taken into account.
 3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
 impacts.
 For substation extension projects involving land acquisition, alternatives were considered to minimize
 impacts on resettlement and environment. A recent KfW-funded study, conducted in two-stages, to
 optimize the cascade development of Poko and Bakaru HPPs (February and September 2015) involved
 an analysis on the power system in Sulawesi which concluded the need for PLN to develop Poko HPP
 to meet the projected increase in electricity demand. The study also involved analysis on alternative
 dam heights in order to limit the number of households requiring physical relocation. The updating of
 the feasibility study, and the preparation of the ESIA and LARAP for Poko HPP will include further
 analyses. The ToRs for ESIA and LARAP, in particular, shall be submitted to RSS for review.
 4. Describ~ measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
 assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
 For the substation extension/upgrading that will be financed by the savings, the project implementing
 agency (PT PLN) will continue to use the ESMF that shall include the development of EMPs for all
 subprojects and LARAP for subprojects that involve land acquisition. The EMPs and LARAP for
 IPTD have been reviewed by the Bank and found to be satisfactory. PLN has experience with World
 Bank projects such as the Java Bali Power Sector Restructuring and Strengthening Project, IPTD,
 Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage Hydropower Project and others.
Environmental impacts from the substation extension/upgrading project will be mitigated according to
measures set out in the EMPs. Measures include the following: (i) the construction site will be
sprinkled with water (ii) construction activities will be performed only during normal working hours;
if construction activities have to be performed before or after the specified time limits, the local
society must be notified in advance; (iii) Contaminated soils and solid waste will be removed and
disposed to sites approved by local authorities; (iv) Bidding documents shall prohibit procurement of
equipment containing PCBs. For the construction phase, the EMP for each substation will be included
in the bidding documents and contracts as legal obligations for contractors to implement. During
operation, the EMP will be transferred to the respective operating entities for implementation.

Permanent land will be compensated in the form of land substitution or cash at market value. Crops or
trees will be compensated at market value or be replaced. Impacts to land under ROW due to
temporary use by PLN during construction and land use limitation by owners during operation will be
compensated at negotiated values to be agreed upon with the affected households and in consultation
with local governments. The restructured project will support the preparation of Poko Hydro.
Safeguards instruments such as the ESIA, and LARAP will be prepared and disclosed during the
implementation of the restructured project in the future.                      '

PLN also has adequate experience in preparing ESIAs for high risk projects funded by the World
Bank, ADB, KfW and others. Safeguards instruments such as the ESIA, and LARAP for Poko HPP
will be prepared and disclosed during the implementation of the restructured project in the future. A
special unit in PLN is responsible for handling the preparation of safeguards documents under the
Division Head ofHSSE (Health, Safety, Security, and Environment). Several full time staff dealing
with the preparation of safeguards documents and technical studies also participated in the preparation
of the Upper Cisokan hydropower project, Mattenggeng hydropower project, and several geothermal
projects. PLN UIP XII, which is the PLN office located in South Sulawesi responsible for the
proposed Poko HPP, also has a full time safeguards staff member but limited staff and low level
management to cover hydropower plant as Category A project. Due to the complexity of land
acquisition and resettlement of a hydropower project, PLN Headquarter is considering elevating the
responsibility of land acquisition including resettlement, legal issues and public communication in UIP
XII from the current sub-manager level to the manager level as in UIP VI for Upper Cisokan
Pumped-Storage Project.

For substation extension/upgrading, two Regional Project Offices in Java and Sumatra under PLN are
directly responsible for the preparation and implementation ofEMPs and LARAPs. PLN and its
Regional Project Office in Java have experience with the implementation of WB financed projects.
They have involved broadly similar safeguards issues and mitigation and are experienced with WB
requirements regarding preparation and implementation ofEMPs and LARAPs. The Regional Project
Office in Sumatra has now four competent environment and social specialists as its permanent staff.
They are very experienced with national regulations as land acquisition and environment management
is a common practice in PLN. During preparation, environment and social staff of the two project
offices received training from the Bank team. They have prepared satisfactory EMP and LARAP for
the subprojects under their responsibility. During supervision, further training will be provided to PLN
staffs in charge of social and environment management. Progress of EMP and LARAP implementation
will be carefully monitored.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The KA ANDAL /detailed TOR for the ESIA study will be publicly disclosed and meaningful
consultations shall be prepared and conducted by PLN UIP Xl 1 in Makassar. At least one other round
 of comprehensive consultations shall be conducted once the draft ESIA completed as per Ministry of
 Environment Regulation no 17/2012 and OP 4.01. Key stakeholders are the local community, project
 affected people, local government officer, local NGOs and national NGOs, Local Forestry Agency,
 Environmental Agency.

 Public consultations on EMP/LARAP for extension/upgrading of substations subprojects that involve
 land acquisition shall be conducted as per the ESMF taking into account lessons learned from the
 IPTD project. For subprojects that will be implemented within their existing premises, public
 comments were solicited through posting the EMPs on PLN?s website and in the respective project
 offices.
 Announcements in local newspapers were made for this consultation. Stakeholder concerns were
 incorporated into the project design and EMPs.

 All the EMPs and LARAP in Bahasa of the existing project have been publicly disclosed.

 B. Disclosure Requirements
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  31-Jan-2018
 Date of submission to lnfoShop                                               3l-Jan-2018
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
 EA to the Executive Directors
 "In country" Disclosure
 Indonesia                                                                    31-Jan-2018
 Comments: All the EMPs and LARAP of the existing project (IPTD) had been publicly disclosed in
           Infoshop on February 3, 2010. For substation extension/upgrading of the restructured
           project, the current ESMF will continue to b~ used. The restructured project will finance
           existing IPTD projects, additional locations realized through project savings, along with
           technical studies and safeguards instruments for the Poko HPP. The restructured
           project is not for financing the physical construction of Poko HPP. The safeguards
           instruments for Poko HPP that will be prepared include the TOR for the ESIA study, the
           ESIA document, and LARAP or IPP (if required). The ToR for the EISA was reviewed
           by the RSS on January 26, 2016. The disclosure of these documents shall take place at a
           later point in time.
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
· Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 15-Mar-2018
 Date of submission to lnfoShop                                               30-Mar-2018
 "In country" Disclosure
 Indonesia                                                                    31-Jan-2018
 Comments: The Resettlement Action Framework of the existing project had been publicly disclosed
           in InfoShop on February 3, 2010. The disclosure of the safeguards documents for Poko
           HPP shall take place in the future during the implementation of Poko HPP project.
 Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  31-Jan-2018
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                 131-Jan-2018
"In country" Disclosure
Indonesia                                                                      j31-Jan-2018
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
To be undertaken in the future during the implementation of the Poko HPP.

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [X]          No [ 1     NA [   ]

If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager Yes [ X 1 No[          ]   NA [- ]
(PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in      Yes [XJ     No [ 1     NA l   1
the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04- Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or              Yes [ 1 No [X]         NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation   Yes [ X 1 No [ 1       NA [ 1
of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural              Yes [ X 1 No [     ]   NA [ 1
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the            Yes [ X 1 No [     ]   NA [ 1
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10- Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate fndigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as       Yes [XJ        No [ 1     NA [ ]
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or       Yes [X]     No [ 1     NA [ 1
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [X]
reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit
or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [X]          No [   l   NA [ 1
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or      Yes [X)     No [   l    NA [   l
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                         Yes [X)     No [   l   TBD [   l

677 Provide estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to       Yes [   l   No [   l   TBD [X]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and   Yes [X)     No [   l    NA [   l
constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome     Yes [X)     No [   l    NA [   l
these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it    Yes [   l   No [X)      NA [   l
include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                  Yes [X)     No [   l   NA [    l
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Yes [ X l       No [   l    NA [   l
Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and            Yes [XJ     No [   l   NA [    l
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [X)         No [   l   NA [    l
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes (XJ       No [   l   NA [    l
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional            Yes [X)     No [   l   NA [    l
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in      Yes [XJ     No [   l   NA [    l
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include      Yes (XJ     No[    l   NA [    l
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with        Yes [X)     No [   l   NA [    l
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s):        Name: Dhruva Sahai
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:         Name: Peter Leonard, S   ate: 06/15/2016
Practice Manager/Manager:   Name: Julia Fraser, PM    te: 06/15/2016
