Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC433 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: January 6, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Indonesia 
Project ID: P083742 
Project Name: Farmers Empowerment through 
Agriculture Technology and Information (FEATI) 
Task Team Leader: Mohamed N. Benali 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 10, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: May 18, 2005 
Managing Unit: EASRD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: Agricultural extension and research 
(50%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry 
sector (20%);Agro-industry (20%);Agricultural 
marketing and trade (10%) 
Theme: Participation and civic engagement 
(P);Analysis of economic growth (P);Other public 
sector governance (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Gregory Guldin 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 30 
IBRD: 70 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN] 
  
 
1. 
The overall development objective of the Project  would be to increase agricultural productivity 
and farmers’ income in selected districts of Indonesia.  This would be achieved by empowering smallholders to 
drive the agricultural services agenda and improve their access to technical and market information, improving the 
delivery of research and extension services and by promoting technology/farmers/agribusiness pilot partnerships.  
The achievement of this objective would be monitored through:  
(i) 
improved relevance of agricultural services/technologies/information -  to be measured by 
increased adoption rates;  
(ii) 
increases in yields of major crops - to be measured by yield increments. 
 
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN] 
 
2. 
As conceived, the FEATI would be a specific investment lending operation, with 
a tentative cost of around US$130 million which would finance the following four components: 
a. 
Agricultural/Forestry Extension Services.
  The scaling up of the DAFEP-style extension 
methodology, farmer/village managed activities and district extension committees to allow 
individual farmers and farmer groups to influence the agricultural services agenda would be at the 
core of the proposed FEATI.  The Project would finance support and training to public and private 
agricultural and forestry extension service providers at district level.  The FEATI would also 
support the central agriculture and forestry extension departments to improve their capacity to 
develop strategies/plans for the delivery and monitoring of extension services and for their linkage 
to research and agribusiness activities. 
b. Agriculture 
Research
.  Under this component, the FEATI would finance the conduct of applied 
research activities at the National Research Institutes and the provincial-level Assessment 
Institutes for Agricultural Technologies to enhance location specific technological innovations, 
including those in bio-technology.  It would set up farmer-driven competitive research funds at the 
provincial and district levels.  The FEATI would also finance staff training, research 
Page  2
 
 
management/monitoring activities; linkage activities between research, extension, RPOs and 
agribusiness. 
c. 
Support to Rural Producers Organizations.
  Under this component and as a pilot activity, the 
Project would support the formulation and enactment of complementary legal/regulatory 
framework that may be required to guarantee the independence and transparent management of 
truly representative RPOs.  The Project would assist in setting up eligibility criteria for RPOs to 
benefit from project support, and where appropriate, would help farmer groups organize 
themselves into associations. 
d. 
 Fund for the promotion of joint ventures.
   Under this novel component, the project would pilot 
the financing of joint ventures between technology generating institutions, farmers/RPOs and 
investors/agribusiness enterprises.  The objective of this component is to use novel technologies 
and the dynamism of agribusiness enterprises as a locomotive for improving farmers’ productivity 
and income. Project financial support would vary with the type of joint venture proposed.  It is 
expected that activities financed under this component would improve marketing channels, quality 
standards of agricultural products and promote off-farm job opportunities. Since not all joint 
venture proposals would be known and vetted before project approval, the project preparation 
team will define a set of criteria to evaluate and fund acceptable ventures during project 
implementation. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
[Guideline:  If the location is not yet identified, please indicate if there are alternative locations under consideration 
or how the location is to be determined during project preparation] 
3. 
The Provinces and specific district in which the Project will be implemented have not yet been defined.  
However, only the districts that have met the entry criteria (transparency and good governance) of the Initiative for 
Local Governance Reform Project or those willing to adopt similar criteria would be considered.  While the Project 
is intended to improve agricultural productivity and farmers’ income across its area of influence, special attention 
would be focused on poor farmers, women and other disadvantaged groups.    
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
[Guideline: Refer to Section 5 of PCN]
 
4. 
The institutional capacity for safeguard policy of the National Centers for Agricultural and Forestry 
Extension (NCAE and NCFE) and the Indonesian Agency for Agriculture Research and Development (IAARD) is 
adequate.   All three institutions have had previous experience in project implementation and are familiar with Bank 
procedures.  It is likely that the RPO component would be implemented by independent/grassroot organizations and 
the promotion of tripartite joint ventures by an agency of MOA.  IAARD already has an office in charge of 
promoting commercial ventures with the private agribusiness sector. 
 
5. 
It is expected that the Environmental Assessment (OD4.01), Pest Management (OP4.09) Safeguard Policies 
would apply.  A social Assessment (SA) will be undertaken and its results will be incorporated in the project design.  
An Environmental Assessment (EA) for category B project would be prepared. It was agreed with the Borrower that 
the responsible Environmental Protection Bureaus would review and approve each of the individual feasibility 
studies for the tripartite joint venture proposals and propose environmental mitigation measures, in case of any 
negative impact.  During project preparation, all agricultural production activities would address the use of 
pesticides and would prepare and implement a pest management plan. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X ] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
The Bank requires environmental assessments (EA) of projects proposed for Bank financing to 
help ensure that they are environmentally sound and sustainable.  The EA assess the impact of the 
proposed technologies. 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[X ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
Page  3
 
 
 
Some of the productivity enhancing technologies may require the use of pesticides.  In such cases, 
pest management plans would be formulated and implemented.   
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that EA category 
(mandatory): 
6. 
The research, extension and joint venture activities to be implemented under the FEATI are not expected to 
trigger significant environmental issues, the Project would therefore be categorized as an Environmental Risk 
category B project.  This rating is based on the Task Team’s screening of the activities proposed for inclusion under 
the Project by NCAE, NCFE and IAARD.  An environmental assessment report would be prepared before appraisal. 
   
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A. 
Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared. 
The QER is scheduled for June 2004 
The PAD stage ISDS would be prepared as soon as the EA is completed and in any case before project 
appraisal. 
 
B. 
For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS 
 
C. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  The specific 
studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Mohamed N. Benali 
Date 
 Dec. 4, 2003 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Glenn Morgan 
January 16, 2004 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Rahul Raturi (see email of 12/4/03) 
Date 
Dec. 4, 2003 
Comments 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
Page  4
 
 
 
