Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC600 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/16/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Indonesia 
Project ID: P079906 
Project Name: Strategic Roads Infrastructure Project 
Task Team Leader: Hatim M. Hajj 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 18, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: November 25, 2005 
Managing Unit: EASTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Other economic management (P);Decentralization (S);Infrastructure services for 
private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
255.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
145.00
145.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objectives are: (i) to sustain competitiveness of regional  
 
economies and social well being of people by eliminating traffic bottlenecks along strategic  
 
arterial road corridors; and (ii) enhance road sector management capacity.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The .Strategic Road Infrastructure Project. (SRIP) will consists of two components:  
 
(i). Betterment and Capacity Expansion on Strategic Roads (US$ 350 million).  
 
This component will comprise a three-year investment program of strategic urban and  
 
inter-urban National road schemes currently suffering from traffic congestion or poor  
 
physical condition. Tentatively, this involves : (a) betterment of about 530 km of roads of  
 
(190 km urban and 340 km inter-urban); (b)capacity expansion of about 250 km of roads  
 
(110 km urban and 140 km inter-urban); (c) construction of 50 Km of new urban roads on  
 
new right-of-way; and (d) replacement of about 1200 meters of bridges on inter-urban  
 
roads. Realization of the preceding would require preparation of feasibility studies, final  
 
engineering design, traffic safety audits, contract documentation, environmental  
 
assessments, land acquisition and resettlement plans, as well as the physical works.  
Page  2
(ii). Institutional Development. This component consists of: (i) technical assistance  
 
directed at continued development of the urban road management system(URMS) and a  
 
comprehensive set of design standards and guidelines for Indonesia; (ii) introduction of  
 
innovative contracting activities to improve quality of works and reduce costs, such as  
 
performance-based contracting; and (iii) support for human resource development  
 
through training.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The inter-urban roads targeted under the project are expected to be almost entirely located in  
 
Java. This was a strategic choice made by the Government, due to the fact that equivalent needs  
 
of other islands are covered under other donor-financed projects. The urban component will  
 
cover Java, Sumatra, Kalimantan, Bali and a few cities in the Eastern islands that were not  
 
included under the Eastern Indonesia Road Transport Projects (EIRTP- 1 and the proposed  
 
EIRTP- 2).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The institutional capacity for safeguards policy at the Ministry of Settlements and Regional  
 
Infrastructure- MSRI - is good weak at the provincial levels (Bapedalda, environmental 
agencies  
 
at the provincial level). At the MSRI level, the Environmental Sub-Directorate in the 
Directorate  
 
General of Regional Infrastructure has substantial safeguards experience working on Bank  
 
projects, including the ongoing Sumatra Region Roads Project- SRRP: Loan 4307 and the  
 
Eastern Indonesia Region Transport Project- EIRTP-1: Loan 4643- IND, and the recently  
 
completed Strategic Urban Roads Infrastructure Project- SURIP: Loan 4054- IND. This is one  
 
of the strongest such units in any of the GoI line ministries, and it will be involved in directing  
 
the preparatory safeguards work and in overseeing the implementation of impact management  
 
and monitoring. However, the principal agencies are equally if not more important in this  
 
project. , and despite the strengthening provided in the environmental areas under the above  
 
projects to the provincial level, more support is needed. During project preparation consultants  
 
have been engaged to prepare the required environmental, social, land acquisition and  
 
resettlement studies. Review consultants have been selected to review those aspects.  
 
Environmentalists / social experts will be included in the consulting teams which will supervise  
 
implementation of the civil works under the project. Strengthening will also be provided to the  
 
Bapedaldas in the concerned provinces where the civil works are located.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Most of the  capacity expansion sub-projects to be included under SRIP will have major 
environmental impacts and thus would require full environmental impact assessments.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Some of the capacity expansion schemes might affect natural habitat.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
Some of the sub-projects included under SRIP may affect cultural property and trigger OP 
4.11. The environmental screening procedure to be included under the project and the  annual 
work program approval process will ensure the project will not adversely affect sites having 
archeological , paleontological, historical, religious or unique natural values.  Any contracts let 
under the project will include a provision covering procedures to be followed in the event of 
?chance finds?.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 
X
Some of the capacity expansion sub-projects to be included under SRIP might affect 
indigenous people (isolated vulnerable people) and trigger OD 4.20. The project will include a 
screening procedure to identify such sub-projects.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Most of the  capacity expansion sub-projects to be included under SRIP will require land 
acquisition and thus would require land acquisition and resettlement action plans.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/09/2004 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  05/30/2005 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Consultants were selected (according to TOR approved by the Bank) and have started  
 
application of the two-stage screening procedure developed under EIRTP-1 to determine 
which  
 
of
the already identified sub-projects require an environmental impact assessment 
(ANDAL), a  
 
site-specific environmental management and monitoring plan (UKL/UPL), or standard  
 
environmental operating procedures (SOPs); land acquisition and resettlement action plan  
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
(LARAP), an abbreviated LARAP, and preparation of an indigenous people.s development 
plan  
 
(IPDPs). For those activities not yet identified a land acquisition and resettlement policy  
 
framework and a framework for treatment of indigenous peoples (isolated vulnerable 
people) are  
 
being prepared. .  
 
The EIAs, UKL/UPLs, LARAPs, abbreviated LARAPs, tracer studies in case the land has 
been  
 
acquired less than two years from the expected date of signing of the loan agreement for 
SRIP,  
 
and IPDPs for the sub-projects to be included in the first year annual work program (AWP-
1) as  
 
well as the policy frameworks for land acquisition and resettlement and for indigenous 
people  
 
are expected to be completed by the end of June 2004. The corresponding studies for 
subprojects  
 
to be included under AWP-2 are expected to be completed by the end of August 2004.  
 
Those studies will be reviewed by the Consultant who is preparing the project (through 
PHRD  
 
financing), review consultants (financed by Japanese Consultant Trust Fund) and by the 
Bank.s  
 
safeguard specialists on the project task team.  
 
The sub-projects to be included in the three year annual work programs under which SRIP 
will  
 
be
implemented have largely been identified. However, the list might have to be reduced to 
be  
 
accommodated within the available financing. Further, the list might be altered as a result of  
 
intensive consultations with the affected provinces and urban areas.  
 
1
Reminder: The Bank.s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be 
disclosed before appraisal (i) at the  
 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language 
that are accessible to potentially affected  
 
persons.  
 
Consultation is a requirement for all sub-projects that require an EIA (ANDAL) or a 
LARAP. In  
 
the urban areas the need for consultation is very important because the problems are often 
more  
 
complex. Pertinent government agencies at all levels, the public (especially the displaced  
 
people), NGOs, and the local and provincial environmental agencies (Bapedaldas) will be  
 
involved in the process of planning, design and implementation. The bank will not give its 
no  
 
objection to contracts with contractors till land and payment of compensation and 
resettlement  
 
have been substantially completed   
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Hatim M. Hajj 
02/13/2004 
Approved by: 
 
R
egional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
02/16/2004 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Maria Teresa Serra 
02/16/2004 
Comments:   
