Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/21/2005 
Report No.:  AC1519
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Indonesia 
Project ID:  P085374 
Project Name:  Higher Education for Relevance and Efficiency (Co-TTL = Susiana 
Iskandar) 
Task Team Leader:  Richard R. Hopper 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 10, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 7, 2005 
Managing Unit:  EASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Tertiary education (100%) 
Theme:  Education for the knowledge economy (P);Decentralization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
83.10 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
33.95
33.95 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
To create an enabling environment for the evolution of autonomous public higher 
education institutions (HEIs), and to develop effective support mechanisms for the 
improvement of the quality, relevance, efficiency, and equity of higher education.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component one: This component will support the government to implement Indonesia's 
Higher Education Long-Term Strategy (HELTS). The goal of the HELTS is to develop 
and expand financing mechanisms that provide incentives for academic quality and 
efficient institutional performance.  This component supports HELTS by refining the 
legal framework for higher education, building institutional capacities of the DGHE, 
assisting BAN-PT to develop an institutional accreditation program, and developing a 
strategy to revitalize the Open University - Indonesia?s largest institution of continuing 
education.  The proposed higher education reforms require an enabling framework that 
permits the Directorate General for Higher Education (DGHE) to encourage a results-
oriented culture of quality and efficiency across all HEIs.  To make the move toward 
institutional autonomy more effective, this project will focus on supporting several policy 
adjustments and on capacity building.  Component two: This component further supports 
HELTS by improving the quality of higher education through targeted investments and 
Page  2
by improving management capacity at HEIs.  This would be achieved through the 
expansion of competitive grants to HEIs and through the introduction of performance-
based contracting for newly autonomous HEIs.  Performance-based financing will be 
piloted at the autonomous public institutions with the strongest management capacity.  If 
successful, the pilots could be scaled up across all autonomous HEIs in the subsequent 
phases of reform.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be centrally managed from the Directorate General for Higher Education 
in the Ministry of National Education. Grants will be managed locally by the individual 
higher education institutions receiving grant awards, but HEI compliance with financial 
management, procurement and safeguards will be overseen by the DGHE and supervised 
by the World Bank.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
Page  3
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
Page  4
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Richard R. Hopper 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Farida Zaituni 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christopher J. Thomas 
 
Comments:   
