                             Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

                                                                                            Report No: AC574
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/16/2004
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: INDONESIA                                        Project ID: P078070
Project: SUPPORT OF CONFLICT-RIDDEN AREAS                 Task Team Leader: Scott E. Guggenheim
PROJECT
Authorized to Appraise Date: June 15, 2004                IBRD Amount ($m): 25.00
Bank Approval: June 17, 2004                              IDA Amount ($m): 20.00
Managing Unit: EASES                                      Sector: Other social services (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)        Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict
Status: Lending                                           reconstruction (P)


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The general objective of this project is to help the government develop and pilot strategies to
support transition to longer-term development in post-conflict areas. The project will achieve this
objective through three types of activities:

l strengthening community-led planning and dispute resolution processes;
l promoting private investment and job creation.
l increasing utilization of effective education and health services.



I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The project is expected to have three main components, all of which contribute to a transitional
program for re-starting development.         The objectives of the components are to promote
local-level reconciliation; to re-start productive activity and spur the sustainable creation of jobs;
and to restore the provision of human development services to standard levels of coverage and
quality.

The three components are:

a)      Community development, reconciliation, and dispute resolution
b)      Improving the Investment Environment
b)      Education and Health Services

A.      Community reconciliation and development will carry out a range of activities
designed to provide village members with formal and informal mechanisms for dispute resolution
that provide an alternative to violence. The planning procedures for this component will be built
around the same procedures being used for the Kecamatan Development Project, which will also
be taking place in the project locations. SCRAP complements KDP but it funds different items
and requires a different facilitation and oversight structure.

                                                   2
                                                                                                 ISDS


        SCRAP's community development work consists of five types of activities:

        (i)      Investment for rehabilitating infrastructure that emerge from the KDP planning
process but require the cooperation of two or more villages -- these proposals are likely to include
simple, infrastructure such as repair of extended water supply systems, broken bridges and the
like, but can also include regreening and reforestation in areas where conflict led to widespread
cutting of orchards. A preparation decision will be whether to allow use of the funds for some
types of private goods if this activity is proposed through the collective village forum and is
directly linked to catastrophic results of the conflict (KDP experience in Lampung provides
examples of kecamatans collectively agreeing to rebuild houses for villages that were burned to
the ground during the conflict as part of a kecamatan-wide reconciliation program; in Maluku
villages large numbers of farmers cannot afford to re-plant trees cut down by raiding parties, etc);

        (ii)     Sociocultural programs that promote cross-village encounters, such as sports
leagues, cultural performances that build peace, village arts programs, and the like (sponsorship
for these will potentially be linked to the business forums described in Component "B");

        (iii)    Expanding the $2.5 million program for vulnerable female headed households in
conflict areas (PEKKA) that was piloted in four provinces under a JSDF grant to the seven
SCRAP provinces. The program combines a long organizing/empowerment program with a series
of micro-grants for widows and other female heads of household, and in SCRAP it will be linked
to some of the activities funded by the rural health program (component "C"). A similar program
but with more of an emphasis on vocational training and job information will be developed for
village youth;

        (iv)     Given the prevalence of land disputes in rural Indonesia and the relatively
successful experiences with community based boundary mapping, SCRAP will fund experienced
NGOs to introduce community based mapping programs into kecamatans with boundary related
land conflicts. These community managed mapping programs will not have a legal standing
because Indonesia is still developing appropriate land registration systems for traditional land
management systems. But introducing a program that gets communities to map and adjudicate
where they themselves think their boundaries are will provide a first step towards giving
disputants an "independent" referent when boundary conflicts break out.

        (v)      SCRAP will draw on the Bank-funded Justice for the Poor ESW to develop and
strengthen formal and informal mechanisms for local-level dispute resolution. Preparation will
assess options and develop more specific proposals, but options for the formal system that are
under consideration by government include a program to recruit and equip a circuit court that
would hear cases in kecamatan centers, programs for community-police oversight committees,
and programs to monitor and disseminate court decisions. Informal dispute settlement training
will primarily cover training programs and the possible development of a dispute referral system.

        This component uses three main organizational mechanisms to propose and manage
activities. In the villages, each village nominates male and female representatives who the villagers
believe can mediate disputes. They will be trained by SCRAP. The inter-village forums established

                                                  3
                                                                                                ISDS


through KDP will be the kecamatan level mechanism for reviewing inter-village investment
proposals (financial thresholds will provide the screen for size). Finally, representatives of the
inter-village forums will form a re-development forum at the district level which will work with
DPRDs and civil society groups. They will screen and approve the sociocultural proposals coming
from the villages and kecamatans using the project's review criteria.

        Preparation will determine the most appropriate contracting structure for the work on
dispute resolution. Programs piloted under KDP suggest that a combination of university-based
lawyers and advocacy NGOs can provide training and oversight for community based dispute
resolution. Programs sponsored by the Partnership for Governance Reform are piloting
mechanisms for community policing. The most difficult proposal to develop may be the pilot to
form a circuit court staffed by judges recruited because of documented honesty and experience
with local level dispute resolution. Preliminary visits to Central Kalimantan and North Maluku
show strong local government demand for these activities, which is consistent with Indonesia
CAS strategies of supporting subnational governance reform.

        The CDD component will be supported by a kabupaten level consultant team that can
provide three main services: (i) training for the village and kecamatan representatives; (ii)
technical review of the investment proposals; and (iii) initiation of community level reconciliation
activities. The consultant team will also provide a bridge between the CDD component and the
work of the other two components that is described below.

Estimated costs of grants
Estimated costs of facilitation
Estimated costs for legal program

B.      The Investment Environment Component will promote private investment in the
conflict areas in three ways. First, rapid surveys carried out by local universities will identify
policies or regulations that block local investment. Repealing them will be the ticket for entry into
the project, as will adoption of the core KGRIP fiduciary reform package (preparation will assess
the realism of these entry conditions once the KGRIP package is finalized). Ongoing monitoring
by universities and NGOs will make sure that once off, they stay off. Second, the project will
establish business forums in each kabupaten that work with the local planning board and civil
society groups to identify investments that would make for a more business friendly environment.
Third, the project will establish a kabupaten investment fund that will allow conflict affected
kabupaten to repair or rehabilitate basic infrastructure identified by the business forums and
bappedas as essential to private investment.

        Investment funds in this component will go to two activities. One business forum will be
for micro-entrepeneurs who have lost their productive assets to the conflict. Provided that proper
screening procedures can be developed during preparation, this group will be eligible for one-off
grants that allow them to purchase replacement productive assets. The second business forum is
for larger commercial enterprises. It will use the PSD decentralized private sector forum
methodology to identify existing productive infrastructure whose rehabilitation would have a
positive investment on private businesses working ability. Priorities identified by this forum would

                                                    4
                                                                                                  ISDS


be submitted to the investment fund for technical review. Feasible proposals would be tendered
using procedures acceptable to the WB.

        Technical assistance needs for this component would be reviewed during preparation. For
the small business forum, NGOs are likely to provide the most appropriate support. For the large
business forum, it is expected that an internationally experienced engineer/procurement specialist
will be needed to review proposals and to help local governments become familiar with World
Bank fiduciary procedures. Since a number of larger businesses would like to contribute to
"social" projects in their neighborhood, technical assistance during preparation will assess options
for creating a private-sector co-investment fund for the community development component.

Estimated costs for surveys
Estimated costs for business forums
Estimated costs for investment fund

C.      Education and Health

        The Education and Health Component aims to improve the utilization of effective and
acceptable programs by families in project areas, with particular focus on service provision at the
community level. Component objectives (see outputs) are:
       l adequate number of functioning schools and health facilities providing basic services to
            a defined standard. (preparation will identify whether a defined set of minimum
            conditions for effective service delivery exists at schools and primary health care
            facilities);
       l to ensure that host communities are active in service planning, management and
            monitoring;
       l to strengthen linkages between the line agency and the community to ensure
            sustainable service provision (including greater use of non-government providers
            where appropriate);
       l to reduce financial barriers to access to essential services; and
       l to promote greater utilization of services through community-level awareness
            campaigns ­ for example back-to-school programs that attempt to attract and retain
            students in whatever levels of schooling the community feel is appropriate.

      Component Activities
      The component will achieve broad-based participation in and utilization of adequate
education and health services by:

1.      Appointing district facilitators and district committees, The component will achieve
broad-based participation in the utilization of adequate health and education services by funding
improvements proposed by communities and supported by the line agencies and local government.
The provess will include the following steps: (i) facilitators will help complete the Participatory
Rapid Appraisal; (ii) discussion of intervention options available to the community to address
identified needs; (iii) proposal preparation; and (iv) service improvement/reintroduction. The
inter-village forum will work to co-ordinate activities with District Health and Education

                                                    5
                                                                                                      ISDS


Committees (DHEC). Membership on the DHEC includes line agency staff, Bappeda, user
groups, women, and NGOs. TOR and membership will be prepared.

2.       Conducting Participative Rapid Assessments (PRAs) of health and education needs,
existing services and financing and cost structures in targeted communities. Based on PRA
outcomes, facilitators will coordinate the prioritization of community needs and will develop brief,
costed proposals for project interventions. Results will be presented to District Health and
Education Committees and to the inter-village health and education forum (a sub-forum of the
inter-village forums being strengthened through KDP2 and 3) for public review and comment.

3.       Reviewing community proposals Based on the participatory rapid appraisal, community
proposals will be prepared with the assistance of the district facilitator. They will be reviewed to
ensure consistency with the national and district education and health plans.

5.      Resourcing and funding of interventions. The costs of approved interventions will be
shared by the project and district government. Transfers of funds to communities will be in
tranches, with agreed % of activity cost on signing, and further tranches at agreed intervals,
related to progress in implementation. Both project and government funds would be channeled
through the KPKN to the inter-village account held in a private or government bank. Where
non-monetary resources are involved (school materials packages, drugs, for example) these will
be supplied directly by the project or they will be supplied by a coordinating unit at a higher level,
such as the province. All funds will be accounted for in a public meeting of the inter-village
forum.

6.      Coordinating with government programs. Support and oversight of implementation
would be by community groups such as school of health facility committees and the sub-district
forum, assisted by the facilitators. Easy to understand, illustrated manuals will describe proposal
preparation; review and approval processes, timelines, fund channeling mechanism, financial
management procedures lines and implementation and resource use (for example, Safe
Motherhood Project District Block Grant Manual and SIGP rehabilitation guidelines). Dinas's
will be required to share district and sub-district sector plans and budgets with the inter-village
forum members.

The project will finance:
   l Block Grants to communities to finance: (i) in health a package of inputs related to need
        and selected health package, covering building refurbishment, approved equipment kits,
        contracts or bonuses for staff, fee relief etc.- ; and (ii) in education, school rehabilitation
        (and in a few cases, construction), operational costs, sanitation facilities, contract teachers
        teaching materials, fee relief, scholarships) ­ to be matched by district/national
        contributions;
   l Resource packages to supplement grant financed activities ­ to take advantage of
        economies of scale (books, teaching aids);
   l Measurs to reduce financial barriers of poor families (e.g. scholarships, fee relief, vouchers
        for maternal care services);
   l Complementary activity plans for the Dinas to ensure supervision and technical support

                                                        6
                                                                                                            ISDS


         for service quality and for the sustainability of the minimal service conditions and agreed
         intervention;
    l Management and implementation support (monitors, facilitators, committees, surveys,
         technically competent NGOs, etc);
    l Community-based incentives/allowances for health workers and teachers.


         Where appropriate, in addition to the core activities described for this component, the project will
support a rapid response to urgent needs by funding assistance packages already widely used in Indonesia,
such as the UNICEF school in a box, ICRC/IMC mobile clinic and outreach services, WHO public health
interventions, etc.

Activities and Cost estimates

Components:

Community Driven Development
Private Sector Development
Education and Health

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Specific project locations will be defined during advanced preparation. Preparation TOR include the
development of socioeconomic profiles for each participating province, although for targeted projects such as
this, where investments are also small, mitigation plans cannot be realistically prepared until district or even
subdistrictsite selections have been made. TOR for the profile are on file -- they include detailed assessments
of the population composition, sociocultural issues, and sensitive site locations. The ES safeguard coordinator
has reviewed the preparation plan.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: This project is expected to be ranked as a "B". Reasons are that:

(i)      the project will not build any new infrastructure. Constructed is limited to rehabilitation of existing
infrastructure that was damaged by the conflict;

(ii)     no large investments are planned;

(iii)    the project is inherently participatory;

(iv)     there will be no land acquisition.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered
     Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                         Yes     No       TBD
     Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                 Yes     No       TBD
     Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                  Yes     No       TBD
     Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    Yes     No       TBD

                                                         7
                                                                                                             ISDS


    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                   Yes     No       TBD
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                    Yes     No       TBD
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                           Yes     No       TBD
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                               Yes     No       TBD
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                    Yes     No       TBD
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                         Yes     No       TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
No large-scale safeguard issues are anticipated.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
No cumulative impacts are anticipated. Investments are discreet and limited. It is highlyunlikelythat two could
   takeplace in the same location.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
There are potential impacts arising from the restoration of growth. These will vary by province.
Preparation will assess what types of envrinmental planning (especially land use planning) are relevant for
project design.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)


II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues


CDD component -- The method in the CDD component that will be used to ensure that proper attention is
paid to environmental problems is a combination of standard checklists and a special checklist for the
environment adopted from the KDP design manuals. These are described below.

For each type of subproject, a technical standard is included in project manuals, and these include
considerations of environmental effects. For example, the magnitude of the grade of a road and the
steepness of the cross-slope perpendicular to the road are limited. Drainage for the road must be installed,
together with culverts to discharge water safely. Leeching fields from latrines have to located at least ten
meters from any water supply, and located downstream as groundwater flows. Water supplies cannot be
located near any potential source of contamination.

The completion of the special checklist for the environment is an obligatory part of the planning process.
Each type of project is checked for the various treatments that must be performed on it to avoid or repair
environmental problems. At the midpoint of construction, the same form is brought out to the field and
inspected again, at a time when it is still feasible to easily repair deficiencies. At the end of construction,
the form is checked one more time against the original plan.

The kabupaten level engineering consultant is responsible for reviewing all infrastructure designs. He or

                                                       8
                                                                                                           ISDS


she will be expected to reject any design not accompanied by a completed checklist, and may also request
clarification for any feature where a problem is anticipated. A kecamatan verification team also reviews
project proposals to ensure compliance with rules.

One other element of handling environmental problems is the use of technical inspection forms, which exist
for many types of subprojects. Among the items inspected are those dealing with aspects of environmental
impact, such as for roads where the forms include slope protection, drainage ditches, and shoulders. These
forms are filled out incidentally by anyone who inspects the infrastructure. SCRAP's oversight structure
will include appropriately qualified engineers.

Private Sector Component -- For the private sector component, environmental review and management
will be incorporated into the contractor's TOR/RFPs as well as the subproject verification process.
Independent monitoring by environmentally experienced NGOs will assess compliance. Monitors will
report to the environmental oversight board (Bappelda-da) as well as to the private sector forum. All
monitoring reports will be publicized.

Health and Education -- The project will build on recent applications of the indigenous peoples
policy in the Health Work Force project. Preparation will include an investigation of barriers to
access which may be different or more severe than for majority groups. Experience from the Third
Community Health and Nutrition Project's work with village midwives shows that bringing
members of the villages into a project-provided support, training, management, and oversight
structure provides a positive solution to access barriers in isolated and minority communities.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Described in main text. Participation is as follows:

(i)      for the CDD component, participation of village stakeholders is direct;
(ii)     for the private sector component, participation of stakeholders is though the business council;
(iii)    for the HD component, participation is determined through rapid assessments which will let
communities establish priorities, through representation on facility level committees, and district
level forums. and through the opportunity to receive and discuss monitoring reports from the
dinas.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
          management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
          projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
          issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                          Expected         Actual

                                                      9
                                                                                                    ISDS




Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                     Scott E. Guggenheim                                1/13/2004
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:     Thomas E. Walton/Person/World Bank                 1/13/2004
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:     Farida Zaituni/Person/World Bank                   1/13/2004
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:     Sulistiowati Nainggolan/Person/World Bank          1/13/2004

Approved by:                         Name                                                Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn S. Morgan                                         1/16/2004
Sector Manager/Director               Maria Teresa Serra                                 1/16/2004

