                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC14832

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Jul-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Jul-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Russian Federation              Project ID:      P151953
                            Project Name:      Regional Cancer Care Modernization Project (P151953)
                            Task Team          Susanna Hayrapetyan
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          03-Apr-2017                     Estimated        14-Dec-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GHN03                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    250.00                     Total Bank Financing:       250.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       250.00
                              Total                                                                       250.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to contribute to Regional government's effort
                           to improve early access to detection and quality treatment of cancer care services in Tyumen Oblast.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project would contribute to improving the early detection and treatment of the Tyumen
                           oblast cancer care system by focusing on the following main areas: (a) improvement of cancer
                           screening and cancer care management; (b) enhancement of cancer prevention and control-related
                           promotion and training activities; and (c) establishment of infrastructure and modernization of
                           diagnosis and treatment capacity. The proposed project would comprise the following three
                           components.
                         Component 1: Improving Cancer Screening and Cancer Care Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent 1.1: Cancer prevention and early detection

                         This subcomponent will consist of three activity lines. First, it will assist nascent health promotion
                         and patient social support entity of the Tyumen Oncology Dispensary (Regional Cancer Center of
                         Tyumen) and the Health Promotion Department of the Public Health Institute of Tyumen oblast, to
                         increase health awareness and individual responsibility of the population. The second activity line
                         would be directed to study best practices and improve cost-efficiency of cancer screening programs.
                         The aim will be to create an innovation unit to study rapidly developing biomarker and big-data
                         decision support system algorithm based technologies in risk stratification for breast and colon
                         cancer, to achieve improved efficiency in conducting population screening programs. The third
                         activity line is aimed to enhance efficiency in cancer data collection and processing process, data
                         quality, and increase availability of complete and valid data in an internationally comparable format
                         for decision making and control of the results, to optimize prevention, early detection, and treatment
                         of oncology patients. The subcomponent, separately and in concert with Subcomponent 1.2, will
                         support implementation of fully digitalized data collection, management, and quality assurance
                         processes.

                         Subcomponent 1.2: eHealth and digitalization of health care data registering and handling

                         This subcomponent will target two areas of health care data management: (a) advancing already
                         ongoing digitalization of patient data handling registration, storage, exchange, and availability to
                         patients and (b) implementation of Digital Decision Support Systems (DDSS) for enhancing quality
                         and efficiency of health care service provision.

                         Component 2: Enhancement of Cancer Training Programs
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component aims at improving clinical and auxiliary skills required to provide effective cancer
                         diagnostic, curative, and palliative care services. The main activity under this component will be to
                         support twinning arrangements with leading European medical schools to help modernize and
                         reorganize cancer training programs (undergraduate, graduate, and continued medical education
                         [CME]) at the Tyumen Medical University and medical college. This will involve (a) reviewing
                         training programs of cancer-related specialties; (b) strengthening communication skills of cancer care
                         professionals, especially in treatment and palliative care; (c) designing and developing a training
                         program for RTTs; (d) assessing the feasibility of establishing a chair of palliative care at the
                         Tyumen Medical University in line with international best practices; (e) expanding the duties and
                         training of oblast oncologists and general practitioners in palliative care, including the provision of
                         home care and quality control; (f) ensuring compliance of national treatment guidelines with
                         international standards; (g) systematizing patient treatment plans through multidisciplinary oncology
                         teams; and (h) implementing quality assurance program for cancer treatment, with close attention to
                         the process.

                         Component 3: Modernization of Oncology Services

                         The unmet demand for high-quality cancer diagnostics and therapy in Tyumen oblast and
                         neighboring oblasts is high and increasing. An adequate technological infrastructure is a precondition
                         for effective modernization and strengthening of the quality of cancer care in Tyumen oblast. This
                           component will support (a) a comprehensive strategy for early cancer detection and treatment with
                           the introduction of modern and advanced medical technologies; (b) the construction of a new
                           Regional Oncology Center (ROC) for Tyumen oblast; and (c) improved organization and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           management of medical equipment and human resources for the provision of cancer care.

                           Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation

                           The objective of this component is to support day-to-day project implementation (fiduciary and
                           safeguards) and technical advisory support for Components 1 and 2. This component will also
                           finance financial audits. This component will sponsor complementary data collection and analytical
                           activities for monitoring results (including citizen/beneficiary engagement indicators). Information
                           and data collection would be complemented through evidence-based data on specific areas and ad
                           hoc facility surveys. In addition, the component would sponsor learning events to educate and
                           promote better use of evidence for policy and decision making.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Tyumen Oblast.

                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Borrower capacity to implement safeguards for the project is currently limited. However, the
                           PIU will hire an environmental specialist in charge of implementation of the ESIA and ESMP during
                           construction phase and establishment of a plan for environmentally sustainable operation of the ROC
                           upon completion. The responsibilities of the PIU safeguards specialist include capacity building for
                           relevant project stakeholders including the oblast government officials and Medical City staff.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Svetlana Khvostova (GEN01)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         Yes            Based on the preliminary screening, the project is
                           OP/BP 4.01                                      expected to have moderate levels of environmental
                                                                           risk, mostly associated with Component 2 activities.
                                                                           The potential impacts will likely be site specific and
                                                                           reversible, with implementation of the mitigation
                                                                           measures outlined in ROC Environmental
                                                                           Management Plan (EMP). The Borrower has
                                                                           prepared, according to the national regulations, an
                                                                           EMP, which was reviewed by the Bank. The EMP
                                                                           covers impacts identified for construction activities
                                                                           of the ROC and waste management risks identified
                                                                           for the operational phase of the Center. The ESIA/
                                                                           ESMP will be required to undergo a set of public
                                                                           consultations to ensure broad public support and
                                                                           understanding of the project. Following the
                                                                           consultations, the ESIA/ESMP will be disclosed in
                                                                           Russia and in the Bank InfoShop before project
                                                                                                                        appraisal. It is proposed that the project is assigned
                                                                                                                        Environmental Assessment Category B.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                 No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                          No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                     No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources                                 No
                                 OP/BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.10
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                No
                                 BP 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No

                                 Projects on International      No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Feb-2017
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      The ESIA/ESMP will be publicly disclosed on the Ministry of Health website and in the World
                                      Bank Infoshop prior to project appraisal in March 2017.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Susanna Hayrapetyan
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nina Chee (SA)                                                                                                          Date: 18-Jul-2016
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Enis Baris (PMGR)                                                                                                      Date: 18-Jul-2016
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
