INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSAI 132
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Mar-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Nepal                       Project ID:  P150066
Project Name: Nepal: Power Sector Reform and Sustainable Hydropower Development
(PSRSHD) (P150066)
Task Team       Jie Tang
Leader(s):
Estimated       02-Feb-2015                 Estimated    26-May-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEEDR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Hydropower (50%), General energy sector (20%), Other domestic and
international trade (15%), Transmission and Distribution of Electr icity (10%),
General education sector (5%)
Theme(s):       Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%), Environmental
policies and institutions (20%), Corporate governance (2 0%), Education for the
knowledge economy (5%), Gender (5%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      24.00             Total Bank Financing:    20.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            1.50
International Development Association (IDA)                                  20.00
South Asia Water Initiative (SAWI)                                            2.50
Total                                                                        24.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
Page 1 of 13


﻿The Project Development Objectives are to: (a) strengthen the capacity of the power sector agencies
to plan and prepare hydropower and transmission line projects following international standards and
best practices; and (b) improve the readiness of the power sector agencies for regulatory and
institutional reforms.
Q         3. Project Description
Project components
The proposed Project has three components: (i) Preparation of Hydropower and Transmission Line
Investment Projects; (ii) Studies and Preparation for Policy Recommendations and Sector Reform;
and (iii) Capacity Building for Safeguard Management and Hydropower Development.
Component A: Preparation of Hydropower and Transmission Line Investment Projects. This
component will support preparation of two hydropower projects, Upper Arun Hydroelectric Project
(UAHEP, 335 MW) and Ikhuwa Khola Hydropower Project (IKHP, 30 MW), as proposed by the
GoN, and one priority high voltage transmission line project to be identified by the on-going
Transmission System Master Planning supported under the on-going Nepal India Electricity
Transmission and Trade Project (NIETTP), in line with international standards and the World Bank
Safeguard Policies. This component will finance (a) the preparation of detailed engineering design
and bid documents for the Upper Arun Hydropower Project and the Ikhuwa Khola Hydropower
Project, including: (i) preparation of detailed engineering design and bid documents; (ii) conducting
environmental and social impact assessments, including a cumulative impact assessment, and
mitigation studies; and (iii) hiring the dam safety panel of experts and the environmental and social
panel of experts; and (b) the undertaking of a feasibility study and the preparation of basic design,
route survey, environmental and social impact assessment, and bid documents for the planned
transmission line project.
Component B: Studies and Preparation for Policy Recommendations and Sector Reform. This
component will address critical power sector issues. It will support preparation, prioritization and
sequencing recommendations for policy and reform actions, and build consensus and capacity for
follow-on implementation under the planned DPC operations. It will support preparation of (a) river
basin planning in an integrated water resource management (IWRM) approach for selected river
basins; (b) recommendations for improvement of water resources management and regulations,
including updating of the Water Resource Act and capacity building of WECS; (c) Power System
o        Expansion Plan, including updating the Generation Master Plan (d) establishment and
operationalizing of a power trading company; (e) NEA business restructuring for improved
management and efficiency, including provision of computerized management tools and installations
of smart meters to enhance the distribution business management, and conducting asset evaluation.
See Annex 2 for other TA activities under projects supported by the Bank and development partners,
which will also provide critical inputs to the preparation of policy and sector reform actions for the
energy sector.
Component C: Capacity Building for Safeguard Management and Hydropower Development. The
component will support improving the environmental and social safeguard management system in
Nepal and associated capacity building, including:
(a)    Conducting Strategic Environment and Social Assessment (SESA) as part of the integrated
river basin planning under Component B;
(b)    Preparation of recommendations for environmental and social regulations;
(c)    Safeguard capacity building for management of transmission line ROW issues; and
(d)    Project management.
Page 2 of 13


﻿4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project will support planning and technical design of critical hydropower generation and
transmission line projects, replacing electricity meters at consumer premises with smart meters,
conducting important technical and analytical studies in the hydropower sector, carrying out
necessary policy dialogues with the government and implementing capacity-building activities to
strengthen relevant government institutions for the energy sector. This Project itself will not have
any direct adverse environmental and social safeguard impacts under its planned supporting
activities.
Nonetheless, the future infrastructure investments being prepared through the project under
Component A may have significant environmental and social impacts. For these proposed
investments, the detailed design, environmental and social studies will be carried out in accordance
with applicable national environmental and social requirements (including laws, regulations and
international conventions that Nepal has ratified), as well as World Bank safeguard policies.
Under Component A, two proposed investment projects - UAHEP (335 MW)) and IKHP (30 MW) -
have been proposed to be prepared through the proposed Project, as well as one additional priority
transmission project to be identified through th eon-going Transmission System Master Planning and
agreed with NEA during project implementation. The UAHEP is a 335 MW hydroelectric facility to
be located on the Arun River in Sankhuasabha District of eastern Nepal. The proposed UAHEP is
designed to be a Peaking Run of the River (PRoR) project with gated weir across the Arun River.
The proposed IKHP site is meanwhile located on a tributary to the Arun River approximately 8 km
downstream of the proposed UAHEP powerhouse site. The IKHP project is envisioned to provide a
source of benefit sharing, with options under consideration including providing project shares to
local communities, and also power supply to local communities.
The physical location of the additional transmission investment project to be prepared under the
project is not yet identified. The specific basins to be targeted by the integrated basin planning task
under Component B, which will also include a Strategic Environment and Social Assessment
(SESA), are likewise not yet identified. Other policy and sector level studies and activities under
Components B and C will have national reach.
o         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Annu Rajbhandari (GENDR)
Chaohua Zhang (GSURR)
Drona Raj Ghimire (GENDR)
James Orehmie Monday (GENDR)
Jun Zeng (GSURR)
Leanne Farrell (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         While the studies and capacity building activities under
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               the proposed Project will not themselves generate any
adverse environmental or social impacts, the proposed
project under Component A will prepare the UAHEP and
Page 3 of 13


﻿IKHP, as well as one transmission project that will be
selected during implementation. Components B and C
will furthermore support basin-level planning activities as
well as sector-wide policy analysis and reform
recommendations which aim to enable future
infrastructure investments that may have significant
potential environmental and social impacts. The Project is
therefore considered Category "A" as per OP 4.01.
To comply with the requirements of OP4.01, GoN's
Project Steering Committee (PSC) has prepared an
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) that specifies the appropriate requirements,
processes, and institutional responsibilities for: (a)
carrying out project-specific ESIAs in accordance with
Bank safeguards and national requirements for all
proposed specific investments which receive preparatory
support through this TA, and (b) indication of how other
institutional strengthening and policy related activities
will ensure appropriate consideration of social and
environmental aspects in line with Bank safeguards
Detailed TORs have also already been drafted for UAHP
and IKHP, were subject to public consultation in April
and May of 2014, and have been updated to take into
account stakeholder feedback. These TORs are annexed
to the ESMF.
Specifically for Component A as part preparation of the
UAHP and IKHP, a full Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIA) and corresponding Environmental and
Social Management Plans (ESMPs), as well as a series of
social planning documents, are required. Also, given that
the UAHP and IKHP are part of a proposed system of
cascading dams in the Arun Watershed, a Cumulative
Impact Assessment (CIA) is also required as part of the
ESIA process. The ESIA (including CIA and ESMPs) and
social planning studies will be carried out during
implementation of the proposed project. NEA will also
retain an Independent Panel of Experts to provide
guidance on the environmental and social aspects of
project development, given the complexity and potential
significant impacts associated with the proposed
investments.
The additional hydropower and/or transmission projects
to be identified which will also be prepared under
Component A will require similar studies (ESIA, CIA,
Page 4 of 13


﻿ESMP, social planning studies) to be carried out, as
applicable to those specific investments. The ESMF lays
out the process to ensure that investment-specific TORs
are developed in accordance with safeguard policy
requirements, and Independent Panels of Experts are
retained when required under OP 4.01 for highly sensitive
and complex investments.
Under Component B, a Strategic Environmental and
Social Assessment (SESA) also be carried out during
implementation of the proposed project in order to inform
the integrated planning processes at national basin levels.
The SESA will furthermore provide recommendations, (i)
on consultations with local communities to establish the
broad support for management of potential environmental
and social impacts related to future energy investments in
these basins, (ii) for strengthening of the relevant
institutional, regulatory and decentralization framework
and (iii) for integration of relevant issues into subsequent
planning decisions for the choice of location and size and
scale of future investments.
The ESMF also outlines how additional studies and
capacity building activities supported through the project
under Components B and C will also incorporate
environmental and social factors and stakeholder
participation as applicable, in particular in any processes
related to prioritization, siting, or design of future energy-
sector investments and modifications to sector strategies
and policies which may affect how environmental and
social issues in subsequent investments are managed. In
particular, guidelines on cumulative and strategic impact
assessment as well as ecological flows will be developed,
and safeguard capacity building across key government
agencies will be supported.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes          The UAHP and IKHP trigger this policy, and future
4.04                                 investment projects to be prepared under Component A
may also trigger the policy (TBD). The detailed TORs for
UAHP and IKHP as well as the ESMF specify appropriate
requirements for the corresponding investment-specific
ESIAs to be carried out under the project to ensure that
any potential impacts to natural habitats are appropriately
assessed and managed in accordance with this policy.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      Yes          The UAHP and IKHP trigger this policy, and future
investment projects to be prepared under Component A
may also trigger the policy (TBD). The detailed TORs for
UAHP and IKHP as well as the ESMF specify appropriate
Page 5 of 13


﻿requirements for the corresponding investment-specific
ESIAs to be carried out under the project to ensure that
any potential impacts to forests are appropriately assessed
and managed, and any forestry programs developed as
part of basin-level or project-specific environmental
management programs are consistent with this policy's
requirements.
o         Pest Management OP 4.09 No          This policy is not expected to be triggered. For UAHP
and IKHP, no chemical pesticides or herbicides are
expected to be used in the implementation of the
investments, such as for Right of Way maintenance of
transmission lines, vegetation management in reservoirs,
or tree nurseries. However, the ESMF will specify that
TORs for detailed studies for additional specific
investments to be supported under Component A will
require verification of whether any chemical pesticides or
herbicides will be used by the investments, and if any
such chemicals are deemed necessary, pest management
plans will be developed in accordance with this policy.
Physical Cultural       Yes         The detailed TORs for UAHP and IKHP, and the ESMF
Resources OP/BP 4.11                for all future specific investments to be prepared under the
TA, specify appropriate requirements to ensure that any
potential impacts to physical cultural resources are
appropriately assessed and managed in accordance with
this policy.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes         This project will have long-term positive impacts on
BP 4.10                             indigenous communities in general through improved
policies on indigenous peoples for the hydropower sector
and their better implementation with strengthened
institutional capacity in the management of issues related
to indigenous people.
The project TA activities will not have direct adverse
impacts on indigenous communities. However, the
proposed UAHP and IKHP projects are expected to have
both positive and negative impacts on indigenous
communities. The projects will follow relevant Nepali
legal framework, including laws, regulations and ratified
international conventions, as well as World Bank OP 4.10
on indigenous people, in the planning and design of these
two projects. Detailed design TORs for both projects are
developed on this basis, including its objective, principles
to be followed, scope of work and design output,
including the preparation of an Indigenous and Vulnerable
Community Development Plan.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes        This project will have long-term positive impacts in
OP/BP 4.12
Page 6 of 13


﻿improving the practice of land acquisition and involuntary
resettlement in the energy sector through improved
policies and their better implementation with strengthened
institutional capacity in the management of land
acquisition and resettlement.
The project TA activities will not require land acquisition
and involuntary resettlement. However, the proposed
UAHP and IKHP projects are expected to have impacts of
land acquisition and possible resettlement. The projects
will follow relevant Nepali laws, regulations and World
Bank OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement in their
planning and design. Detailed design TORs for both
projects are developed on this basis, including its
objective, principles to be followed, scope of work and
design output, including the preparation of resettlement
action plan.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    Yes         The UAHP and IKHP trigger this policy, and the NEA,
4.37                                during implementation of the proposed project, will
appoint a Panel of Experts to advise it on all aspects of
safety of these two Dams. Also, the project ESMF
specifies measures to ensure compliance with this policy
for all additional hydropower projects being prepared with
support of this Project with dam heights over 15m.
Projects on International  Yes      The UAHP is located on the Arun River, which is a trans-
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                boundary waterway as defined by this policy. IKHP is
located on a tributary to the Arun River. In accordance
with the policy, riparian notification has been carried out
o                                             for these two specific hydropower projects (UAHEP and
IKHP) to be prepared under the Project, as well as general
information about the proposed project.
Projects in Disputed    No          Not applicable.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed Project would only finance technical assistance and some goods and materials for
capacity building and replacement of electricity meters at consumer premises with smart meters.
Therefore, the proposed project will not itself have any direct adverse environmental or social
impacts.
However, activities supported under Component A of the Project will prepare the necessary
preparatory studies and documentation for the development of UAHP and IKHP, as well as an
expected one additional hydropower project and one Transmission Line. These specific investment
Page 7 of 13


﻿projects would have adverse social and environmental impacts if and when they are implemented.
Therefore, the project has been assigned an EA category of A under OP 4.01.
For UAHP and IKHP specifically, since they have been identified during preparation of the
O
Q)          proposed project, detailed TORs for the required environmental and social studies have already
been developed as part of preparation of this Project. For these two proposed investments,
environmental impacts would occur in the construction, operation and maintenance phases across
numerous impact zones and influence areas, including locations in the upstream catchment area
and the reservoir, the dam site, tunnel corridor and power plant location, a section of the Arun
River immediately downstream of the dam that will experience significantly reduced flows, and
the corridors of the transmission line and access roads. Impacted areas would also include the
construction areas where workers would be camped, quarry areas, spoil disposal areas and
construction equipment service areas. Temporary in-migration could cause HIV and workers could
destroy vegetation for firewood. Given the mountainous nature of the terrain, erosion and
sedimentation issues would need to be evaluated and managed in all areas during project
construction, operation and maintenance, including ensuring slope areas are well protected and
drained. Managing water quality in the reservoir and ensuring adequate
Environmental / riparian flows are also issues to be evaluated and managed carefully.
Initial, preliminary baseline surveys were conducted as part of the Upper Arun feasibility study
preliminary Environmental Impact Assessment. These indicated mostly primary forest in the
project area, including along the tunnel, penstock and transmission line corridors and the power
house area. Furthermore, the UAHP dam site borders the Makalu Barun National Park Buffer
Zone. Impacts to natural habitats in accordance with Natural Habitats OP 4.04 will need to be
carefully studied through the project ESIA. There is currently no information available on
archaeological or other physical cultural resources. Impacts, if any on PCR are therefore still to be
determined and will be covered as part of the Environmental and SOcial Impact Assessment
(ESIA) for UAHP and IKHP, and if necessary the corresponding Environmental and Social
management Plans (ESMPs). In any case, procedures will be specified in case chances finds of any
archaeological and/or cultural significance occur during construction.
Meanwhile, under Components B and C, the proposed Project will provide technical advice,
guidance and recommendations to GoN on policy and planning aspects related to hydropower
a          development, including specific aspects related to environmental and social assessment and
management, and other aspects which may affect the potential environmental and social impacts
and management approaches for future investments in the sector. Most notably, integrated basin
planning processes will be supported for water resource management and hydropower
development for select basins at a national scale under Component B. These planning processes
will have implications for future development activities in the basins, with related environmental
and social effects. Meanwhile, technical guidelines and policy recommendations to be developed
under Component C will influence how environmental and social aspects are managed at a sector
level for future hydropower and transmission investments.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Long term and indirect environmental and social impacts from the development of the UAHP and
IKHP are likely and may include: aquatic effects to the morphology of the channel of the Arun
River immediately downstream of the dam sites, and from impacts associated with erosion and
sedimentation in the catchment area and along the corridors of the access roads if these are left
Page 8 of 13


﻿unmitigated as these would potentially open up access to forest areas in the Arun river watershed
that were previously very difficult to access. Influx of workers and changes to livelihoods of the
local population associated with the project may also increase pressures on forest resources, with
indirect effects to biodiversity as well as catchment management and erosion/sedimentation.
O
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
O
The ESIAs to be carried out for each specific investment being prepared through the Project will
include a full alternatives analysis of siting, design, technology, construction methods, and
operational aspects of each investment project.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared by the GoN is the
safeguards instrument for the proposed Project, consistent with OP4.01 requirements for TA
projects. The ESMF sets out the approach to addressing safeguards aspects for the overall
proposed Project and covers Components A, B and C. The ESMF sets out the approach to
identifying and addressing potential social and environmental aspects, including, inter alia, the
public consultation and communication strategy, and the institutional arrangements, also in
compliance with the other triggered safeguards policies, which are the Natural Habitats OP4.04,
Forests OP4.36, Physical Cultural Resources OP4. 11, Indigenous Peoples OP4. 10, Involuntary
Resettlement OP4.12, Safety of Dams OP4.37 and Projects on International Waterways OP7.50.
The ESMF also sets out the list and broad scope of studies and safeguards instruments to be
prepared during the period of implementation of the proposed project to ensure compliance with
all of these triggered policies.
For Component A, the ESMF specifies that all safeguards documents and studies financed under
the proposed project will be prepared in compliance with WB standards and safeguard policies, as
well as applicable policies and standards of the GoN. For UAHP and IKHP, specific TORs for the
required environmental and social planning were prepared and consulted with key stakeholders
during preparation of the proposed project, and are annexed to the ESMF. NEA will also engage
an Environmental and Social Independent Panel of Experts for UAHP and IKHP in accordance
with OP 4.01, as well as an Independent Panel for Experts for Dam Safety aspects in accordance
with OP 4.37.
For Component B, a SESA will be carried out to assess the implications of the integrated water
basin planning processes, and will make recommendations regarding (i) the strengthening of the
institutional, regulatory and decentralization framework, (ii) integration of the management of any
environmental and social issues into subsequent planning decisions for the location and scale of
energy investments, alternatives, mitigation measures and monitoring activities. The SESA will
furthermore provide recommendations on consultations with local communities to establish the
broad support for management of potential environmental and social impacts related to future
energy investments in these basins.
Government institutional arrangements and capacity
The project overall will be implemented by a Project Steering Committee (PSC) to be chaired by
the Energy Secretary. The role of the PSC will be critical in orchestrating the various policy and
reform recommendations under the various components of the Project, with support of the Bank.
Page 9 of 13


﻿The 3 components will in turn each have a primary Implementing Agency. The implementing
agency for Component A will be the Nepal Electricity Authority (NEA). Under Component B,
WECS will be the primary implementing agency (IA) for basin wide river planning and the related
SESA and NEA will be the IA for power system expansion planning and operationalizing a power
O
trading company, and under Component C, WECS will implement the various institutional
strengthening and policy activities. Each IA will set up a PMU consisting of a full/part time
project Coordinator, a Financial Management Specialist and a procurement Specialist, supported
by technical staffs of the two IA. The PSC oversees and coordinates the PMUs for implementation
of various activities under the Project.
In terms of borrower capacity, NEA has good experience working with the World Bank on
preparation of hydro power projects, most recently during the preparation of the Kabeli A and Kali
Gandaki Hydropower Projects which are currently under implementation. Furthermore, through
the proposed project, assistance will be provided to support capacity development within NEA
specifically on environmental and social management aspects, and to ensure that stakeholder
engagement and consultations carried out by government for the various activities are fully
inclusive and appropriate to the diverse stakeholders so as to enable meaningful participatory
consultation, in accordance with Bank policy requirements.
Ensuring that the NEA and WECS have clear responsibilities and TOR for the agreed work, and a
strong information-sharing and consultation process in place throughout the project, will also
mitigate this risk. These aspects are detailed in the ESMF and will be supervised by the Bank
throughout the project.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Under Component A, for each investment being prepared under the proposed Project,
consultations on the environmental and social aspects of the investments is required with diverse
stakeholders - including potentially affected peoples and communities, other local communities as
well as NGOs, institutions, industry, academics and any others - at least twice, once at the TOR
stage for each investment and once on the draft studies, in accordance with OP 4.01. However,
following international good practice, the investment-specific studies to be commissioned will
include a more comprehensive stakeholder engagement program. The ESMF specifies that each
investment specific TOR shall include a requirement for a stakeholder identification and mapping
*           process and development of stakeholder consultation plans for purposes of ensuring effective,
inclusive, and culturally appropriate consultation and engagement throughout the course of study
of each specific investment. In the case of UAHP and IKHP, the first formal consultation event
was held on the initial draft TORs for the ESIAs and social planning studies to be carried out for
these investments as part of preparation of this TA project, and the TORs have been updated by
NEA to reflect feedback received. NEA will establish a project-specific website, where
information about the specific investments being prepared under the project (for now covering
UAHP and IKHP) can be accessed. Draft and final reports will need to be disclosed locally,
including executive summaries tailored to the language, level of literacy, as well as cultural
considerations for the local communities in each project affected area. For future investments,
similar processes will be followed.
For Component B, with respect to the integrated basin planning activity, preparation of this project
included an initial workshop in Kathmandu in September 2014 involving key stakeholders from
across government and the donor community, as well as select key NGOs and academics. The
Page 10 of 13


﻿workshop aimed to lay the initial groundwork for advancing integrated basin planning and
management in Nepal at a national level by creating a mutual broad understanding of the key
elements and components of such processes, stimulating consensus on the need for such an
approach, exchanging information about current and planned donor supported activities in Nepal
O
Q)         related to water resource management and planning, and identifying critical gaps or areas where
more donor support would be helpful to advancing integrated basin planning. During
implementation of the proposed project, this initial workshop will be built upon further with
additional capacity building activities involving diverse stakeholders at the level of the specific
basins to be targeted through the TA. The SESA to be carried out in conjunction with the
integrated river basin planning activity will furthermore require engagement with broad
stakeholders, and will feed the recommendations and feedback of stakeholders on water resource
management and hydropower development considerations within each basin into the basin
planning processes. The program to be supported through Component B furthermore aims to
support WECS in developing a transparent digital platform for data and information sharing at a
basin level, to facilitate better understanding of the interrelated effects of different water resource
development activities within a basin on shared resources, and hence better decision making and
collaborative management of water resources for both hydropower as well as other sector uses (in
particular irrigation). All draft and final documents produced related to the integrated basin
planning processes will furthermore be disclosed on the digital platform, and linked to from the
project website.
For Component C, the specific studies to be supported related to key policy areas on
environmental and social management will each require identification of relevant stakeholders to
contribute to each, and engagement with them throughout the course of study. All draft and final
studies will be disclosed.
For the overall project, the ESMF outlining the safeguards compliance strategy across all project
components, and including the detailed TORs for environmental and social assessments and
studies for the UAHP and IKHP investments, will be dis closed and consulted with project
stakeholders by GoN prior to appraisal.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              15-Jan-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           15-Jan-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  15-Jan-2015
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Nepal                                                    22-Jan-2015
Comments: ESMF covers both environmental and social assessments.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              15-Jan-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           15-Jan-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Nepal                                                    22-Jan-2015
Comments: ESMF covers both environmentla and social areas, including resettleemnt.
Page 11 of 13


﻿Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                15-Jan-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             15-Jan-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Nepal                                                      22-Jan-2015
Comments: ESMF covers both environmentla and social areas, including Indigenous Peoples.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [    ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ x] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]   NA [    ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [   ]  NA [ X ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes[X]  No[    ]  NA [
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes[X]  No[  ]  NA [
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [  ] No [X]   NA [    ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [    ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ x ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
and constraints been carried out?
Page 12 of 13


﻿Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, Yes [ ] No [X] NA [ ]
does it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                     Yes [  ]  No [X]    NA [    ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and Yes [  ]  No [X]  NA [    ]
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?   Yes [  ]  No [X]    NA [    ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [  ] No [X]     NA [    ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                  Yes [  ] No [X]     NA [    ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Jie Tang
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name:                                      Date:
Practice Manager/      Name:                                      Date:
Manager:
Page 13 of 13


