                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                                            Report No.:ISDSA16180
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated:                  26-Oct-2017
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed                26-Oct-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                           Uzbekistan                   Project ID:               P146206
    Project Name:                      District Heating Energy Efficiency Project (P146206)
    Task Team Leader(s):               Feng Liu,Mitsunori Motohashi
    Estimated Appraisal                06-Sep-2017                  Estimated Board           20-Dec-2017
    Date:                                                           Date:
    Managing Unit:                     GEE03                        Financing                 Investment Project
                                                                    Instrument:               Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency                     Recovery) or OP            No
    8.00(Rapid Response to Crises and         Emergencies)?
                                                Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           232.00                          Total Bank Financing: 140.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                         Amount
    BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                             92.00
    International Development Association (IDA)                                                                  140.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00
    Total                                                                                                        232.00
    Environmental Category:            B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?        No

    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The project development objective is to improve the efficiency and quality of heating and hot water services in
    selected cities of Uzbekistan.
    3. Project Description
    The Project will have three components:

    Component 1: Modernization of District Heating Systems. The component will finance energy efficiency
    investments in renovation of heat production and transportation and distribution systems, including installation
    of building-level individual heating substation and heat meters for billing purposes. In addition, gas, electricity,
    and water supply systems will be upgraded, where it is needed for district heating purposes. The component will


                                                      Page 1 of 8
also finance procurement of specialized maintenance equipment for the participating district heating companies.

Component 2: In-building Improvements. This component will finance replacement of in-building heating
system (distribution pipelines and radiators), as well as demonstration of cost-effective weatherization measures
in selected residential buildings and social facilities.

Component 3: Implementation Support and Capacity Building. This component will finance capacity-building
and implementation support for the Ministry of Housing and Communal Services, the Project Coordination Unit
(PCU) in the Kommunkhizmat Agency, participating district heating companies and their Project teams, and
home owners associations of the MABs and their management companies.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The project will be in the following localities: Andijan City (Andijan oblast), Chirchick city (Tashkent oblast),
Samarkand (Samakand oblast), Bukhara (Bukhara oblast) and Tashkent City (its Sergili district).
Andijan is a large regional, industrial, and cultural center located in the south-east of Fergana Valley. Climate of
the area is distinctly continental. Winters are relatively mild, monthly average temperature varies from –4 to +
6oC. Precipitation falls in the form of rain and snow. From April to August heavy rains are possible, in summer
there are exceptionally thunderstorms related to highly developed convention during heavy air intrusions.
Annual average precipitation varies from 240 to 260 mm. Duration of seasonal snow coverage does not exceed
30 days. Summers are dry and hot. In the city, there are various types of houses with the great majority of one-
story buildings. The total number of multi-apartment buildings is 701 of which with independent in-house gas
heating – 85 and connected to district heating – 616. Of last buildings 548 are connected to Issiklikmanbai
boiler-houses and 68 connected to industrial boiler-houses. However, there was no district heating in residential
buildings in the last years due to the poor state of heating sources and networks.
Chirchik is located in Tashkent region of the Republic of Uzbekistan, on the bank of the Chirchik River in a
narrow mountain valley surrounded by offshoots of the Tian Shan Mountains. Its south-west is not blocked by
the mountains. Physiographic characteristics of the area of Chirchik boiler-houses are conditioned by a severely
continental climate with high amplitudes of day and seasonal temperatures, low precipitation and their uneven
distribution among seasons, long, hot and dry summers and short dry winters. Chirchik district heating
enterprise “Issiklik Energiyasi” has 14 boiler-houses; out which 12 are operating and 2 have been stopped due to
the lack of consumers. Heating networks are constructed on high supports above ground and in reinforced
concrete ducts under the ground. Due to physical deterioration and obsolescence of heating mains and in-house
networks and above-limit system operation, heat and hot water consumption is higher than normative standards
for heating-system water and power consumption.
The HP-8 is located in the northeast of Sergeli district of Tashkent. Private housing area is located 100 m to the
east of the HP-8, industrial zone surrounds the boiler-house in the west and north, and an enterprise
manufacturing sunshields is located 250 m to the south of the boiler-house. Physiogeographic characteristics of
Tashkent determine its climate conditions, especially wind patterns. Climate of the region - dry semi-desert with
the increased wind activities. Wind patterns in Tashkent and its surroundings are characterized by east, northeast
winds in wintertime and north, northwest winds in summertime. The number of facilities connected to heating
networks of Sergeli HP-8 in Sergeli district is 1,010, of which 830 multi-storey apartment building, 123 state-
financed organizations, and 57 commercial enterprises. Both main and submain heating lines are constructed
above ground on high supports and underground in reinforced concrete ducts.
The city and oblast of Bukhara is situated on an oasis in the Zerafshan river delta in central Uzbekistan in the
southwest of the country. The Kyzyl Kum desert takes up a large portion of its territory. The climate is a
typically arid. The current heat supply system in Bukhara is open meaning that hot water from DH network is
directly used for heating and providing hot water. For the present, heat supply and hot water supply of the
consumers of Bukhara city is carried out by boiler houses of two large producers of heat power: OJSC
«Bukharaenergomarkaz»; and OJSC «Issiklik manbai». Besides there are objects -57 apartment houses which


                                                 Page 2 of 8
are not connected to district boiler houses as before they belonged to various departments abolished nowadays
and were supplied with heat by the departmental boiler houses liquidated now.
Samarkand city is located in the core of the Central area of Uzbekistan, in the junction of historical ways and
modern railway, automobile and air networks. The climate of Samarkand, as well as all cities of the plain and
foothill part of the Central Asia, has clearly expressed signs of arid climate. Here high temperatures of air and
low humidity along with clear sky are typical for the summer period. Spring is short and rainy, winter is little-
snow. With unstable snow cover. 37 boiler houses with single established thermal capacity from 0,2 to 91
Gcal/h providing heat supply of multi-storey apartment houses, social and cultural facilities, schools,
kindergartens, health care facilities and other consumers are part of OJSC “Samarkand Issiklik manbai”. 680
multi-storey apartment houses, some state organizations and other consumers, including colleges, lyceums,
schools, kindergartens, social and cultural and health care facilities are connected to the thermal networks of
OJSC “Samarkand issiklik manbai” now.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Arcadii Capcelea, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
 Rebecca Emilie Anne Lacroix, Social Safeguards Specialist
6. Safeguard Policies That Might Apply
Safeguard Policies                             Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01            Yes             This OP is triggered as district heating
                                                               rehabilitation and installation of new equipment and
                                                               technologies might generate some environmental
                                                               impacts such as: dust, noise, soil removal and
                                                               destruction, occupational hazards, traffic disruption,
                                                               construction wastes, etc. To address these issues the
                                                               borrower conducted EIA studies and prepared for
                                                               each participating city Environmental Management
                                                               Plan (EMP), which are in compliance with the WB
                                                               and national EA rules and procedures. The
                                                               EIA/EMPs have been disclosed and publicly
                                                               consulted in all participating cities with
                                                               participation of all key stakeholders and local
                                                               population. The EMPs will be used for project
                                                               implementation.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                    No              As the project will be implemented within city
                                                               boundaries, it is expected there will be no natural
                                                               habitats in its vicinity and thus this OP is not
                                                               triggered.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                             No              This OP is not triggered as the project will be
                                                               implemented within the city boundaries and no
                                                               forest areas will be in its vicinity.
Pest Management OP 4.09                        No              This OP is not triggered as no pesticides will be
                                                               purchased or applied under the project
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11         No              The EIA/EMPs specify no buildings which are
                                                               specified in the list of national Physical Cultural
                                                               resources will be included in the project.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                  No              No Indigenous people in Uzbekistan


                                                 Page 3 of 8
    Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12           Yes             As the project will support installation of new local
                                                                  and mini (container) boiler houses in participating
                                                                  cities, it might generate some permanent or
                                                                  temporary resettlement impacts (such as minor land
                                                                  acquisitions or livelihood impacts on shop owners
                                                                  working in the vicinity of the public works) and
                                                                  thus this OP is triggered. The rehabilitation and
                                                                  upgrading work planned under Component 1 is
                                                                  expected to take place on existing infrastructure and
                                                                  on land, which is owned by the state and managed
                                                                  by the oblast administration. However, the exact
                                                                  locations and the scale of physical works have yet
                                                                  to be determined and minor land acquisition might
                                                                  be required. To address potential impacts the
                                                                  borrower has prepared a Resettlement Policy
                                                                  Framework (RPF) for the project as a whole.
                                                                  Specific impacts will have to be confirmed by the
                                                                  borrower through each PIU once the feasibility
                                                                  study has been completed by conducting social
                                                                  screening of each project site. During the project,
                                                                  site-specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) will
                                                                  be developed as necessary by the borrower and any
                                                                  compensation paid before the commencement of
                                                                  construction works.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                     No              None of the project activity will depend on or will
                                                                  impact dams safety.
    Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No                  The project activities will not have any impacts on
    7.50                                                          international waterways.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60         No              The project will be not implemented in disputed
                                                                  areas.
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
    any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    The project EIA concluded the project will generate mostly positive socio-economic benefits due to the
    improvement of hot water supply and heating services for the population along with the improved
    environmental conditions in the participating cities. Replacement and modernization of old inefficient boilers or
    installation of new ones will significantly reduce the level of pollutants emitted, which will have significant
    positive effects on the health of the population. At the same time, it may also generate some adverse impacts:
    noise: air pollution; impact on water quality and resources; impact on water by the construction run-offs;
    disturbance of traffic during construction and rehabilitation works; construction dust; and workers safety, etc.
    However, these impacts will be temporary and site specific and could be easily mitigated through implementing
    adequate avoidance and/or mitigation measures. It was also concluded that no impacts are expected on sensitive
    or protected areas. Furthermore, no physical cultural resources will be involved/or impacted. The proposed
    investments are not anticipated to cause any permanent physical displacement. The rehabilitation and upgrading
    work planned under Component 1 is expected to take place on existing infrastructure and on land, which is
    owned by the state and managed by the oblast administration. However, the exact locations and the scale of

                                                    Page 4 of 8
physical works have yet to be determined and as the project will support the installation of new local and mini
(container) boiler houses in the participating cities, temporary or permanent impacts cannot be ruled out (such as
minor land acquisition or livelihood impacts on shop owners working in the vicinity of the public works). To
address them the borrower prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework, which will be applied in all participating
cities.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
The long term impacts are mostly positive and relate to the improvement of hot water supply and heating
services for the population, and of air quality in the participating cities, which will have significant beneficial
effects on the health of population.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
Without the project the social and economic situation in participating cities would be worsening with an increase
in the emissions of pollutants and adverse impacts on the health on the population. The alternative of using coal
instead of natural gas was considered. The usage of coal is inferior both in economic and environmental terms.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
To address potential project environmental and social impacts the borrower has conducted an Environmental
Impact Assessment (EIA) and prepared Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for all participating cities.
The Environmental Assessment (EA) report includes the World Bank's safeguards policies applied to the
proposed project, description of the policies, legal, and administrative framework regarding environmental
management and the central heating sector in Uzbekistan, and five site specific EIA & EMPs for participating
cities (Andijan, Bukhara, Chirchik, Samarkand, and Sergili district of Tashkent city). The EIA & EMP reports
contain the following: (a) baseline analysis; (b) project alternatives; (c) potential environmental impacts and
necessary activities targeted at mitigating them; (d) monitoring plan for EMPs implementation; (e) EMPs
implementing arrangements as well as a short analysis of district heating companies (DHCs). All five EMPs for
participating cities have been officially reviewed and approved by the Oblasts State Ecological Expertise. The
approvals obtained contain a series of conditions to be fulfilled during the project implementation. The EMPs
stipulate all adverse environmental impacts associated with the Project, which will be prevented, eliminated, or
minimized to an acceptable level. This will be achieved through the implementation of the EMPs environmental
mitigation measures, including careful replacing of old pipes and pumps and conducting rehabilitation works in
a way that would prevent cutting of trees, destroying landscape in parks, air and soil pollution and; noise
pollution; ensuring labor safety and health impacts during boilers replacement or modernizing, welding
operations etc. The EMPs contain also a monitoring section, which provides: (a) details, of monitoring
measures, including the parameters to be measured, methods to be used, sampling locations, frequency of
measurements; and (b) monitoring and reporting procedures to (i) ensure early detection of conditions that
necessitate particular mitigation measures, and (ii) furnish information on the progress and results of mitigation;
and (c) institutional responsibilities and grievance mechanism.

The EMP provisions will form part of the design documents for the project, and will be included in the
construction contracts for the proposed activities. The Contractors will be required to include the cost of EMP
requirements in their financial bids and to comply with them during project implementation. The bidding
documents for selecting the contractors will include specifications that would ensure effective implementation of
environmental, health and safety performance criteria by the winning bidder. In particular: (i)
preventing/limiting disturbance of soils and vegetation removal to the minimum; prevent soil compaction as
well as other potential impacts; (ii) ensuring that all ground disturbing activities are conducted consistent with
the construction requirements; (iii) developing a traffic management plan that include measures to ensure work
zone safety for construction workers and the traveling public; (iv) conducting all activities on installing new
boilers will be done with due care, ensuring labor safety; and (iv) obtaining approval for the traffic management

                                                   Page 5 of 8
plan from the Traffic Police prior to commence of any construction/repair works; etc. The contract with winning
bidder will include an obligation to inform the DHCs of any significant health, safety, and environmental
accidents and events among subcontracted project workers.

The overall project implementation responsibility will lie with the central PCU under the Kommunkhizmat
Agency. The safeguards issues will also be undertaken by the participating DHCs under the supervision of the
PCU. The central PCU will have an ES which will oversee overall coordination of individual EMPs
implementation, reporting to the Kommunkhizmat Agency and to the World Bank regarding safeguards issues,
as well as of integrating safeguards requirements into biding and contracting documents. The PCU will be
responsible for interaction with the environmental authorities, ensuring an efficient implementation of
safeguards documents and will undertake, randomly, field visits and environmental supervision and monitoring,
assessing environmental compliance at worksites, and advise project participants and environmental specialists
of the DHCs on environmental issues. The environmental specialist of the PCU will be responsible for
identifying EA training needs for the participating DHCs and its environmental specialists and analyzing
contracts in terms of environmental management and mitigation issues. Among major responsibilities of the
environmental safeguards specialist at the DHCs will be the following: (a) ensuring that contractors complies
with all EMPs requirements; (b) coordinating of all environmental and EA related issues at the city and oblast
level; (c) conducting EMP supervision and monitoring and assessing environmental impacts and efficiency of
mitigation measures, as well as identifying non-compliance issues or adverse trends in results, and putting in
place programs to correct any identified problems; (d) when needed, providing advises and consulting
contractors in EMP implementation; and, (e) reporting to the PCU with regard to EMP implementation. Lastly,
the contractors will have the responsibility to operate in full compliance with national environmental legislation
and with the EMP requirements and are obliged to follow regulative requirements of the national law and WB
related to: occupational health and safety; fire safety; environmental protection; community health and safety;
and to traffic safety. All EMP associated activities should be financed by the contractors. The contractors will
also be requested to designate a person in charge of environmental, health and safety issues and for
implementing the EMP and for reporting on EA issues.

To manage impacts covered under OP 4.12 the borrower has prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).
As the technical designs are finalized, the borrower will conduct screening of each site in the five cities to
identify any impacts covered under OP 4.12. If necessary, the borrower will prepare Resettlement Action Plans
(RAP) that integrate feedback from consultations with project-affected persons. Compensation and mitigation
measures will be implemented before the start of project works. The PCU has retained the services of an
experienced safeguards specialist who will be responsible for screening of project investment for social impacts
covered under OP 4.12 and will closely monitor the subprojects for any social impacts.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The draft EIA & EMP was disclosed and consulted with all interested parties in participating cities.
Furthermore, the hard copies of the EIA & EMP Executive Summary of the draft document has been distributed
to the key stakeholders: sanitary and environmental authorities, design institutes, environmental NGOs and
mahallas. After the public consultations the EA document has been updated and disclosed on municipalities
websites and in WBdocs.

The draft RPF was disclosed and discussed with key stakeholder in the five participating cities. In person
consultations were organized in Bukhara, Samarkand and Chirchik, while virtual consultations were organized
in Sergeli district (Tashkent) and Andijan. Questions received mainly pertained to information about the project
and compensation (e.g., start date, scope of works, compensation for structures) and these were clarified during
the consultation process. The final RPF was disclosed on Uzkommunhizmat website and in WB docs.



                                                 Page 6 of 8
   A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) has been established for the project to manage any concerns related to
   safeguards. Feedback can be submitted to the subproject PIUs or the PCU that is responsible for documenting
   and responding to complaints. More generally, the TA and capacity-building component of the project will
   include developing a communications strategy and training to build District Heating Companies' capacity to
   understand and react to customers’ concerns through more systematic customer feedback collection, analysis,
   and response to such feedback. Progress will be verified through regular customer feedback at the level of
   municipalities and utility companies, as well as annual customer satisfaction surveys. The project includes a core
   indicator to measure progress on customer satisfaction. This is also disaggregated by gender to account for, and
   take action on, any potential differential impacts upon female and male customers.
   .




B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                             13-Sep-2017
Date of submission to InfoShop                                          19-Sep-2017
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




    Uzbekistan                                                                    13-Sep-2017
 Comments:
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05-Oct-2017
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                   16-Oct-2017
 "In country" Disclosure
PHRESCTRY




 Uzbekistan                                                                 16-Oct-2017
 Comments:
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [X]        No []          NA           []
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice        Yes [X]        No []          NA           []
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP                 Yes [X]        No []          NA           []
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                   Yes [X]        No []          NA           []
 framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
 prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards     Yes [X]        No []          NA           []
 or Practice Manager review the plan?
 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                     Yes []         No [X]         TBD          []
 Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access      Yes []         No [X]         TBD          []
 to assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means

                                                   Page 7 of 8
          of livelihoods)

PHCompliance




          The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the   Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
          World Bank's Infoshop?
          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a        Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
          public place in a form and language that are understandable
          and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




          All Safeguard Policies
          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional    Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
          measures related to safeguard policies?
          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been          Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
          included in the project cost?
          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
          related to safeguard policies?
          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
          the project legal documents?


         III. Approval
         Task Team Leader(s):                 Name:Feng Liu,Mitsunori Motohashi
         Approved By:
         Safeguards Advisor:                  Name: Nina Chee (SA)                Date: 26-Oct-2017
         Practice Manager/Manager:            Name: Sameer Shukla (PMGR)          Date: 26-Oct-2017




                                                        Page 8 of 8
