                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC12719

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-May-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-May-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                            Project ID:       P154621
                            Project Name:      China: Guangdong Compulsory Education Project (P154621)
                            Task Team          Amer Hasan
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          03-May-2016                      Estimated         12-Sep-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GED02                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Primary education (70%), Secondary education (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       300.00               Total Bank Financing:            120.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     180.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        120.00
                              Total                                                                        300.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to improve access to educational resources and quality of
                           teaching in selected public schools located in 16 counties of Guangdong.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project seeks to improve access to educational resources and quality of teaching. It will
                           focus on selected public schools in 16 counties that face a number of challenges in delivery high
                           quality compulsory education to their students. These challenges run the gamut from schools not
                         meeting existing standards, to teachers needing additional training, to ensuring specific activities are
                         available for left-behind children and children with disabilities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In order to address the challenges these counties face, the project will focus on the following
                         components:
                         a.      Component 1: Improve educational resources for teachers and students
                         b.      Component 2: Assess teaching and learning practices, strengthen training and improve
                         quality of teaching
                         c.      Component 3: Pilot experimental approaches to improving resources, teaching, teacher
                         deployment and school management
                         d.      Component 4: Project Management, Capacity Building, and Monitoring and Evaluation

                         Under component 1, the following activities are envisaged:
                         a.       Hardware
                         -        Classrooms. Crowded classrooms continue to hamper the delivery of education in schools in
                         parts of the province. Some classrooms will need to be constructed in order to bring schools in
                         compliance with existing standards for class size.

                         -       Teacher dormitories. One key incentive provided to teachers in rural areas is the ability to get
                         free/subsidized housing. Teacher dormitories will need to be constructed in some locations where
                         demand for them outstrips supply or where the existing stock of dormitories needs to be replaced.

                         -        Mobile laboratories. The government seeks to ensure that all students have access to
                         laboratories. However, it is not always feasible for all locations to have a dedicated, stand-alone
                         laboratory: some locations may have too few students to justify the cost of constructing a laboratory
                         while others may not have a teacher. This activity will lead to the design and deployment of mobile
                         laboratories: buses or vans that house a configurable laboratory. Depending on the equipment loaded
                         into the van at any given time, the lab can be configured to be a physics, chemistry, biology or
                         computer lab and can be moved around among locations that need them.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         b.       ICT Equipment and online educational content
                         -        ICT packages for primary and junior secondary schools: Ban Ban Tong. Under the Chuang
                         Qian project, the government has been supplying schools with an ICT package referred to as Ban
                         Ban Tong ? classroom-to-classroom connection. Under this project schools that have not yet received
                         Ban Ban Tong will receive the package with a view to improving teaching practices.
                         -        ICT packages for teaching stations. Teaching stations are schools that only offer classes up
                         to grade 5. Typically found in remote, rural locations, these schools require a more substantial ICT
                         package. This package is similar but not identical to the Ban Ban Tong package.
                         -        Multi-media and video-conferencing equipment. Video-conference facilities are needed at
                         the county level to facilitate teacher training ? particularly distance training. In addition to allowing
                         face-to-face instruction these facilities will also allow teachers to access online teaching and teacher
                         training materials.
                         -        Teaching materials. The content that will be needed for training and online sharing needs to
                         be developed. This activity will finance the development of these materials.
                         -        Database. A database will be needed to house this online teaching and teacher training
                         material. The database will include self-paced online training courses for teachers as well as online
                         content that they can use in classrooms with their students.

                         c.      Special purpose equipment
                         -        Equipment for children with mild learning disabilities. The government seeks to develop
                         activity rooms in mainstream schools for children with mild learning disabilities (the exact list of
                         disabilities that the project will be able to focus on has not yet been finalized). These rooms would be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         used to provide specialized care to these children. The project will finance the procurement of the
                         equipment needed for these rooms.
                         -        Equipment for an activity room for left behind children. The project counties are home to a
                         large number of left-behind children. In order to better support their development, the government
                         seeks to provide activity rooms for left-behind children. The project will finance the procurement of
                         the equipment needed for these rooms.
                         -        Equipment for extra-curricular activities. The government seeks to support the over-all
                         development of children. In order to do so children must have opportunities to engage in extra-
                         curricular activities. The project will finance the equipment needed to support such activities.

                         Under component 2, the following activities are envisaged:
                         a.       Video observation for teacher assessment
                         -        Video-based classroom observation. Teaching practices will be assessed using video-based
                         classroom observations. In particular analysis of these videos will help understand how teachers and
                         students interact with each other and with available ICT for learning and overall development.
                         -        Development of teacher training modules. These videos will be used to develop teacher
                         training modules for continuous professional development (CPD). This approach builds on
                         experiences in Indonesia and Vietnam where teacher CPD was reinforced using video-based
                         classroom observation.

                         b.       Training
                         -        Training for multi-subject teachers. In smaller schools, teachers often have to teach multiple
                         subjects. However, they have seldom been trained to do so. Under the project a short term program
                         on multi-subject teaching will be developed and delivered for existing teachers.
                         -        Degree programs for multi-subject teachers. Two types of fully-subsidized degree programs
                         are also envisioned for new teachers: (i) a 5 year associate?s degree and (ii) a 6 year bachelor?s
Public Disclosure Copy




                         degree.
                         -        Training for special education teachers. Teachers will need to be trained to work with and
                         manage the activity rooms for children with mild learning disabilities. While the children will spend
                         the day attending regular classrooms with the rest of their classmates, these teachers and activity
                         rooms will be available for additional support as needed.
                         -        Training for teachers caring for left-behind children. Teachers who will be assigned to
                         manage the activity room for left-behind children will need training in how to do so.
                         -        Training for regular and backbone teachers. Courses to improve teaching practices with a
                         focus on learning outcomes and overall development will be designed and delivered to both regular
                         and backbone teachers ? teachers who are considered excellent. These courses will be delivered
                         through multiple channels including face-to-face training and online training.
                         -        Training for principals. Principals require training in school management skills to ensure that
                         systems and processes for delivering quality education are efficient. A number of instruments exist to
                         assess strengths and weaknesses of management practices. The project will identify an appropriate
                         instrument for adaptation and use in the context of these 16 counties and use it to prioritize training
                         for principals.
                         -        Courses for students. Students will need to be taught how to employ ICT to support them in
                         achieving better learning outcomes. These courses will ideally be delivered in schools.

                         c.      Studies
                         -        Evidence-based design. Several of the proposed activities under this project will need to be
                         based on a review of existing practices and evidence. These are (i) a study on the standards for
                         training multi-subject teachers; (ii) a study on how to reinforce the missing element of care for left-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         behind children and (iii) a study on how to design content for continuous professional development
                         using video observation of classrooms.

                         Under component 3, the following activities are envisaged:
                         a.       Pilots
                         -        Leveraging social donations. In an effort to address the lack of financial resources for
                         education at the county-level, foundations have often been relied on to raise social donations from
                         prominent local and/or expatriate businessmen. The project will pilot the establishment of a standard,
                         transparent management system for such foundations to collect and channel social donations for
                         education.
                         -        Improving children?s overall development. A core objective of the government is to produce
                         not only good students but good citizens. This objective focuses on children?s overall development.
                         A pilot will be undertaken to test out alternative strategies for improving the overall development of
                         children in compulsory education.
                         -        Providing incentives to teachers to work in rural areas. One persistent bottleneck to quality
                         education in Guangdong is the lack of good teachers willing to teach in rural areas. The provincial
                         government organizes special recruitment fairs each year for teachers in rural areas. This pilot will
                         experiment with ways to strengthen the current incentive system to encourage teachers to work in
                         rural areas. For instance, since 2008, Guangdong province has been refunding tuition fees to
                         university graduates who work as teachers in rural areas. Under the project, the government will test
                         two other approaches to boost teacher incentives to work in rural areas.
                         (i)      An institution-based approach: Schools within the province will be invited to participate in a
                         school-to-school partnership system where educational resources and teachers from better-off
                         schools can be shared with worse-off schools. A typical duration for teacher deployment under this
                         approach would last up to 1 year.
                         (ii)     An individual-based approach: Under this approach the government would advertise a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         number of incentives for teachers to work in rural areas. It would monitor which ones attract the most
                         candidates. Teacher deployment in this case would range from 3 to 5 years.

                         -        Improving school management practices. Selected schools within the project counties would
                         pilot approaches to streamline systems and processes. One possibility is using an ISO9000
                         certification approach to improve efficiency. Other approaches will be considered and piloted.

                         b.     Studies
                         -      Evidence-based design. A study reviewing incentives to encourage teacher mobility would
                         be needed to inform the design of the pilots proposed in this component.

                         Under component 4, the following activities are envisaged:
                         -       Consultants. Technical consultants will be recruited to form a panel of experts. They will
                         supplement the capacity of the PMO and PIUs to:
                         (i)        Carry out research
                         (ii)    Assist in the day-to-day implementation of project activities, including procurement,
                         financial management and safeguards
                         (iii)    Coordinate within and among the relevant government agencies.
                         (iv)     Carry out regular M&E activities
                           - Capacity Building. The Department of Education including the PMO and PIUs will be provided
                           with:
                           (i)     Office equipment to facilitate communication, coordination, and project management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           (ii)    Training on Bank procedures and project management.
                           (iii)    Study tours for project management and for exchange of experiences in modernizing the
                           education system.

                           -        Monitoring and evaluation. M&E activities will need to be coordinated by the PMO
                           following the Results Framework. In particular, to establish the impact of project activities on
                           learning, a sample of students in grades 3 and 4 and in grades 7 and 8 will be tested before and after
                           specific project activities. Appropriate sampling strategies will be followed to be able to demonstrate
                           the causal impact of key interventions if deemed feasible.

                           For each component, school selection criteria will be developed to ensure that activities are well-
                           targeted to schools that need them the most. These criteria will be objective and draw on
                           administrative data on schools in each country. For instance, in the case of classrooms and teacher
                           dorms, the project will examine enrollment trends over the last several years to assess whether the
                           school has been growing or shrinking. Eligibility criteria will also be developed on the minimum size
                           of schools that can be feasibly incorporated into the project.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The counties in which the project will operate are: Chaoyang, Wengyuan, Wuhua, Haifeng, Lufeng,
                           Suixi, Lianjiang, Leizhou, Wuchuan, Dianbai, Huazhou, Chaoan, Huilai, Puning, Jiexi and Luoding.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Guangdong Department of Education (DoE) is the highest authority in the education system in
                           the province. A Steering Committee headed by the Director of DoE will be established to oversee
                           project preparation and implementation. A Project Management Office (PMO) was set up within the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           DoE in March 2015. The PMO will be responsible for the day-to-day project activities, while the
                           Basic Education Division in the DoE will provide policy guidance in the implementation of project
                           components. The PMO is staffed by government officials and technical specialists who are seconded
                           from education institutions. Similar structures will be put in place at the county level. The Director of
                           Education at the county level would be responsible for the project activities in the county. He or she
                           would be supported by a Project Implementation Unit (PIU). The PIUs would be set up before June
                           2015 and staffed by seconded government staff. All PIUs are within the county education
                           departments. Experienced professional consulting teams will be hired to prepare the safeguard
                           document of the project. The Bank?s safeguards specialists will provide training and support to help
                           the client to complete the work in a satisfactory manner.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Aimin Hao (GSU02)
                           Yiren Feng (GEN2A)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment          Yes            Component 1 of the proposed project will finance the
                           OP/BP 4.01                                       construction of standardized classrooms, teacher
                                                            dormitories, and mobile laboratories. Both the
                                                            classrooms and the teacher dormitories for each
                                                            participating school will be within the existing
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            campus, no land acquisition or relocation of people is
                                                            anticipated. Depending on the equipment loaded into
                                                            the van at any given time, the mobile lab can be
                                                            configured to be a physics, chemistry, biology or
                                                            computer lab. Currently there are 16 participating
                                                            project counties. In total, 250 standardized
                                                            classrooms will be built for the 16 counties, each
                                                            classroom will be 100m2; the teacher dormitories
                                                            will be 35m2 each with less than a 5 or 6 floor
                                                            building planned. The total construction area will be
                                                            less than 1000 m2 within the existing campus of each
                                                            participating school. The scale and size of the
                                                            building within the existing campus of each
                                                            participating school is very small. Considering the
                                                            type, location, sensitivity, and scale of the proposed
                                                            project, the project is proposed to be classified as
                                                            Category B due to the potential impacts that are
                                                            small scale and limited to the site. An Environmental
                                                            Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared for the
                                                            civil works of the project and the labs to cover the
                                                            environmental management activities of the project.
                                                            The Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP) will be
                                                            part of the EMP to address the generic construction
                                                            impacts.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No   The civil works of the project are within the existing
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            campuses, or the residential areas in the town, the
                                                            project will not affect any natural habitats or critical
                                                            natural habitats as defined under the policy.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No   Project activities will not affect forest areas, it will
                                                            not involve any logging or planting activities in
                                                            forest areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No   The project will not procure pesticides or increase
                                                            use of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources   No   Both the classrooms and the teacher dormitories will
                         OP/BP 4.11                         be constructed within the existing campus of each
                                                            participating school. The EA team visited each
                                                            proposed participating school and confirmed there
                                                            are no physical cultural resources within the
                                                            campuses as defined by the policy. Chance finding
                                                            procedure will be included in the ECOP, and relevant
                                                            clauses will be included in all construction contracts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      No   Ethnic minority students account for 0.5% of total
                         4.10                               number of students in the 16 project counties.
                                                                                                                        However, no ethnic minority concentration is found
                                                                                                                        in these counties. No ethnic minority has been
                                                                                                                        identified satisfying the four criteria stated in OP/
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        BP4.10 policy. Based on social assessment, all ethnic
                                                                                                                        minority students are from communities where there
                                                                                                                        are predominantly Han people, and they mostly
                                                                                                                        speak fluent Mandarin. There are no language
                                                                                                                        barriers for these students to receive equal education
                                                                                                                        at school.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                Yes                        The proposed project will improve quality of
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                compulsory education in selected counties through
                                                                                                                        improved school infrastructure, and improving
                                                                                                                        teachers➢❨ quality. Construction of classrooms and
                                                                                                                        teachers➢❨ accommodations will take place within
                                                                                                                        current campus with land use rights, and no land
                                                                                                                        acquisition is expected. This will be confirmed by
                                                                                                                        the social assessment. However, construction will
                                                                                                                        involve temporary transition for those live in
                                                                                                                        structures to be rebuilt, which means teachers/current
                                                                                                                        dwellers in these structures will have to rent houses
                                                                                                                        elsewhere during construction. Details of temporary
                                                                                                                        transition will become available during project
                                                                                                                        implementation, and a Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                                        Framework (RPF) will be prepared to ensure that
                                                                                                                        project construction does not cause any reduced
                                                                                                                        welfare to local communities. In particular, the cost
                                                                                                                        of renting houses by teachers/current users of the
                                                                                                                        structures to be rebuilt will be recovered by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        project using counterpart funding. In the event
                                                                                                                        schools willing to participate in project need land
                                                                                                                        acquisition, a RAP will be prepared under the
                                                                                                                        guidance of the Resettlement Policy Framework. The
                                                                                                                        social assessment report and the Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                                        Framework will be disclosed locally.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         The project will not finance construction or
                                                                                                                        rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                                                                        policy.
                                 Projects on International      No                                                      The project is not located in any international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   waterways as defined under the policy.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The project is not located in any known disputed
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                areas as defined under the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 05-Oct-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             The specific studies in timing will be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Task Team Leader(s): Name: Amer Hasan
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor: Name: Josefo Tuyor (SA)                                 Date: 11-May-2016
                           Practice Manager/    Name: Harry Anthony Patrinos (PMGR)                    Date: 17-May-2016
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
