INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA15453
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Oct-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Oct-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Gabon                       Project ID:  P151077
Project Name: Infrastructure and Local Development Program II (P151077)
Task Team       Mahine Diop,Deo-Marcel Niyungeko
Leader(s):
Estimated       28-Oct-2015                 Estimated    10-Dec-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSU13                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General public administration sector (20%), General water, sanitation and flood
protection sector (35%), Other social services (6%), Other industry (5%), Urban
Transport (34%)
Theme(s):       Urban services and housing for the poor (60%), Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprise support (10%), Participation and civic engagement (10%), Municipal
governance and institution building (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
ci 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
O
Total Project Cost:     100.00             Total Bank Financing:   100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
Borrower                                                                      0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       100.00
Total                                                                       100.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The PDO is to improve access to urban services in selected underserviced neighborhoods, and to
build basic capacities for municipal management in target cities.
Page 1 of 9


﻿3. Project Description
This is a follow-up operation to the Local Infrastructure Development Project I (LIDP 1). It is
expected that the proposed project will be able to: (i) build on the achievements of the original
project, particularly in terms of implementation of basic infrastructure, job creation and capacity
building to SME/SMI; and (ii) address the problems of capacity-building for municipalities to enable
them to better perform their roles in urban development. The participatory approach initiated under
LIDP 1, which helped improve transparency of urban investments and promote better lines of
a         accountability between municipalities and local populations, will be maintained and reinforced in the
proposed project. This participatory approach was based on the community involvement in project
identification, preparation, and monitoring of works.
Project Components
Component 1: Urban infrastructure and services (US$80 million)
The objective of this component is to increase access to services in underserviced neighborhoods and
to assure better integration of these neighborhoods into the urban fabric. The component has two sub-
components:
*      Priority Investment Program: Investments in network and structuring infrastructure in Target
Cities, inter alia: (i) upgrading of select urban roads and (ii) financing of other urban priorities as
determined on the basis of the City Development Plan (CDP) for each Target City.
*      Neighborhood Investments: Investments in neighborhood infrastructure and basic services,
including, inter alia: (i) access roads; (ii) water and sanitation works; (iii) secondary drainage
systems; (iv) health centers and schools; and (v) local markets as determined on the basis of the
Neighborhood Development Plan (NDP) for each Target Neighborhood.
The Priority Investment Program focuses on network and structuring infrastructure to connect the
neighborhood to the fabric of the city, with benefits on a city-wide level, while the Neighborhood
Infrastructure sub-component targets infrastructure of a much more reduced scope, for services
improvement within neighborhoods. The selection of Project investment activities in will be done in
coordination with other relevant sector ministries and other Bank Global Practices (e.g. education,
health, transport, water, etc.). To assure reasonable equity in repartition of Component 1 funds, a
formula was established whereby each city will receive an equal base allocation of US$4 million for
investments, and with the balance distributed according to population weight. This formula was
determined to assure that each city receives sufficient funds to cater to some of the need for
structuring investments while recognizing that larger cities have more substantial needs.
The Priority Investment Program is developed to assure completion of some unfinished works and/or
already identified works in the neighborhoods targeted under LIDP 1, as well as additional
investments in connectivity and structuring infrastructure for ILDP2 neighborhoods and cities. An
initial program of 8.3 kilometers of road rehabilitation is being developed during Project preparation
for three cities. Selection of further investments will be narrowed down during Project preparation
and final selection will take place once the City Development Plans (CDPs) are available (see sub-
component 2.1) to assure relatively quick visible results on the ground, it is important to assure the
Mayors' and citizens' engagement after the long period of discussions with no investments between
the LIDP 1 and ILDP2. Road upgrading will rely on labor-intensive construction techniques, in
continuation of the labor-intensive road construction technique used by the LIDP 1.
Page 2 of 9


﻿The Neighborhood Infrastructure sub-component will finance investments to rehabilitate or construct
smaller infrastructure in one or a few targeted neighborhoods per Project city. A number of activities
identified in neighborhoods benefiting from the LIDP1 could not be implemented under the LIDP1
but some of these will be included in the ILDP2. Other investments will be taken from Neighborhood
O
Q)        Development Plans developed under Component 2 in consultation with the beneficiary populations,
and will thus start after the Priority Investment Program. To guide the selection of investments, these
will need to reasonably respond to criteria of: (1) cost-effectiveness; (2) equity of costs and benefits
to the stakeholders; (3) sustainability; (4) operation and maintenance; (5) potential employment
impact; and (6) considerations of vulnerable groups. The selection process will take longer than for
the Priority Investment Program, and the investments of sub-component 1.2 will start after sub-
component 1.1 investments are well on the way.
The environmental and social management under the project will draw on experience gained under
the previous operation. To further enhance the environmental and social sustainability of future
infrastructure investments, Component 1 will finance the planting of indigenous tree species on
subproject sites where appropriate and areas prone to erosion.
Component 2: Institutional support and capacity building (US$15 million)
This component aims to strengthen the capacity of municipalities and other stakeholders in urban
development to plan, program, implement, and manage urban services in a transparent and inclusive
manner. The component has five sub-components:
*      Municipal strengthening: Provision of capacity support to Target Cities through, inter alia:
(i) elaboration of CDPs, to determine investment priorities in Target Cities; (ii) elaboration of NDPs,
to determine investment priorities in Target Neighborhoods; (iii) elaboration of Urban Master plans;
(iv) support to revenue collection; (v) support to establishing municipal technical services and
including municipal asset management system; (vi) support to municipal organization; and (vii)
allocation of funds for capacity support based on specific demands from municipalities.
* Government strengthening: Provision of capacity building to central government and
deconcentrated ministerial departments through, inter alia: (i) training, technical assistance and
limited contribution to equipment and goods; (ii) elaboration of regulation governing decentralization
and local government finance; (iii) elaboration of regulation and strategies for urban development.
o        *       Private sector strengthening: Provision of, inter alia: (i) SME sector study; (ii) training to
SMEs; and (iii) support to establishing professional organizations in the construction sector.
* Civil society strengthening: Provision of, inter alia: (i) community facilitation; (ii) training
and equipment; and (iii) regulation governing the relationships between NGOs and municipalities.
*      Crosscutting support for, inter alia: (i) environmental training and awareness-raising; (ii)
development of a municipal solid waste strategy; (iii) training in infrastructure implementation; and
(iv) communication.
Component 3: Management, coordination, monitoring and evaluation (US$5 million)
This component will assure correct implementation of all project activities. It will finance cost
related to, inter alia: (i) training for the CN-TIPPEE personnel; (ii) environmental and social
monitoring; (iii) project monitoring and evaluation; (iv) operating expenditures; and (v) audits. The
cost will be shared with the other Bank-funded projects, managed by the CN-TIPPEE. Cost will be
shared with three other Bank-funded project implemented by the CN-TIPPEE.
Page 3 of 9


﻿4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
All nine provincial capitals will benefit from Project interventions. The Project will be implemented
in the six cities targeted during the first phase (Libreville, Port-Gentil, Franceville, Oyem,
Lambar6n6 and Mouila) and the three other provincial capitals (Makokou, Koulamoutou, and
Tchibanga) for a total of nine cities. The criteria for the selection of neighborhoods within the cities
are similar to those used in LIDP1, namely the degree of isolation, access to basic urban services,
housing density and typology, and insalubrity.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Antoine V. Lema (GSURR)
Emmanuel Ngollo (GENO5)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         OP/BP 4.01 will be triggered due to the project activities
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               that will include inter alia: (i) road upgrading and
neighborhood access roads; (ii) water and sanitation
works; (iii) secondary drainage systems; (iv) health
centers and schools; and (v) local markets as determined
on the basis of the City Development Plan (CDP) for each
targeted city and Neighborhood Development Plan (NDP)
for each Targeted Neighborhood.
The sites for subprojects will be selected by local
governments on the basis of their City Development Plans
and Neighborhood Development Plans. Activities include
the rehabilitation of roads and construction works, which
usually involves the opening of quarries. All these
activities may induce moderate adverse environmental
impacts, of limited significance and magnitude, which can
be easily managed and mitigated. Therefore, the project is
classified as category B. Because the exact locations of all
project's activities are yet to be determined, an
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) has been the relevant safeguards instrument that
was prepared. The document was consulted upon in-
country and published in Gabon on July 23, 2015 and in
the Bank's Infoshop on August 11, 2015. The ESMF
prepared describes the guidelines and procedures for the
preparation of Environmental and Social Impact
Assessments (ESIAs), including environmental and social
management plans (ESMPs) and their implementation for
investments in site-specific sub-projects as they are
identified. For investments for which the sites are known
prior to appraisal, investment-specific ESIAs/NIES and
ESMPs have been disclosed in country on October 7,
2015 and at the Bank's Infoshop on October 20, 2015.
Page 4 of 9


﻿Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           This OP is not triggered, as there will be no potential
4.04                                 impact on natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           The proposed project will not affect forests, nor will it
involve reforestation.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           There will be no use of pesticides or health-related
a
concerns with respect to vector management.
Physical Cultural       Yes          The works will take place in inhabited areas and will
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 involve excavations and demolitions. There is a
possibility of chance finds of physical cultural resources.
To mitigate potential adverse impacts, the ESMF, the
ESIAs and the ESMPs will include guidance and
procedures for physical cultural resources management.
No separate safeguards instrument is needed.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           There are no indigenous people in the project areas.
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         Component 1 (Urban Infrastructure and Services) will
OP/BP 4.12                           likely induce land acquisition related to the rehabilitation
and/or construction of socio-economic infrastructures
such as roads, markets, water supply and sanitation sub-
projects, municipal halls, schools, health and social
centers, erosion control and environmental works. As only
parts of the project sites have been identified, and
likewise detailed design still have to be completed, a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared,
consulted upon for those investments. The RPF was
disclosed in-country and published in Gabon on July 23,
2015 and at the Bank's Infoshop on August 11, 2015 to
Q)                                             address potential environmental and social issues.
Subsequent Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) have been
prepared and implemented as needed for these
investments. For investments with known sites,
investment-specific RAPs have been disclosed at the
Bank's Infoshop on October 29, 2015.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           This OP is not triggered, as there will be no dam
4.37                                 construction or rehabilitation of dams that will necessitate
safety status reports.
Projects on International  No        This OP is not triggered, for there are no international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 waterways in the project sites.
Projects in Disputed    No           This OP is not triggered because project intervention sites
Areas OP/BP 7.60                     will not be within disputed areas.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Page 5 of 9


﻿Project will likely induce land acquisition, but no physical displacement is expected. Economic
displacement will be limited. Nevertheless, five types of impacts are foreseen under this project,
arising from the project implementation activities:
O
a. Civil Works: Nuisance and pollution associated with activities and waste form construction and
rehabilitation works (noise, dust and construction wastes) will affect especially the construction
workers and the closest neighbors to the sites. Unmanaged production of waste and residues from
the sites could constitute a source of nuisance for public health if no sustainable ecologic
management system is put in place. Also, excavation works at the sites could cause the unstable
soil subsidence, which can cause the destruction of property and accidents.
b. Construction accidents: During the work phase, there will be risks of accidents associated with
construction equipment/instruments and the presence of building materials poorly protected or
used inappropriately. The risk of falling exists for all authorized and unauthorized persons on
construction sites in terms of narrow and congested traffic areas. The risk of accidents also relates
to road traffic for the delivery of building materials (movement of vehicles: collision, skidding,
striking, pinching, crushing, or load-fall, stumbling during operations).
c. Degradation of cultural relics: It is intended that the project avoid cultural sites, sources of
social conflicts. However, in case of fortuitous discovery (chance finds), the builders must commit
to notify immediately the relevant services of the Ministry of Culture, and the work will be
oriented in accordance with their guidelines.
d. Social conflicts in the event of non-employment of the local workforce: Construction works
should require participation the local workforce, which will be a potential source of increase in
income at the local level. On the other hand, non-use of the local workforce during the work could
result in frustrations or conflicts, which may interfere with the smooth implementation of works.
Also, failure to observe local customs by staff may result in conflict with local populations.
O
Q)          e. Populations and workers' health: Health wise, there are risks of sexually transmitted diseases
STD/HIV/AIDS transmission associated with the presence of temporary foreign workers,
composed usually of youths, with a tendency to increase contacts with young girls and women
within the local population in the work areas.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
No long-term impacts are expected due to anticipated, future activities in the project area.
The potential environmental and social impacts are likely to be of small-scale, site-specific,
manageable and thus easily mitigated. There are no indirect or long terms adverse impacts
expected during project implementation.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not relevant.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower developed and sustained its safeguards capacity during the preparation and
implementation of LIDP 1. A social scientist in the project unit was recruited to ensure social
safeguards compliance. Safeguards documents were timely prepared. Ministry of Environment has
Page 6 of 9


﻿actively endorsed the project.
An additional environmental safeguards specialist will be hired under the ILDP2 to manage and
oversee the environmental management process, to provide institutional strengthening and on-the-
O
job training services throughout the project period. Both safeguards specialists will continue to
work closely within the CN-TIPPEE and collaborate with the Directorate General of the
Environment and Protection of Nature (DGEPN) to apply and strengthen the existing or updated
ESMF and RPF procedures that will improve subprojects' quality and sustainability through
compliance with safeguards under the conditions of the Financing Agreement.
During implementation, Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs), Environmental
and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and/or Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) or Abbreviated
Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs) will be prepared as and when necessary once new sub-project
sites and plans for civil works or other infrastructure development are finalized.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders are mayors of the beneficiary cities, and the population of the targeted
neighborhoods, in addition to governments line ministries. These stakeholders were consulted in
public consultations in the process to review the draft final safeguards instruments.
All key stakeholders, together with NGOs, private sector and development partners will continue
to be consulted regularly. The project will continue the dialogue with all stakeholders, relying on
the RPF and ESMF to ensure that the appropriate mitigation measures are taken into account in
accordance with the Gabonese and the Bank's safeguards policies. This participatory approach will
be carried out throughout implementation, maintenance, supervision and evaluation of the project
activities.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              14-Jul-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           1 1-Aug-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Gabon                                                    13-Jul-2015
Comments: Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) disclosed. NIES for
Libreville, Port Gentil and Oyem have been disclosed at the Bank' s Infoshop on
October 20, 2015.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              14-Jul-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           11I-Aug-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Gabon                                                    13-Jul-2015
Comments: Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) disclosed. The Abbreviated Resettlement
Action Plan has been disclosed at the Bank's Infoshop on October 29, 2015.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
Page 7 of 9


﻿respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
O
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ] No[   ]   NA [X]
report?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?           Yes [  ] No [X]     TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [X ] No [ ] TBD [ ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes[X]  No[    NA
World Bank's Infoshop?
0          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X]  No  NA
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Page 8 of 9


﻿Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes []No []NA[]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
O
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Mahine Diop,Deo-Marcel Niyungeko
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)             Date: 30-Oct-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Maria Angelica Sotomayor Araujo      Date: 30-Oct-2015
Manager:                      (PMGR)
Page 9 of 9


