                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC18010

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-May-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-May-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Cote d'Ivoire                   Project ID:       P151507
                            Project Name:      Financial Sector Development (P151507)
                            Task Team          Cedric Mousset,Caroline Marie C. Cerruti Hailey
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          11-Oct-2016                     Estimated         15-Dec-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GFM01                           Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Banking (30%), Microfinance (30%), General finance sector (20%), Payments,
                                               settlements, and remittance systems (15%), SME Finance (5 %)
                            Theme(s):          Other Financial Sector Development (55%), Financial Consumer Protection and
                                               Financial Literacy (20%), Corporate governance (15%), St ate-owned enterprise
                                               restructuring and privatization (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     30.00                    Total Bank Financing:         30.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 30.00
                              Total                                                                       30.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to support the government of Cote d’Ivoire to foster sound
                           financial inclusion.
                           C. Project Description
                         1.       The proposed PDO supports the financial sector strategy of the government that involves
                         restructuring public banks and the cooperative network as well as fostering sound financial inclusion.
                         The project is expected to have two components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Sound financial intermediation for selected institutions

                         2.       The project would support the restructuring of the Banque Nationale d➢❨ Investissement
                         (BNI), the main public bank that is expected to remain state-owned, and of the UNACOOPEC. It
                         does not have a broad financial stability objective but aims to address legacy issues that hinder
                         financial inclusion. Currently, both institutions have serious governance problems and capital
                         deficiencies if impaired assets were accounted for based on international standards. UNACOOPEC
                         was placed under conservatorship in 2013 and has negative equity, yet little progress has been made
                         to achieve financial soundness. BNI is the 8th largest bank in Cote d➢❨ Ivoire with over 100,000
                         clients but is plagued by high impaired loans and non-performing government exposures. The project
                         is supported by a FIRST grant which provides technical assistance to frame the restructuring
                         strategies.

                         3.       A restructured BNI is expected to support funding to key economic sectors. Currently the
                         mandate of the BNI is not clear. It is a former investment bank, which has moved recently to SME
                         finance to fill a gap, without adequately managing the associated risks. The restructuring would
                         entail strengthened governance, including through a clarification of its business model, to ensure
                         viable operations going forward and a complementarity with the rest of the financial system.

                         4.       The UNACOOPEC is a critical actor for financial inclusion. It uniquely covers the entire
                         territory of Cote d➢❨ Ivoire, with 131 points of service and 650,000 members, reaching about 16
                         percent of the population. Yet its business model is not viable and focused on salaried workers and
                         retirees. It is highly dependent on the implementation of public credit programs. The objective of the
                         restructuring under the loan would be to restore financial soundness and improve governance so as to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         better serve the needs of populations that are excluded from the formal system, mainly in rural areas.

                         5.      The funding for this component will be determined based on restructuring strategies chosen
                         by the government. As the project is not expected to cover all the funding needs for restructuring, the
                         team will agree a funding plan with the government by appraisal.


                         Component 2: Responsible financial access

                         6.      The project would help increase responsible access to financial services. This would be
                         achieved via the digitalization of government payments on a pilot basis, and the promotion of
                         consumer protection and agent banking. As financial regulation is elaborated at the regional level, the
                         project would not support regulatory reforms, however a FISF technical assistance is expected to
                         support an enabling framework for consumer protection and for retail agents, which could be piloted
                         in Cote d➢❨ Ivoire.

                         7.       The digitalization of government payments would help unbanked beneficiaries of
                         government payments / payers to access a transaction account (as well as improve the efficiency of
                         tax collection). The Payment Aspects for Financial Inclusion (PAFI) taskforce highlights that large,
                         recurrent payment streams such as Government payments, both disbursed and received, including
                         payments of taxes, have an impact on financial inclusion. The team has identified the Tax Authority
                         as a suitable partner to pilot the digitalization. Taxes are only paid in cheques or cash, while most
                         government payments to suppliers, civil servants and pensioners are made electronically. The project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         would finance the equipment required for the digitalization of tax payments, while FISF would
                         provide advisory services. It is expected to particularly benefit micro and small enterprises which pay
                         their taxes in cash at their municipalities.

                         8.      The project would support measures to protect consumers of financial services. The legal and
                         regulatory framework for consumer protection is narrow and focus on a usury rate, with no redress
                         mechanisms. As the unbanked get access to financial services, they may fall prey to predatory
                         practices and over-indebtedness. The project would support the creation of an institution to promote
                         financial consumer protection according to international best practices, focused on transparency of
                         financial services and complaint handling. This institution would provide redress to customers of
                         financial services.

                         9.       The project may also support the development of retail agents for financial services on a
                         pilot basis. Evidence shows that retail agents can help enhance financial inclusion by reaching
                         underserved populations. However, agent-related risks need to be correctly supervised and mitigated
                         (consumer protection, anti-money laundering, risk management). Subject to an enabling regional
                         framework for agents to be developed by the regional central bank (BCEAO), the project would
                         support the implementation of a pilot program, building on the development of agents for mobile
                         payment services.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         10.      The project would be executed mainly in Abidjan; however its impact would be in the entire
                         territory of the Republic of Cote d➢❨ Ivoire. Given the nature of the project its execution would be
                         in Abidjan as all the relevant institutions involved are headquartered there and the institution for the
                         promotion of financial consumer protection would be headquartered in Abidjan as well. Despite the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         fact that the execution of the project would take place only in Abidjan, given the nature of the
                         institutions and activities involved, population living in rural areas would also be positively affected.
                         In fact, both UNACOOPEC and BNI have a big presence in rural area, if they were to be
                         strengthened people living in those areas would be positively affected. Similarly the digitalization of
                         government payments and the agent banking pilot would positively affect rural population as they
                         would be able to access financial services (in particular payment services) close to their residence.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         11.       The Republic of Cote d➢❨ Ivoire has already undertaken several reforms in terms of
                         governance and financial sector. Major financial sector reforms have already been undertaken by the
                         authorities to avoid any financial sector failures which may undermine any recent and further
                         progress in financial inclusion and have particular impact on the most vulnerable fringes of the
                         population. The country has relatively high capacity, and the authorities are committed to advancing
                         financial inclusion in a responsible manner. Hence, if the need arises to put in place specific
                         mechanisms to protect the most vulnerable people the government would have adequate capacity. In
                         fact, it may either establish rules imposing non-discriminatory practices or oversee the impact on the
                         digitalization of government payments in certain communities.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         Benjamin Burckhart (GSU01)
                               Melissa C. Landesz (GEN07)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Safeguard Policies                                          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment                                    No                         The project focuses on financial reforms and will not
                                 OP/BP 4.01                                                                             have a physical footprint. No direct or indirect
                                                                                                                        negative environmental impacts are foreseen. The
                                                                                                                        installation of physical IT equipment and minor
                                                                                                                        refurbishment of existing buildings (for the
                                                                                                                        establishment of the agency for consumer protection)
                                                                                                                        will follow relevant national laws.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                 No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                          No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                     No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources                                 No
                                 OP/BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.10
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                No
                                 BP 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No

                                 Projects on International      No                                                      None of the project activities involve international
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      There are no project activities in disputed areas.
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Sep-2016
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      N/A. The project is a Category C project for EA purposes, no further environmental work is
                                      required. The installation of physical IT equipment and minor refurbishment of existing buildings
                                      will follow relevant national laws.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Cedric Mousset,Caroline Marie C. Cerruti Hailey
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)                       Date: 11-May-2016
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Alejandro Alvarez de la Campa (PMGR)      Date: 13-May-2016
                                 Manager:


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
