                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                 APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                                        Report No.:ISDSA23209
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated:                 26-Oct-2017
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed               26-Oct-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                          Pakistan                     Project ID:             P154987
    Project Name:                     National Transmission Modernization I Project (P154987)
    Task Team Leader(s):              Anh Nguyet Pham,Anjum Ahmad
    Estimated Appraisal               23-Oct-2017                  Estimated Board         19-Dec-2017
    Date:                                                          Date:
    Managing Unit:                    GEE06                        Financing               Investment Project
                                                                   Instrument:             Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency                  Recovery) or OP            No
    8.00(Rapid Response to Crises and         Emergencies)?
                                               Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           562.55                       Total Bank Financing: 425.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                     Amount
    Borrower                                                                                                 137.55
    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                    425.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                               0.00
    Total                                                                                                    562.55
    Environmental Category:           B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?       No

    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The Project Development Objective (PDO) of NTMP-I is to increase the capacity and reliability of selected
    segments of the national transmission system in Pakistan and modernize key business processes of the National
    Transmission and Dispatch Company.
    3. Project Description
    Concept. The project will support investments in high-priority transmission infrastructure, information and
    communication technology (ICT), and technical assistance (TA) for improved management and operations.
    Infrastructure investments will create new assets or rehabilitate existing parts of the system—transmission
    substations, transmission lines, or a combination of the two—based on the NTDC’s identification of the highest
    priority improvements. The ICT investment will establish a robust ICT infrastructure and roll out an Enterprise


                                                    Page 1 of 11
Resource Planning (ERP) system for enhanced efficiency of management and operations. The TA will help the
NTDC implement the project and improve the company's capacity for sustainable system operation. NTMP-I
consists of three components summarized below. The allocation of funds among the components will be
flexible, allowing for adjustment during implementation in line with company priorities.

Component A: Upgrading and Expansion of the Transmission Network (estimated cost US$498.99 million,
consisting of a US$373.94 million IBRD loan and US$125.05 million in NTDC counterpart funds). This
component consists of (a) expanding, augmenting, and upgrading of selected existing 500 kV and 220 kV power
substations and associated lines; and (b) constructing new 765 kV, 500 kV, and 220 kV substations and
transmission lines. The component will have groups of subprojects. Group 1 subprojects will consist of those
that the NTDC has designated as having the highest priority. These subprojects have completed feasibility
studies and required safeguards documentation. Group 2 subprojects will consist of potential subprojects that the
NTDC’s Power Sector Development Plan (PSDP) for 2016–2021 has identified, but the details are not yet
known. For inclusion in NTMP-I, these subprojects have to meet a set of technical, economic, and safeguards
criteria. Financing for each subproject will become available when its proposal complies with the eligibility
criteria, on a ‘first come, first approved’ basis until the commitment of all funds is allocated to the component.
This design will create an incentive for timely implementation, allowing the shifting of funds between
subprojects and recycling of cost savings.

Component B: Deployment of the Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) System (estimated cost US$37.5 million,
consisting of a US$30 million IBRD loan and US$7.5 million in NTDC counterpart funds). This component will
finance the first stage of an ERP program for the NTDC. The component includes implementation of the ICT
infrastructure modernization and the development and deployment of an ERP system aimed at strengthening the
company's selected management capabilities through using an integrated ICT system. The component includes
the procurement of civil infrastructure such as data centers, provision of local area network outlets, software
licenses, hardware for office automation, consulting services for implementation support and change
management, and ICT capacity building and strategic sourcing to ensure the sustainability of the ERP system.

Component C: Project Management, Technical Assistance, and Capacity Building (estimated cost US$25
million, consisting of a US$20 million IBRD loan and US$5 million in NTDC counterpart funds). This
component will finance (a) project management and implementation support services; (b) strengthening of
NTDC’s planning, operations, and maintenance capability; (c) modernization of NTDC’s key business
processes; (d) preparation of new investments; and (e) other priority TA and capacity building to be agreed
between the NTDC and the World Bank.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The subprojects under Component A are scattered in various urban, peri-urban and rural areas in all four
provinces of Pakistan. A large number of subprojects are located in Punjab Province and in the Islamabad
Capital Territory and the remaining subprojects are located in the provinces of Sindh, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
(KP) and Balochistan. The majority of the sub stations will be located near the load centers, which are urban
and peri- urban areas. Component B and C are technical assistance activities which will be carried out within the
existing premises of NTDC and can be considered to have no safeguards impacts.

In capacity upgrading (expansion) of existing substations, the key activity is to install additional new 500/220kV
or 220/132 kV power transformers, reactors and associated equipment. In rehabilitation (augmentation) of
existing substations, existing 500 kV or 220 kV transformers and associated equipment will be replaced with
new ones of higher capacity. Rehabilitation also includes conversion of existing substations with open air
insulated switchyard (AIS) to more compact and indoor gas insulated substations (GIS). These activities do not
require land acquisition and will be implemented within the premises of these substations. NTDC has advised


                                                Page 2 of 11
that PCB are not in use in any of its existing substations and are not used in any new substations. Safe disposal
of replaced equipment will require adequate mitigation measures to ensure environmental protection and
avoiding contamination of natural resources like water and air. Health, safety and construction related
environmental impacts need to be identified in the EMP and adequately implemented. Some upgrading
subprojects in Group 2 may require limited additional pieces of land, which is normally adjacent to the existing
substations.

New 765 kV, 500 kV and 220 kV substations typically have two to four power transformers and associated
equipment at 765, 500, 220 and 130 kV, a control room and ancillary equipment. The key components in 750
kV, 500 kV and 220 kV power substations are; (i) switchyard bay, (ii) control building, (iii) residential houses
for staff with water supply and sanitation facilities (iv) fencing and landscaping, and (v) short access road.
Typically, a new substation requires medium or short transmission lines connecting it to the existing
transmission network. A new substation requires an enclosed, leveled site free of any vegetation or human
habitation (except for substation operators), typically 50-70 acres for a 500kV substation and 30-40 acres for a
220kV substation. New substations may also require additional permanent and temporary land acquisition for
500 or 220 kV transmission connections or upgrading or new existing access roads. New subproject sites can be,
and normally are, selected flexibly within a certain area to minimize the scale of such structures and impacts on
environment or land acquisition.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Ahmad Imran Aslam, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
 Imran-ul Haq, Social Safeguards Specialist
 Marcelo Hector Acerbi, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
 Salma Omar, Social Safeguards Specialist
6. Safeguard Policies That Might Apply
Safeguard Policies                            Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01           Yes            The proposed project will upgrade or expand select
                                                             substations and construct new substations and
                                                             transmission lines. These activities may have
                                                             temporary, reversible and short to medium term
                                                             environmental impacts which can be adequately
                                                             mitigated through a well-planned environmental
                                                             management and mitigation plans. Based on the
                                                             proposed activities and likely environmental
                                                             impacts, which are generally construction related,
                                                             the project has been rated as category B.

                                                             The project has adopted a hybrid approach. Two
                                                             ESIAs and an ESMP have been prepared for known
                                                             sites and an ESMF has been prepared to guide the
                                                             preparation of Group 2 subprojects during project
                                                             implementation. The ESMF provides guidance for
                                                             noneligible subprojects, including those that may be
                                                             classified as Category A and procedures and
                                                             guidelines for screening proposed subprojects and
                                                             confirming the most appropriate type of safeguard
                                                             instrument.


                                                Page 3 of 11
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              Yes         Site visits and screening undertaken for Group 1
                                                     subprojects have determined that no natural, or
                                                     critical habitats will be impacted. However, as
                                                     NTDC can update or propose new subprojects in
                                                     Group 2, some of the new transmission lines in
                                                     Group 2 may pass through natural or critical
                                                     habitat. The ESMF provides a screening checklist
                                                     and suitable mitigation measures for subprojects in
                                                     Group 2. No subproject will be approved for
                                                     funding, if it causes: (a) significant degradation or
                                                     conversion of critical natural habitats or (b)
                                                     significant degradation or conversion of natural
                                                     habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       Yes         The project does not involve any commercial
                                                     plantation or its harvesting. No subproject under
                                                     Group 1 impacts or passes through forests. Some of
                                                     the new transmission lines in Group 2 may pass
                                                     through forests. The ESMF provides a screening
                                                     checklist and suitable mitigation measures for
                                                     subprojects in Group 2. No subproject will be
                                                     approved for funding, if it causes (a) significant
                                                     conversion or degradation to critical forest habitat;
                                                     (b) significant reduction or degradation to the
                                                     ecosystem function of, or resources within a forest;
                                                     and change or affect the rights and welfare of
                                                     people and their level of dependence upon or
                                                     interaction with forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No          NTDC does not use chemicals or pesticides for
                                                     vegetation removal or land clearing under the
                                                     transmission lines.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes         No subproject under Group 1 impacts on Physical
                                                     Cultural Resources (PCR). There is flexibility in the
                                                     location of new substations and transmission lines
                                                     under Group 2 to avoid negative impacts on
                                                     physical cultural resources. Therefore, impacts on
                                                     Cultural Resources can be avoided or minimized in
                                                     design for new subprojects under Group 2. The
                                                     ESMF provides a procedure for screening out
                                                     projects with significant impacts and a PCR
                                                     management plan into the ESMP or ESIA for minor
                                                     impacts. No subproject will be approved for
                                                     funding, if it causes (a) temporary or permanent
                                                     relocation or any other type of impact on physical
                                                     cultural resources known to be of local, regional or
                                                     national significance based on national or
                                                     Provincial lists, proposed national or Provincial lists
                                                     and/or identified during public consultation with
                                                     local affected groups and (b) any physical cultural
                                                     resources considered especially important or

                                          Page 4 of 11
                                                                 sensitive particularly to local groups (e.g.
                                                                 gravesites) are located on the site.
                                                                 All ESMP will contain a chance find procedure.
    Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                  No            No subproject in Group 1 is located in areas where
                                                                 Indigenous People (IP) live. No potential subproject
                                                                 in Group 2 is located in Chitral District in Khyber
                                                                 Pakhtunkhwa where the only known indigenous
                                                                 people are present. However, the appraisal of Group
                                                                 2 Subprojects during NTMP-I's implementation will
                                                                 include a review to determine OP 4.10 application.
    Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12            Yes           The project will have low-intensity impacts
                                                                 involving some temporary or permanent loss of
                                                                 land to new substations, transmission tower
                                                                 foundations, and line stringing. Two Resettlement
                                                                 Action Plans (RAPs) have been prepared for Group
                                                                 1 projects involving land acquisition. NTDC
                                                                 developed a Land Acquisition and Resettlement
                                                                 Framework (LARF), which the Bank approved
                                                                 under CASA 1000 Project and other on-going
                                                                 projects with NTDC. This LARF will serve as the
                                                                 Resettlement Policy Framework for NTMP-I. A
                                                                 Social Management Framework (SMF) as part of
                                                                 the integrated ESMF has also been prepared to deal
                                                                 with other social issues.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      No            The project does not involve any works in, on, or
                                                                 around any dam so this policy is not triggered.
    Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No                 The project does not involve any works on any of
    7.50                                                         the river/international waterways as defined in the
                                                                 Bank policy.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No            The project is not located in disputed areas as
                                                                 defined in the Bank's policy.
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
    any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    The following potential impacts are identified during construction for rehabilitation and expansion of
    substations: (i) increased level of dust and noise from the use and movement of machinery; (ii) non-toxic solid
    waste during construction; (iii) soil and water contamination due oil spill or leakage from machinery or
    transformers; (v) exposure of construction worker and communities to Electric and Magnetic Field (EMF) and
    risk of falls and electrocution; (vi) discrimination in the workforce, employment or abuse of children; (vii)
    exposure of community to construction workers (unwanted attention or abuse), potential conflicts between local
    communities and labor work force and (viii) safety issues from increased traffic. Impacts during operation
    include (i) oil leaks from transformers; (ii) fire and emergency preparedness; (iii) solid wastes and (iv) worker
    health and safety.

    For new substations and transmission lines, in addition to the above impacts, other potential issues include the

                                                    Page 5 of 11
management of vegetation clearance, sediment and erosion control, conversion of agriculture land to industrial
land use, management of water supply and sanitation in the residential colony. The visual impacts and ‘urban
sprawl’ that can result from new substations is difficult to mitigate except through robust analysis of alternatives
during site selection.

Land acquisition processes, including public consultation and satisfactory compensation for the population
residing in the project area, are the main social issues under the project. 750/500/220 kV Islamabad West
substation (IWS) requires about 225 acres and is expected to have impacts on 1690 people in 260 households.
Among affected households, 10 families will be relocated; 58 families will lose all their productive land; some
25 percent will lose land larger than three acres; the rest will lose smaller parcels of land. There are 12 families
considered to be “vulnerable”. There will be no land acquisition from households headed by women. Nowshera
500 kV substation will require 145 acres, including land for the converter station under the Central Asia South
Asia Transmission and Trading Project (CASA). The substation and the associated transmission line of 9.5 km
is expected to affect 1140 people in 176 households. Among 59 households impacted by the substation-- 51
titleholders and 8 sharecroppers-- 11 households (18.5 percent) will lose all their agricultural land and the
remaining 48 families (81.5 percent) will lose 40-50 percent of the land they own. Therefore, all PAPs will face
significant impacts, which include loss of land, crops, structures, trees, other assets and livelihoods. The
transmission line will affect 117 families, among whom 29 will lose land permanently for tower foundations and
the remaining 90 households will be temporarily affected as their lands are in the transmission line Right of Way
(ROW). They will receive compensation for loss of land, structures, crops and livelihoods. A total of 45 affected
families were identified as vulnerable as they live under the poverty line. These families will be eligible for
additional payments.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
The project would reinforce the national transmission system and thus benefit all segments of the population
connected to the grid from: i) improved availability of the power supply, ii) reduced un-served demand, and iii)
reduced number and duration of power outages. These benefits contribute to economic growth and household
quality of life. Furthermore, the project is anticipated to reduce GHG emissions from displacing self-generation
using diesel with cleaner grid-supplied electricity. The GHG emissions reduction is estimated at 52.9 million
tons of CO2 over the project lifetime.

Transmission lines will limit land use under and near the right of way for the long term. This shall be addressed
in the resettlement entitlements. The conversion of agricultural land to industrial land on the outskirts of towns
and cities may encourage or exacerbate urban sprawl and land development, but this long-term impact can only
be managed through town planning regulations rather than at the project level.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
For Islamabad West, the ESIA evaluated three alternative sites. No environmentally sensitive receptors are
found at the three sites. Socially, the impacts on all the proposed sites would be similar since all these sites are
being used for agriculture and devoid of any residential structures. The site at Kamalpur Miyan is selected due to
better technical feasibility and fewer social impacts, such as availability of flat land and existing access road.
Further, due to availability of an existing access road, the selected site has lesser social impacts compared to
other two sites where more land acquisition and resettlement would be required for building an access road. For
Nowshera, the ESIA considered two sites and the location at Azakhel Bala near Nowshera was selected due to
better security and availability of suitable land. The ESMF includes the analysis of alternatives as part of the
environmental assessment process of the sub-projects to be financed under Group 2.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
ESMP for Group I Projects: For the 31 substation upgrades and extensions identified in Group 1 Subprojects,

                                                 Page 6 of 11
the environmental and social impacts will be managed under an ESMP. The key risks concern oil spills, poor
waste management, and workforce health and safety. Mitigation solutions will focus on pollution, waste and
emission control, the management of nuisances (noise, dust) and workforce accommodation and conduct.
Disruption to the community living in the areas of the subprojects should be minimal because all work will take
place within existing substation compounds. Nevertheless, the ESMP states that the community will be
consulted and informed of the construction activities and the GRM will be used to manage and resolve
complaints. For the construction phase, the ESMP for each substation will be included in the bidding documents
and contracts as legal obligations for contractors to implement. After project commissioning, the ESMP will be
transferred to the respective operating units in NTDC for implementation during the operation and maintenance
phase.

ESIAs for Islamabad West and Nowshera: NTDC has prepared ESIAs and ESMPs for the new Islamabad West
and Nowshera substations. The key environmental issues regarding these substations are the conversion of
agricultural land to industrial land use as described above. Linked to this conversion are concerns about the
management of water supply and sanitation in the residential colony, noise and electro-magnetic radiation from
the equipment, and the construction-related impacts (noise, dust, traffic, aggregate quarrying, worker and
community health and safety). There will be no impacts on natural habitats, forests or physical cultural
resources. The landscape impacts at the Islamabad West site cannot be mitigated as the site is located at the edge
of Islamabad and the ESIA notes that urban development will continue in this area with or without the
substation. Construction-related impacts are manageable using controls on timing of works, traffic
management, and dust management, along with ongoing community consultations. Routine site operations will
include checking and maintenance regarding sanitation, water supply and storm water.

The ESMF provides procedures and guidelines for screening proposed subprojects and confirming the most
appropriate type of safeguard instrument. Options for safeguards instruments for Group 2 Subprojects include
updating the Group 1 ESMP for subprojects that only require extension or augmentation, or preparing project-
specific ESIAs and ESMPs for new substations and transmission lines. The ESMF also includes a screening
checklist to exclude all investment proposals that may cause significant or irreversible environmental and social
impacts. Each subproject safeguards instrument will require clearance by the Bank prior to funding approval.

NTDC is taking a two-pronged approach to social safeguards. For sub-projects under Group 1 involving land
acquisition, two RAPs have been prepared. These include developments in the Islamabad West and Nowshera
substations and the associated transmission lines. For Group 2, NTMP-I will use the LARF that NTDC adopted
with the World Bank agreement for the CASA 1000 Project, the Dasu Hydropower Project (HPP), and the
Additional Financing for Tarbela 4 HPP. Additionally, the ESMF includes mitigation measures for adverse
social impacts related to labor, gender, community health and safety and other aspects that do not require
resettlement.

NTDC has prepared a Gender Assessment for NTMP-I. This assessment includes an analysis of current
practices and their gender impact as well as recommendations on addressing gender impacts during
implementation. The analysis shows that there is a gender disparity in the country between men and women in
education and labor force participation generally, and also in the energy sector. Women are particularly
vulnerable in the rural areas. The project will be gender informed through the analysis of relevant gender
information and monitoring of appropriate actions. The project will minimize negative effects on female PAPs
through implementation of the LARF, RAPs and consultations. The Project will also develop a Gender Action
Plan for NTDC which will be used to address NTDC’s institutional level gender gaps.

The citizen engagement in NTMP-I will take place primarily through: (i) the consultation process for ESIA and
RAP and (ii) the Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) with people and communities.



                                                Page 7 of 11
Borrower Capacity:
NTDC is the project implementing agency. The Multi-Function Program Management Unit (MFPMU) is
responsible for overall project coordination between the World Bank and other departments of NTDC and
preparation of progress reports. Two regional project offices, General Manager Project Delivery North (GM PD-
North) and South (GM PD-South) will be responsible for implementing of the safeguards instruments for all
subprojects and for maintaining regular contact with local community and authorities.
The regional GM PDs will manage its responsibilities through their own Resettlement Units (RU) and two
existing the Environment and Social Cells (ESIC). The first ESIC which administratively reports to the MFPMU
(so called ESIC MFPMU), is technically responsible to the two GMs PD for the preparation and implementation
of all environment instruments under NTMP-I except ISW and Nowshera. The second ESIC administratively
under the Dasu Project Management Unit (so called ESIC DTLP) which in turns reports to the GM PD North,
will manage the safeguards instruments of ISW and Nowshera. The regional project offices will also get support
from two external consultants: Project Supervision Consultant (PSC) for supervision during construction and
Project Design and Procurement Consultant (PDPC) for preparation of safeguards instruments for Group 2 and
assist with the consultation.

ESIC MFPMU. The ESIC MFPMU was established in 2007, initially to manage the environmental and social
requirements of ADB projects. Later, its functions have been expanded to cover all donor financed investments,
including the WB projects with exception of special projects. The cell is staffed with a Manager (environment
and social safeguards), a Deputy Manager (environment) and two Assistant Managers. The ESIC will (i) screen
Group 2 subprojects and draft TOR for the safeguards instruments; (ii) ensure the quality of the ESIAs, ESMP
and RAP for Group 2 subprojects,- which will be prepared by the PDPC- and that these documents are approved
by relevant government authorities; (iii) supervise the implementation of ESMPs (excluding the direct
supervision of the Contractor’s ESMP which will be done by the PSC). The team will also supervise
implementation of the RAP of Group 2 subprojects. NTDC is committed to engage an additional environment
and a social staff to the ESIC to manage its workload.

ESIC DTLP. The ESIC DTLP is staffed with a Manager (environment and social safeguards), a Deputy (social)
and an Assistant Manager (environment). The cell will (i) supervise the implementation of ESMPs for IWS and
Nowshera (excluding the direct supervision of the Contractor’s ESMP which will be done by the Project
Supervision Consultant); and (ii) supervise implementation of RAP for IWS and Nowshera. The ESIC DTLP
also plans to engage an additional environment and a social staff to manage its workload.

The two ESICs will ensure that the bidding documents include the ESMP and that the Contractor prepares an
acceptable Contractor’s ESMP before works begin. ESICs will compile quarterly monitoring reports on ESMP
and RAP compliance to be sent to the MFPMU and the World Bank, throughout the construction period. The
ESICs are expected to provide trainings to the NTDC field personnel responsible for monitoring of
environmental compliance during both construction and operation and maintenance phases of the project. The
safeguards instruments (ESMP, ESMF, ESIAs and RAPs) prepared for NTMP-I include capacity building and
trainings to be conducted for the ESIC and regional project offices to carry out their functions. Close monitoring
and oversight by the Bank’s safeguard team is also essential to ensure satisfactory safeguard compliance.

Resettlement Units. Each regional GM PD has a Resettlement Unit (RU). The composition of RU includes
among other members, the social development/resettlement officer as a focal member, social mobilization staff,
land acquisition collector and construction supervision consultant. The sub-project director is the RU convener.
The RU has overall responsibility for the updating, implementation and monitoring of RAPs in coordination
with the District Administration, Revenue Department and other line Departments. NDTC will hire a team of
individual experts to conduct independent monitoring for the implementation of RAPs. The independent
consultants shall review the progress throughout RAP implementation, as reported by NTDC; evaluate the status
of achieving the RAP’s objectives; identify any gaps and propose remedial measures for implementation; and


                                                Page 8 of 11
   assess the process of RAP implementation as well as its compliance with Bank procedures.

   Implementation Support Consultants. The PSC will employ environmental and social safeguard specialists to
   supervise the implementation of the Contractor’s ESMP, provide on-the-job training to NTDC fields staff and
   report regularly to the GM PDs and the MFPMU. Both consultants will provide tailor-made training and
   capacity building to ESICs and the regional offices on relevant safeguard instruments applied to NTMP-1.
   5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
   safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
   The affected people and communities along the subprojects are key project stakeholders. Other stakeholders
   include NGO’s and other civil society groups that represent environmental interests in the project area of
   influence and government officials from relevant departments or institutions. The key and other stakeholders
   were consulted on the EIAs, ESMP and RAPs of Group 1 Subprojects. Consultation on the ESMF have also
   taken place with the relevant NGOs and other stakeholders. The feedbacks from the consultations have been
   incorporated into the NTMP-1’s design and the final ESIAs, ESMP, ESMF and RAPs. The mechanisms for the
   future consultations have also been included in these safeguards instruments.

   The ESIAs, ESMP, ESMF and RAPs in English and their executive summaries in Urdu and Pashto have been
   disclosed on NTDC’s website and in the Bank’s Infoshop.
   .




B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                          12-Jun-2017
Date of submission to InfoShop                                       20-Sep-2017
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




    Pakistan                                                                   12-Jun-2017
 Comments: As of October 4, 2017, two ESIAs, an ESMP and ESMF for the project activities have been
 disclosed on NTDC website. Executive Summaries of the two ESIAs in local languagues --Urdu and Pashto--
 have been disclosed in the same website.
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                      12-Jun-2017
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                   20-Sep-2017
 "In country" Disclosure
PHRESCTRY




 Pakistan                                                                   12-Jun-2017
 Comments: As of October 4, 2017, two RAPs and LARF for the project activities have been disclosed on NTDC
website. Executive Summaries of the two RAPs in local languagues --Urdu and Pashto-- have been disclosed in
the same website.
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [X]              No []         NA          []

                                                 Page 9 of 11
          report?
          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP                Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




          OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes []    No [X]   NA    []
          degradation of critical natural habitats?
          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes []    No []    NA    [X]
          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
PHCompliance




          OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          property?
          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
PHCompliance




          OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                  Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
          prepared?
          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards    Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          or Practice Manager review the plan?
          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                    Yes [X]   No []    TBD   []

          65 Provide estimated number of people affected to date, or
          to be affected.
          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access     Yes [X]   No []    TBD   []
          to assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means
          of livelihoods)

          2,834 Provide estimated number of people affected to date,
          or to be affected.
PHCompliance




          OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional         Yes []    No []    NA    [X]
          issues and constraints been carried out?
          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to         Yes []    No []    NA    [X]
          overcome these constraints?
          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,       Yes []    No []    NA    [X]
          does it include provisions for certification system?
PHCompliance




          The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          World Bank's Infoshop?
          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a           Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          public place in a form and language that are understandable
          and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




          All Safeguard Policies
          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
          measures related to safeguard policies?

                                                         Page 10 of 11
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been          Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?


III. Approval
Task Team Leader(s):                Name:Anh Nguyet Pham,Anjum Ahmad
Approved By:
Practice Manager/Manager:           Name: Gailius J. Draugelis          Date: 26-Oct-2017
                                    (PMGR)




                                             Page 11 of 11
