                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA12703
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Apr-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Apr-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Africa                            Project ID:    P149526
                            Project Name:     Sahel Malaria and Neglected Tropical Diseases (P149526)
                            Task Team         John Paul Clark,Andy Chi Tembon,Haidara Ousmane Diadie
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         06-Apr-2015                       Estimated   28-May-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GHNDR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Health (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Health system performance (30%), Malaria (25%), Other communicable diseases
                                              (25%), Child health (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     121.00           Total Bank Financing:               121.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                             121.00
                              Total                                                                                   121.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to: Increase access to and use of harmonized community-level
                           services for the prevention and treatment of malaria and selected neglected tropical diseases in
                           targeted border areas
                            3. Project Description


                                                                      Page 1 of 7
                         The proposed project will have three components: (1) Improve regional collaboration for stronger
                         results across countries; (2) Support for Coordinated Implementation of Technical Strategies and
                         Interventions, and; (3) Strengthen institutional capacity to coordinate and monitor implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component One: Improve regional collaboration for stronger results across countries
                         This component will support countries’ efforts to harmonize policies and procedures and engage in
                         joint planning, implementation and evaluation of program activities. Responsibility for key regional
                         functions will be allocated among countries and regional implementation partners according to their
                         comparative advantage. The key regional elements of this component will include:
                         •         A regional committee comprised of national program managers and technical advisors will
                         be established to (i) harmonize technical strategies, implementation and monitoring tools across
                         countries, (ii) conduct joint planning of campaigns, cross-border activities and project evaluations;
                         (iii) identify operational research priorities and disseminate lessons learned in the context of project
                         implementation and evaluation. The Regional Committee will be convened by WAHO.
                         •         Capacity building, including short and long-term training and technical assistance will be
                         provided by regional institutions. The WHO Regional Office for Africa (WHO/AFRO), through the
                         Inter-Country Support Team for West Africa (IST/WA) and the African Program for Onchocerciasis
                         Control (APOC) will be the primary implementation partner for regional capacity building and
                         technical assistance activities. WAHO and local institutions such as universities and research centers
                         may also be engaged in training and technical assistance. For example, the Malaria Research and
                         Training Center (MRTC) in Bamako is already providing some training and technical assistance to
                         the three countries for implementation of malaria control strategies and there is potential scope to
                         expand on this. Other opportunities to engage national institutions will be explored during project
                         preparation.
                         •         Regional networks for monitoring and evaluation, including drug and insecticide resistance
                         monitoring will be established or strengthened to increase the usefulness (timeliness, simplicity and
                         reliability) of the information generated by country monitoring and surveillance systems. Efficient
                         communication networks and systems of computerized data management will be established/
                         upgraded for prompt reporting and feedback, exchange of information within and among countries
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and with regional and international authorities. The project will support a network of sentinel sites
                         across the three countries to ensure early identification of changes in disease epidemiology or the
                         efficacy of key interventions. Sentinel monitoring of certain indicators such as schistosomiasis
                         prevalence and infection intensity will both provide an indication of impact on project beneficiaries
                         but will also contribute to risk mapping and targeting of interventions. There is a potential for drug
                         or insecticide resistance to reduce the efficacy of malaria and NTD interventions and reverse the
                         gains in disease control that have been obtained to date. As such it is imperative for the region that
                         any indication of emerging or increasing resistance is detected as early as possible. Working closely
                         with the WHO/AFRO and Roll Back Malaria, the project will contribute to strengthening the existing
                         network of sentinel monitoring sites in West Africa.
                         •         Arrangements for regional pooled procurement of drugs for SMC and other essential
                         commodities will be established. The primary reason for regional pooled procurement is to facilitate
                         the well-coordinated delivery of drugs for SMC to all three countries in advance of the annual
                         malaria transmission season to ensure simultaneous roll out of the intervention. In addition, pooled
                         procurement has the potential to reduce transaction time and costs and result in savings through large
                         quantity discounts. During project preparation several options for pooled procurement will be
                         evaluated. One option would be the designation of WAHO as a procurement agent based on their
                         experience and performance in regional procurement of HIV/AIDS drugs on behalf of ECOWAS
                         member states. Another option would be to have the Centrale d'Achat des Médicaments Essentiels
                         Génériques et des Consommables Médicaux (CAMEG) in Burkina Faso undertake procurement and


                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         quality assurance of SMC drugs and other key commodities on behalf of all three countries taking
                         into account findings of the recent assessment of CAMEG conducted by World Bank Procurement
                         (GGODR). Other options, including procurement through a UN Agency or established
Public Disclosure Copy




                         competitively-bid contract frameworks will also be considered.


                         Component Two: Support for Coordinated Implementation of Technical Strategies and Interventions

                         This component will support countries’ efforts to jointly control malaria and control and eliminate
                         NTDs where possible through community-based interventions with particular emphasis on
                         populations with poor access to services including populations living in border areas. These
                         interventions will provide the means for decreasing the burden and transmission of these diseases
                         within country, including imported cases, and generating positive externalities for neighboring states.
                         The proposed project will contribute to the strengthening of health systems to facilitate effective and
                         timely implementation of project interventions. The proposed interventions include: (i) community
                         mobilization and intensive information, education and communications (IEC) campaigns; (ii) SMC
                         for children 3-59 months of age; (iii) community-based biological diagnosis of malaria using rapid
                         diagnostic tests (RDTs) and effective treatment of confirmed malaria with artemesinin-based
                         combination therapy (ACT); (iv) integrated community-based treatment of the preventable NTDs,
                         and; (v) surgical treatment of reversible disabilities from trachoma and lymphatic filariasis at the
                         community level.
                         •         Community mobilization and IEC is central to the success of all four of the proposed
                         medical interventions as well as project monitoring and evaluation. Community and religious
                         leaders, women’s’ groups and other local stakeholders will be engaged in project preparation and
                         implementation to maximize buy-in and ownership of project objectives. Intensive IEC, including
                         behavior change communication (BCC) will be conducted throughout project implementation to
                         ensure demand for and uptake of other project interventions and normative behavior change (i.e. care
                         seeking for young children with fever; hygiene practices for the management of lymphedema; etc.) to
                         sustain the health gains generated.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •         Seasonal malaria chemoprevention (SMC): The malaria control strategy for countries in the
                         Sahel has very recently been strengthened by the introduction of a new and highly effective
                         intervention, SMC, which is the presumptive monthly treatment of the high risk population with an
                         effective drug combination during the rainy season. SMC is specifically suited to the Sahel where the
                         malaria transmission season is short and intense. SMC has been shown to be extremely cost
                         effective in controlled trials and initial roll-out; however few countries have begun to take the
                         intervention to scale. This project will accelerate that process, further contributing to reductions in
                         morbidity and mortality and moving countries closer to malaria elimination. Children aged 3 – 59
                         months in areas with seasonal malaria transmission will be given a combination of two relatively
                         inexpensive and readily available anti-malarial drugs at regular one-month intervals during the rainy
                         season which runs from June to October. As SMC campaigns will need to be implemented by all
                         three countries at the same time each year, planning, procurement, training and evaluation will be
                         coordinated at the regional level.
                         •         Community-based diagnosis and treatment of malaria: Regional and country strategies for
                         malaria control and elimination include community based diagnosis and treatment of malaria as a
                         critical intervention for reaching the rural poor who have poor access to fixed health facilities.
                         However, these strategies have not been taken to scale and the interventions have not reached the
                         most remote and vulnerable communities. When malaria is undiagnosed and untreated it can
                         progress to severe disease and death, particularly in you ng children. Project support for this
                         intervention will complement presently inadequate domestic and external financing to ensurethat the

                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                         intervention reaches populations with poor access to services and those living in border areas. The
                         project will promote and accelerate the integration of malaria diagnosis and treatment into
                         community-based primary care approaches using rapid diagnostic tests (RDT) and treatment of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         confirmed cases of malaria with artesunate-based combination therapy (ACTs). As per national
                         policies and protocols, children without malaria may be treated for other common infections or
                         referred to a health center.
                         •        Integrated treatment of neglected tropical diseases (NTDs): The drugs used for the treatment
                         of the preventable NTDS are available through donations from the pharmaceutical industries to the
                         WHO. Historically these diseases have been addressed though parallel mass treatment campaigns,
                         but new policies are being adopted by countries in the region to integrate mass treatment of NTDS in
                         an effort to increase efficiency, effectiveness, and reduce operational costs. The integrated mass
                         treatment of NTDs will be delivered through the community health care delivery system and will be
                         rolled out with support from this project. Integrated community MDA for NTDs represents
                         exceptional value for money.
                         •        Treatment of the reversible consequences of NTDs: Part of the public health problem
                         presented by NTDs is related to impairment and disability from lymphedema (elephantiasis) and
                         hydrocele for LF and trichiasis for trachoma. Management of the morbidity and disability in
                         lymphatic filariasis and trachoma require a broad strategy involving both secondary and tertiary
                         prevention. Secondary prevention includes simple hygiene measures, such as basic skin care, to
                         prevent progression of lymphoedema to elephantiasis, which can be done through family and
                         community home-based care. The management of hydrocele and trichiasis will require simple
                         surgery, which can be provided at the community level by mobile surgical teams. Although each
                         country is providing this service, coverage is extremely limited and the backlog of surgical candidate
                         is very large. This is in part due to the limited number of qualified and trained health professional
                         available to conduct the surgeries within each country. The project will promote the mobilization of
                         multi-country teams to provide these services “campaign-style” once or twice each year in each
                         country.

                         Component Three: Strengthen institutional capacity to coordinate and monitor implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will provide support to country level implementing agencies and regional institution
                         to perform core functions and insure that the project is well implemented, monitored and evaluated.
                         During project preparation the Ministries of Health in the three participating countries, WAHO and
                         WHO/AFRO will identify priority needs for institutional capacity and human resources. This
                         component may be used to support the recruitment and training of key personnel including financial
                         management, procurement, monitoring and evaluation as well as technical specialists at country level
                         when required. It may also support capacity building and program costs for regional institutions
                         involved in training and technical assistance in addition to secretariat functions such as convening
                         and coordinating partners and stakeholders
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in Burkina Faso, Mali and Niger.

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Medou Lo (GENDR)
                         Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)


                                                                      Page 4 of 7
                            Environmental               Yes          The project will not support any investment (including
                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01                    civil works) that is likely to harm the natural environment.
                                                                     The project is classified as Environmental Category B.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     The safe collection, storage and disposal of medical waste
                                                                     generated under Component 2 are the key environmental
                                                                     issues in the project. All three countries have current
                                                                     (2011) Medical Waste Management Plans that are
                                                                     acceptable to the Bank. The Niger one is already updated,
                                                                     and those for Mali and Burkina Faso will be revised and
                                                                     updated during the implementation of the proposed
                                                                     project. The ToRs for the update of the said studies have
                                                                     been prepared, approved by the Bank and disclosed in-
                                                                     country and at the Bank InfoShop.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No           The project does not affect or involve natural habitats.
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No           The project does not involve forests.

                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No               The project does not involve pest management.

                            Physical Cultural        No              The project does not affect or involve Physical Cultural
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                     Resources.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/   No              There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement No              The project does not involve any land acquisition leading
                            OP/BP 4.12                               to involuntary resettlement, and/or losses restrictions of
                                                                     access to resources and livelihoods.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No           N/A
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No           N/A
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No           There are no Disputed Areas in the project area.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Increasing access to high quality interventions for the prevention and treatment of malaria and
                              neglected tropical diseases will result in additional medical waste. Possible environmental risks
                              include inappropriate handling and disposal of hazardous medical waste. The proposed project is
                              not expected to generate any major adverse environmental impact. There are no civil works and no
                              physical footprint that would trigger the policy on involuntary resettlement.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:



                                                                       Page 5 of 7
                           No potential adverse long term impact has been identified. Instead, the implementation of the
                           National MWMPs will deliver significant environmental benefits by enhancing the capacity of the
                           health facilities to handle and disposal safely their own medical waste.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Each of the three countries has a National Medical Waste Management Plan (2011-2015) which is
                           under implementation with a Bank financed project. They include action plans to prevent risks
                           associated with medical waste. The one for Niger is already updated as part of the preparation of
                           the Population and Health Support Project (P147638). Those for Mali and Burkina Faso will be
                           revised and updated during the implementation of the proposed project, based on lessons learned
                           from their implementations.

                           Capacity to plan and implement a MWMP has been developed though the previous health project
                           financed by the Bank. The current National MWMPs outline the capacity building needed for safe
                           collection, storage and disposal of medical waste. The implementation of the Niger one has been
                           assessed and the new implementation action plan (2016-2020) includes measures to further
                           reinforce the capacity of the health workers and the health facilities to ensure safer medical waste
                           management.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders identified are the Governments of Burkina-Faso, Mali, and Niger through
                           their ministry of health, workers at the health facilities (public and private), local authorities, and
                           civil society. In each country the National MWMP was shared with the stakeholders during a
                           workshop. Press releases followed to ensure dissemination at the national level.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      06-Apr-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   12-Apr-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      00000000
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Burkina Faso                                                     03-Apr-2015
                           Comments: Disclosure in local newspaper of the ToRs for update of the MWMP
                           Mali                                                             09-Apr-2015
                           Comments: Disclosure in local newspaper of the ToRs for update of the MWMP
                           Niger                                                            17-Feb-2015
                           Comments: Disclosure in local newspaper of the MWMP
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.



                                                                       Page 6 of 7
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            For Burkina Faso and Mali, the ToRs for the update of the said studies were disclosed in-country,
                            respectively, on April 3, 2015 and April 9, 2015, and at the Bank’s InfoShop on April 12, 2015. For
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Niger, the National Medical Waste Management Plan, updated based on lessons learned from its
                            implementation, was disclosed in-country on February 17, 2015 and re-disclosed under the proposed
                            project at the InfoShop on March 31, 2015.
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             report?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: John Paul Clark,Andy Chi Tembon,Haidara Ousmane Diadie
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Trina S. Haque (PMGR)               Date: 17-Apr-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 7 of 7
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
