                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA17337
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Jul-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Jul-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Kyrgyz Republic                   Project ID:   P154778
                            Project Name:     Third Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project (P154778)
                            Task Team         David Malcolm Lord
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         27-Jul-2016               Estimated     30-Sep-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GWA09                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        28.00           Total Bank Financing:     23.50
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        4.50
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              23.50
                              Total                                                                                    28.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to assist the Kyrgyz Republic to (i) improve access and
                           quality of water supply and sanitation services in target rural communities, and (ii) strengthen
                           capacity of institutions in the water supply and sanitation sector.
                            3. Project Description
                           Project Components

                           The proposed project is a follow-on from the Second Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project


                                                                      Page 1 of 9
                         (RWSSP-2), which closed October 31, 2014, and is designed to scale-up water supply and sanitation
                         investments and service delivery models, to new project areas, and to support the implementation
                         (and enhance where necessary) of the Government?s sector strategy for the rural water sector. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project will build-upon the analytical outputs and lessons derived from RWSSP-2 and seeks to
                         harness the momentum and demand for change generated through the successful implementation
                         experience over the last 2-3 years of the project.

                         The project will support the Government to implement strategic actions already identified and to
                         create a programmatic framework which will guide the investment planning and implementation
                         process. In addition, the project will take full advantage of opportunities to reduce extreme poverty
                         by working in rural areas and extending piped water services to predominantly low-income
                         households. This will be supported by specific activities, including developing and mainstreaming
                         citizen engagement and gender-inclusive policies and procedures.

                         The project is expected to benefit more than 105,000 people residing within the participating rural
                         villages in Osh, Chui and Isyk-Kul Oblasts. The majority of beneficiaries within the project areas
                         will be provided with access to piped water services through a new household connection .
                         Furthermore, some 14,000 people (mostly children), will directly benefit through the investments in
                         sanitation facilities and associated hygiene, nutrition and behavior change interventions in schools
                         and other eligible public institutions (for example, health clinics).

                         The RWSSP-3 has been structured in four components. A summary of activities to be financed
                         under each Component is provided below.

                         Component 1: Water supply infrastructure and equipment investments. This component will address
                         the needs for rehabilitation of existing and/or construction of new water supply systems in the target
                         areas. The component will finance goods, works and services (including engineering design and
                         construction supervision) and will include civil and electrical/mechanical installations for water
                         supply production (boreholes, well-fields, intakes, etc., as well as disinfection, and pumping as
Public Disclosure Copy




                         required), and transmission and distribution (networks, storage, meters, etc.) to households in the
                         project areas. This component will also finance preparatory activities including detailed engineering
                         designs for scaling up investments under the program.

                         Component 2: Sanitation Development. This component will finance goods, works and services to
                         provide strategic support for improved sanitation within the target rural communities and to enhance
                         the Government's strategy for improved sanitation in rural areas. It will include, retrofitting of
                         existing sanitary facilities in schools, kindergartens and possibly other public buildings (e.g health
                         clinics). It will also finance a range of other activities at the national and local levels towards
                         supporting improved sanitation. This will include the development of a set of standard designs for
                         latrines and septic systems for rural areas, this together with related education programs will support
                         private household investments for these facilities.

                         Component 3: Development of sector strategies and institutions - will support strategic studies and
                         technical assistance to assist the Government in making informed policy decisions for the
                         development, modernization and reform of the WSS sector. It will also support consultancies and
                         studies to help d evelop and implement (i) capacity building activities for State agencies; and (ii)
                         capacity building activities for Community Drinking Water User Unions, local authorities, and other
                         WSS local institutions.



                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         Component 4: Project management. This component will finance the project management costs of
                         the project management unit related to staffing, consultancies and equipment costs, Monitoring and
                         Evaluation program, and financial management including internal and external financial audits.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)


                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alisher Khamidov (GSU03)
                         Cesar Niculescu (GEN03)
                         Ekaterina Romanova (GSU03)

                          6. Safeguard Policies     Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental             Yes            Effective measures have been put in place under the
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                    RWSSP-3 to address and closely monitor the safeguards
                                                                   issues. An Environmental and Social Management
                                                                   Framework (ESMF) has been prepared and disclosed
                                                                   prior to appraisal (July 4 in country and July 6, 2016
                                                                   infoshop disclosure). Each investment to be financed
                                                                   under the project will be reviewed for safeguard risks in
                                                                   line with the OP4.01.
                                                                   As the designs for sub-projects progress, site-specific
                                                                   Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs)
                                                                   will be prepared by ARIS and publicly disclosed. The
                                                                   Project is expected to have limited negative
                                                                   environmental and social impacts, as physical works will
                                                                   be undertaken to only construct/rehabilitate local
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   facilities. Its only minor impact will be temporary
                                                                   nuisances resulting from construction activities, which
                                                                   will be mitigated by including into the work contracts
                                                                   specific measures to be taken by contractors and close
                                                                   supervision of compliance by ARIS.
                                                                   With regard to potential social impacts the conflict filter
                                                                   has been applied. Specifically, ARIS will explain to
                                                                   beneficiaries and the public the benefits from the project;
                                                                   apply clear criteria for the selection of sub-projects;
                                                                   disseminate grievance redress standards and measures.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP    No
                          4.04
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36        No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09 No

                          Physical Cultural         No             The environmental screening process will screen for the
                          Resources OP/BP 4.11                     presence of physical cultural resources. In addition,



                                                                     Page 3 of 9
                                                           chance find procedures will be included in all works
                                                           contracts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.10
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes      Project activities related to the rehabilitation of existing
                         OP/BP 4.12                        and/or construction of new water supply systems
                                                           (Component 1) in the target areas and investments for
                                                           retrofitting existing sanitary facilities under Component 2
                                                           are likely to have temporary and permanent land-
                                                           acquisition implications. Therefore, OP 4.12 Involuntary
                                                           Resettlement has been triggered and a resettlement policy
                                                           framework (RPF) prepared for the project. The draft RPF
                                                           was disclosed during public consultations held on
                                                           February 11, and June 23, 2016 in Bishkek and
                                                           respectively, February 16, and June 24, 2016 in Osh.
                                                           Feedback from the consultations was reflected in the
                                                           revised final document, disclosed both in-country and at
                                                           the Infoshop on 6 and 7 July 2016, respectively. The RPF
                                                           provides guidance on the preparation of resettlement
                                                           action plans (RAPs) during project implementation.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                         4.37
                         Projects on International   Yes   OP 7.50 has been triggered because the project will
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50              finance rehabilitation, improvement, or minor additions/
                                                           expansions to drinking water supply systems located
                                                           within the transboundary basin of the Syr Darya, Talas
                                                           and Chui Rivers. However, project interventionsare not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           expected to adversely affect water quality or quantity to
                                                           downstream other riparian states. It is anticipated that the
                                                           nature of Project activities will not (i) cause appreciable
                                                           harm to the other riparian states as it will not adversely
                                                           change the quality or quantity of water flows, and (ii) will
                                                           not be appreciably harmed by other riparian state?s
                                                           possible water use. Infrastructure rehabilitation and
                                                           modernization and water supply management
                                                           improvements should increase system efficiency, thereby
                                                           generating water savings and providing users with a
                                                           reliable water supply. Further, the project aims to
                                                           improve efficiency of water use and to substantially
                                                           reduce technical losses and high water consumption rates.
                                                           Leakages will be reduced through infrastructure
                                                           rehabilitation and replacement which will help conserve
                                                           ground and surface water resources. Water conservation
                                                           will be promoted through improved demand-management
                                                           measures, i.e., replacement of continuously running
                                                           communal stand pipes, replacement of communal stand



                                                            Page 4 of 9
                                                                      pipes with household stand-pipes, and installation of
                                                                      individual meters.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      The Exception from the requirement to notify other
                                                                      riparian?s under OP 7.50 has been granted because the
                                                                      nature of the Project activities meet the policy
                                                                      requirements mentioned in paragraph 1 (i) and (ii) above.
                            Projects in Disputed       No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The Project will focus on achieving concrete, verifiable and sustainable results in the improvement
                              of water supply and sanitation service delivery to participating rural communities. While the
                              environmental and social impacts of the proposed project will be largely positive, some adverse
                              impacts may be generated. The identified positive environmental impacts of the project include (i)
                              improved water management and efficiency through replacement of leaking pipes and production
                              systems, replacement of continuously running communal stand pipes with household stand-pipes,
                              and installation of individual meters, together with support for improved operations; (ii) the
                              overall water consumption for respective rural systems, will be less than actual quantities and
                              original design/planning estimates due to efficiency gains; (iii) help in protecting ground and
                              surface water resources by promoting the construction and use of environmentally sound
                              sanitation facilities for human waste disposal; (iv) improved citizens? skills and awareness in
                              planning and implementation of local activities, with particular attention to environment
                              protection, and (v) sustainable management of improved infrastructure by communities, which
Public Disclosure Copy




                              will bring environmental and social benefits related to natural resources management.

                             The potential estimated environmental issues associated with the small/medium scale activities for
                             local communities will be limited, temporary nuisances resulting from construction activities, and
                             may include: (i) increased pollution due to construction waste; (ii) generation of dust, noise, and
                             vibration due to the movement of construction vehicles and machinery; (iii) associated risks due to
                             improper disposal of construction waste and asbestos, or minor operational or accidental spills of
                             fuel and lubricants from the construction machinery; (iv) improper reinstatement of construction
                             sites upon completion of works. These potential environmental impacts are readily identifiable,
                             small in scale, and minimal in impact and can be effectively prevented, minimized, or mitigated by
                             including into the work contracts specific measures to be taken by contractors under close
                             supervision of compliance by ARIS. Use of construction materials that are hazardous to human
                             health (for example, asbestos and asbestos-contained materials [ACM]) will not be permitted.
                             ACM waste will be collected, transported and finally disposed by applying special protective
                             measures in accordance with hazardous waste handling standards.

                             The project will not finance Category-A activities, will not support activities that target natural
                             habitats or protected sites, and will prohibit those activities that can cause a significant loss or
                             degradation of any significant natural habitat. The environmental screening process will check for
                             the presence of physical cultural resources. In addition, chance find procedures will be included in


                                                                        Page 5 of 9
                           all works contracts.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           N.A
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N.A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Effective measures have been put in place under the RWSSP-3 to address and closely monitor
                           safeguards issues. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the project
                           consistent with Environmental Assessment (EA) requirements for both the Kyrgyz Republic and
                           the Bank was prepared by ARIS and reviewed and approved by the Kyrgyz Forestry and
                           Environment Preservation Agency and found satisfactory by the World Bank. A draft ESMF was
                           disclosed in country during public consultations held on February 11, and June 23, 2016 in
                           Bishkek and respectively, February 16, and June 24, 2016 in Osh. The final ESMF documents in
                           both Russian and English languages were disclosed again in country and on the Bank Infoshop on
                           July 4 and 6, 2016 respectively. The ESMF will be incorporated into the POM. Each activity to be
                           financed under the project will be reviewed for safeguards risks in line with OP4.01, and must
                           obtain the clearances required by Kyrgyz national regulations.

                          Site-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) will be prepared for each
                          activity. Implementation of environmental mitigation and compliance measures during the
                          RWSSP-2 was carried out by the contractors (construction firms) and monitored by ARIS staff
                          (engineers). This practice will continue under the RWSSP-3. During implementation, ARIS will
                          have overall management responsibility for ensuring that the measures indicated in the EMP are
                          being properly performed. ARIS, in collaboration with the local authorities of the participating
Public Disclosure Copy




                          rural communities and the Kyrgyz Forestry and Environment Preservation Agency, will perform
                          the environmental monitoring during both construction and operation phases, as specified in the
                          monitoring plan of the ESMP. Appropriate training on Bank safeguards will continue to be
                          provided under the RWSSP-3 to local officials, contractors, and community representatives.

                          Project activities related to the rehabilitation of existing and/or construction of new water supply
                          systems in the target areas are not yet fully defined, and therefore OP 4.12 Involuntary
                          Resettlement has been triggered, to account for any potential temporary and permanent land-
                          acquisition implications. A resettlement policy framework (RPF) has been prepared for the
                          project. The draft RPF was disclosed during public consultations held on February 11, and June
                          23, 2016 in Bishkek and respectively, February 16, and June 24, 2016 in Osh. Feedback from the
                          consultations was reflected in the revised final document, disclosed both in-country and at the
                          Infoshop on July 6 and 7, 2016 respectively. The RPF provides guidance on the preparation of
                          resettlement action plans (RAPs) during project implementation.

                          ARIS will be responsible for safeguards management under the proposed project. With qualified
                          personnel and well established systems, ARIS has demonstrated their capacity and developed a
                          strong record of experience with environmental and social safeguards aspects of projects financed
                          by the Bank and other international and bilateral donors, including RWSSP-2. Furthermore, as per
                          the Bank?s recommendations during preparation, ARIS has started to broaden their capacity for


                                                                     Page 6 of 9
                           safeguards management through engaging and training new staff in this field.

                           In addition to above, RWSSP-3 has taken into account the findings of a Conflict Filter assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                           carried out during project preparation. Key sources of potential tension and conflict were identified
                           and include: (i) inequality of services (access and quality) within the project areas; (ii) perception
                           of or actual implementation delays; (iii) social resistance for tariff increases; (iv) change in water-
                           use behaviors and practices; and (v) transparency and governance issues. These issues will be
                           addressed through a range of technical, social and institutional support mechanisms. A summary
                           of mitigation measures include: (i) engaging during both project preparation and implementation
                           in pro-active communication that explain to both beneficiaries and the public at large the benefits
                           brought by the project to the target communities; (ii) applying clear and transparent criteria for
                           investment selection and design, including technical, social and economic/poverty indicators; (iii)
                           developing suitable grievance redress standards and measures for the project (not only for
                           safeguards-related issues); and (iv) identifying early on the propensity to social tensions and/or
                           possible conflicts in the project areas by requesting ARIS to assess such risks as part of its social
                           and environmental impact checks.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           ARIS has carried out public consultations for groups that may be impacted by subproject before
                           finalization of ESMF. These groups are usually represented by those who live near construction
                           site, as well as by representatives of local NGOs, and other stakeholders. ARIS will conduct at
                           least one public consultation with groups affected by the activity prior to completion of the
                           individual, site-specific ESMPs. Additionally, if needed, broader consultation will be done
                           involving radio or TV. ARIS has also carried out public consultations on the RPF to inform
                           potential project-affected people and other stakeholders about potential resettlement due to project
                           activities and to obtain their feedback.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       05-Jul-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    06-Jul-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kyrgyz Republic                                                   06-Jul-2016
                           Comments: The draft ESMF documents were disclosed during public consultations held on
                                         February 11, and June 23, 2016 in Bishkek and respectively, February 16, and June
                                         24, 2016 in Osh. Feedback from the consultations was reflected in the revised
                                         documents. The final ESMF documents in both Russian and English languages were
                                         disclosed in country and on the Bank Infoshop on July 4, 2016 and July 6, 2016
                                         respectively.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       05-Jul-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    07-Jul-2016




                                                                       Page 7 of 9
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kyrgyz Republic                                                    07-Jul-2016
                           Comments: The draft RPF was disclosed during public consultations held on February 11, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         June 23, 2016 in Bishkek and respectively, February 16, and June 24, 2016 in Osh.
                                         Feedback from the consultations was reflected in the revised documents. The final
                                         RPF documents in both Russian and English languages were disclosed in country
                                         and on the Bank Infoshop on July 6, 2016 and July 7, 2016 respectively
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?



                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: David Malcolm Lord
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Michael Haney (PMGR)                          Date: 19-Jul-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
