                                  The World Bank
                                  Implementation of the International Comparison Program (ICP) in Western Asia




                                                     Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                   Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Feb-2018 | Report No: ISDSC23287




                         Feb 20, 2018                                                                                             Page 1 of 5
                                  The World Bank
                                  Implementation of the International Comparison Program (ICP) in Western Asia



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                     Project Name                   Environmental Category       Country
                                                          Implementation of the
                                                          International Comparison
                           P165630                                                       C - Not Required             World
                                                          Program (ICP) in Western
                                                          Asia
                           Team Leader(s)                 Estimated Date of Approval     Managing Unit                Financing Instrument
                                                                                                                      Investment Project
                           Mizuki Yamanaka                                               DECAE
                                                                                                                      Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Financing (in USD Million)

                           SUMMARY             -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                     0.00
                           Total Financing                                                                                                        0.00
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                          0.00


                           DETAILS  -NewFin2




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The overall project development objective of the proposed project is to ensure the successful implementation and
                           completion of the ICP activities in the Western Asia region, and to further institute the ICP as a permanent element in
                           the regional and national statistical programs, as per the UNSC recommendation. Furthermore, the project aims at
                           enhancing statistical capacity of NSOs of countries in the Western Asia region, especially in economic statistics. These
                           steps will, in turn, advance the statistical foundation for measuring sustainable development and supporting evidence-
                           based policymaking.

                           C. Project Description
                           To achieve the proposed objectives, the project includes components and activities described below.

                           Regional training workshops

                           This component involves conducting regional training workshops that cover the following topics: (i) designing
                           and conducting ICP price surveys and estimating PPPs; (ii) compiling GDP expenditures; (iii) establishing


                         Feb 20, 2018                                                                                                        Page 2 of 5
                                  The World Bank
                                  Implementation of the International Comparison Program (ICP) in Western Asia




                           synergies between ICP processes and ongoing CPI survey activities; (iv) compiling HCPIs; and (v) promoting
                           the uses of PPPs and sub-national indices.

                           Technical assistance missions for the production of sub-national PPPs

                           This component will include technical assistance missions for the computation of sub-national PPPs.

                           Workshops for capacity building of lower-capacity countries

                           Intensive capacity building efforts will be exerted for supporting countries with insufficient resources in data
                           entry, data validation, training on the ICP software, and other areas of difficulty.

                           Participation of regional/national experts in international meetings
Public Disclosure Copy




                           This component aims at ensuring the inputs and contributions of regional and national experts
                           from participating countries in technical activities undertaken globally and building the capacity of these
                           experts through exposure to latest methodologies and techniques.

                           Preparation of knowledge/training materials

                           This component involves the preparation of knowledge and training material that will be used for facilitating
                           the regional training workshops and in technical assistance missions.

                           Preparation of interim progress reports

                           Interim progress reports will be prepared on a semi-annual basis, highlighting the progress made in the
                           different activities conducted during the course of the project.

                           A final report (publication) for PPP results

                           At the end of the activity cycle and after endorsement of the final results, a report illustrating the results of
                           the corresponding ICP cycle in Western Asia will be published.




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          No physical intervention is included in the project activities. The meetings and workshops with clients and
                          relevant agencies will be typically held at hotels and government offices in the capital cities of the countries
                          that hold regional workshops, international meetings or country visits.



                         Feb 20, 2018                                                                                                 Page 3 of 5
                                  The World Bank
                                  Implementation of the International Comparison Program (ICP) in Western Asia




                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          The borrower, UN-ESCWA, sets in place an evaluation policy that focuses on expected and achieved
                          accomplishments, examining the results chain, processes, contextual relevance, impact, effectiveness,
                          efficiency and sustainability of the interventions and contributions of the organizations of the UN system.



                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Takeaki Sato, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
                          Fawah Ngeniform Akwo, Social Safeguards Specialist
Public Disclosure Copy




                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project              Triggered?                 Explanation (Optional)
                                                                                                   No physical intervention is expected from
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                No                    the project. No procurement of
                                                                                                   equipment/goods will be made as well.
                                                                                                   The project does not contemplate
                                                                                                   rehabilitation or new works in areas of
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                        No
                                                                                                   natural habitats or that would significantly
                                                                                                   impact natural habitats.
                                                                                                   The project will not finance activities in
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                 No                    forests or that could potentially affect
                                                                                                   forest resources or their management.
                                                                                                   The project does not involve purchase or
                                                                                                   use of pesticides or finance any activities
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                            No
                                                                                                   that could lead to changes in pesticide use
                                                                                                   or pest management practices.
                                                                                                   The project does not contemplate
                                                                                                   rehabilitation or new works that could
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11             No
                                                                                                   potentially affect physical cultural
                                                                                                   resources.
                                                                                                   The project will strengthen the statistical
                                                                                                   capacity of government institutions, and as
                                                                                                   such will not finance any activities affecting
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                      No
                                                                                                   areas where indigenous communities are
                                                                                                   present or to which they have a collective
                                                                                                   attachment.
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                No                    The project will strengthen the statistical
                                                                                                   capacity of government institutions and as
                                                                                                   such will not finance any activities that

                         Feb 20, 2018                                                                                                     Page 4 of 5
                                   The World Bank
                                   Implementation of the International Comparison Program (ICP) in Western Asia



                                                                                                                      might lead to land acquisition,
                                                                                                                      resettlement, or the restriction of access to
                                                                                                                      natural resources.
                                                                                                                      The project will neither support the
                                                                                                                      construction or rehabilitation of dams nor
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                     No
                                                                                                                      will it support other investments which rely
                                                                                                                      on services of existing dams.
                                                                                                                      The project will not finance activities
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50                No                            involving the use or potential pollution of
                                                                                                                      international waterways.
                                                                                                                      The project will not finance activities in
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                         No
                                                                                                                      disputed areas as defined in the policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? No


                              APPROVALS

                              Team Leader(s):                                  Mizuki Yamanaka

                              Approved By

                              Safeguards Advisor:                             Nina Chee                                         09-Feb-2018

                              Practice Manager/Manager:                       Grant James Cameron                               09-Feb-2018


                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.




                         Feb 20, 2018                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 5
