                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC12745

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Apr-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-May-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Tanzania                         Project ID:      P153277
                            Project Name:       TZ-Zanzibar Improving Student Prospects Project (P153277)
                            Task Team           Shwetlena Sabarwal
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           28-Apr-2016                      Estimated        13-Jun-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GED01                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Primary education (30%), Secondary education (70%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        35.00               Total Bank Financing:              35.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   35.00
                              Total                                                                         35.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed PDO is to: improve the future economic prospects of students in the school system.
                           Improved future economic prospects will be measured by: improved transition to advanced
                           secondary and improved labor market relevance of school education.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project will focus on improving the future economic prospects of students in the school system
                           by using a two-tier approach that (i) addresses key system-level failures; and (ii) provides targeted
                         support directly to students near high drop-out points to help them stay in school and/or improve
                         their labor market opportunities. While specific interventions will be identified through consultative
                         multi-stakeholder discussions, the overall approach has been developed in consultation with the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         government. Under this approach, addressing system-level failures will include a focus on:
                         improving teacher effectiveness (particularly through improved content knowledge, pedagogy, and
                         supervision), timely delivery of adequate capitation grants, strengthening of Education Management
                         Information System (EMIS), and construction of science labs. Targeted support to students near high
                         drop-out points will entail a strong focus on student cohorts in Standard 6 and Forms 1-4 when most
                         of the drop outs happen. This support will mainly be to reduce rates of drop-outs (especially before
                         secondary completion) and non-activity. Interventions could include: assessment of reading, writing,
                         and arithmetic skills (3R); provision of remedial education; encouragement and support for increased
                         enrollment in science subjects; and support for labor market transition (information on market
                         returns, support for networking, and apprenticeship opportunities in labor market). This two-tier
                         approach is expected to yield returns in the short term in the form of improved student prospects
                         (learning, economic, and social outcomes), but also promote high-performing, systems that will
                         generate returns over the medium to long term.

                         The proposed project will be financed through an Investment Project Financing (IPF) modality in
                         which the team will explore the option of a results-based financing (RBF) approach using
                         disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs). Under this approach a subset of results indicators will be
                         chosen as DLIs; each DLI will have an agreed monetary value and will serve as triggers for
                         performance-based payments within the project. DLIs are expected to help shift focus away from
                         inputs and towards results.
                         In order to maximize the transformative potential of future education programming, government of
                         Zanzibar wants to introduce a new type of design process for the proposed project. This change is
                         being informed by past experiences and lessons learnt from successful development initiatives in
                         other contexts. The new design process is titled ‘Results for Prosperity Education Lab’ (R4P ELab)
                         and is engineered to ensure that the proposed project will have: broad-based buy-in, clear targets,
                         focused direction, and a strong outcome-based performance culture.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The MoEVT Concept Note for the R4P ELab describes it as: an intense problem-solving
                         environment within a dedicated physical workspace with a full time team working in iterative
                         manner towards delivering results. The R4P Education Lab (ELAB) will bring together
                         representatives from across the line ministries, private sector, donor partners, non-government
                         organizations, teachers union, and civil society. Together this Lab team will focus on generating
                         implementable solutions to identified problems. These discussions will be informed by: (i) outputs
                         from a review of the sector; (ii) a current situational analysis, and (iii) available national and
                         international evidence on effectiveness of various solution approaches and interventions. The total
                         lab team is expected to comprise of about seventy people working together over a five-six week
                         period.
                         The main outputs of the R4P ELAB will be: (i) new Multi-sector Education Plan (MEP) 2015/16 –
                         2020 with specific objectives; (ii) design of the new education project to achieve these objectives;
                         and (iii) detailed implementation plans associated with the new education project. The precise scope
                         of Bank support to the new MEP and related education project will be finalized based on discussions
                         during and immediately after the ELAB.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in Zanzibar. The project proposes to finance construction of new
                           buildings, and science labs and possibly some rehabilitation works. Such civil works have
                           environmental impacts related to (i) physical location of site, (ii) waste and wastewater management
                           from labs, (iii) construction related waste management and (iv) worker and occupational safety
Public Disclosure Copy




                           issues. These will need to be identified and addressed in an Environment and Social Management
                           Framework and subsequent site-specific Environmental Management Plans will be prepared once the
                           locations of the subprojects are known.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The project will be implemented by the Ministry of Education and Vocational Training, Zanzibar.
                           The Ministry has experience in implementing education programs financed by other donors including
                           Sweden/ SIDA, GPE, UNESCO and USAID. However, the last education project in Zanzibar
                           (ZBEIP) suffered from implementation delays and challenges related to capacity weaknesses of the
                           implementing agency. This can be addressed by including capacity building on environmental and
                           social issues in this current project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Arundhati Inamdar Willetts (GENDR)
                           Christine Agnes Nabaloga (GSU07)
                           Ishanlosen Odiaua (GEN05)
                           Jane A. N. Kibbassa (GEN01)
                           Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (GSU07)
                           Ruma Tavorath (GEN07)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment        Yes            The project plans to finance construction of new
                           OP/BP 4.01                                     buildings, science labs and classrooms. While the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                          scope of these civil works are moderate, they have
                                                                          potential impacts related to (i) physical location of
                                                                          site, (ii) waste and wastewater management from
                                                                          labs, (iii) construction related waste management and
                                                                          (iv) worker and occupational safety.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04     Yes            The Jozani-Chwaka Bay National Park on Unguja
                                                                          Island is home to a number of species of
                                                                          conservation interest, including the endangered Red
                                                                          Colobus monkey and Aders Duiker. Chwaka Bay is
                                                                          proposed to be declared a Ramsar Site. Although the
                                                                          scale and scope of works makes it unlikely that
                                                                          natural habitats will be severely affected by the
                                                                          project, some project sites may lie in the vicinity of
                                                                          the National Park and therefore measures will need
                                                                          to be instated in order that the park habitats are not
                                                                          disturbed.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36              Yes            Triggered as Jozani Forest is part of the Zanzibar-
                                                                          Inhambane scrub forest on coral rag, which is a
                                                                          unique forest type found only along the East African
                                                                                                                        Coastline. Mangrove forests are also found in Unguja
                                                                                                                        (of note are the forests in Chwaka Bay) and Pemba.
                                                                                                                        As with natural habitats, although the scale and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        scope of works makes it unlikely that forests will be
                                                                                                                        severely affected by the project, some project sites
                                                                                                                        may lie in the vicinity of the coral rag and mangrove
                                                                                                                        forests and therefore measures will need to be
                                                                                                                        instated in order that these forests are not disturbed.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                     No                         The project will not finance or procure or utilize
                                                                                                                        pesticides
                                 Physical Cultural Resources                                 Yes                        This safeguard may be triggered as both Unguja and
                                 OP/BP 4.11                                                                             Pemba Islands have many historic and cultural sites.
                                                                                                                        They may be affected by construction activities such
                                                                                                                        as heavy vehicular traffic carrying construction
                                                                                                                        materials, dust and vibration. Therefore although the
                                                                                                                        impacts may not be considered serious, there is still
                                                                                                                        need to exercise due care through the implementation
                                                                                                                        of appropriate mitigation measures.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    No                         There are no known Indigenous Peoples in the
                                 4.10                                                                                   Project area of influence in Zanzibar Islands.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                No                         The construction and rehabilitation of educational
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                facilities will be undertaken within the confines of
                                                                                                                        existing educational facilities. Therefore land
                                                                                                                        acquisition is not anticipated in this project
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         The project will not have any connection with or
                                                                                                                        impact on dams
                                 Projects on International      No                                                      The project will not have any connection with or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   impact on international waterways
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The project is not being implemented in disputed
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                areas

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 16-Mar-2016
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The Ministry has started a baseline survey of the proposed subprojects sites. Based on the
                                      findings, an Environmental and Social Management Framework will be prepared by mid
                                      February. The draft document will be disclosed and consulted before start of Appraisal
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Shwetlena Sabarwal
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                                                                                                Date: 29-Apr-2016
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Sajitha Bashir (PMGR)                                                                                                  Date: 03-May-2016
                                 Manager:


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
