                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC13598

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Sep-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Sep-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Bhutan                           Project ID:      P155513
                            Project Name:       Agricultural Growth and Nutrition Security Project (P155513)
                            Task Team           Winston Dawes
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated                                            Estimated        26-Feb-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GFA06                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Irrigation and drainage (25%), Crops (25%), Agro-industry, marketing, and
                                                trade (30%), Agricultural extension and research (20%)
                            Theme(s):           Water resource management (20%), Nutrition and food security (20%), Rural
                                                markets (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (25%), Tr ade facilitation and
                                                market access (15%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     10.43                      Total Bank Financing:           0.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       1.40
                              Global Agriculture and Food Security Program                                   8.00
                              LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                            1.03
                              Total                                                                         10.43
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           16.     The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to (i) increase agricultural
                           productivity and enhance market linkages and (ii) improve nutritional security in six of the poorest
                           rural dzongkhags in south-west Bhutan. The PDO is to be achieved by raising agricultural yields
                         through improved irrigation and on-farm water management, farm mechanization, adoption of
                         nutrition sensitive agriculture, and improved production technology. Market linkages will be
                         developed and strengthened by improving post-harvest and marketing infrastructure and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         strengthening value chains, combined with improving market information systems using ICT
                         solutions. Nutrition security will also be enhanced through the school feeding program, improved
                         communication, awareness raising and nutrition education. Technical assistance will be provided to
                         support project management and institutional capacity.
                         C. Project Description
                         2. Overall Design: Agriculture in Bhutan is typically characterized by smallholder, traditional and
                         subsistence farming. At the individual household level, current scale and scope of farming typically
                         provides employment and produces food for only part of the year. The proposed project will seek to
                         address the inter-connected problems faced in enhancing agricultural production and productivity
                         and commercialization through a set of integrated, area-specific interventions that respond to local
                         problems, potentials and priorities. This project will seek to identify opportunities for private sector
                         engagement in the provision of supplies/inputs, services and market linkages Emphasis will be laid
                         on the provision of small infrastructure support, supporting farm mechanization and appropriate
                         technologies, formation of relevant skills, strengthening value chains, and linking farmers to markets.
                         The key foundation for this project will be the strengthening and capacity building of farmers’
                         groups in order to build ownership and sustainability of project interventions. All project
                         interventions will take gender into consideration and ensure women’s equal participation in project
                         activities, their representation in farmer groups and involvement in decision making. This project
                         draws from the lessons learnt through previous projects and builds on the gains made through prior
                         investments. Special focus will be given to developing public private partnerships as this is a key
                         ingredient that is currently missing in the RNR sector in Bhutan.

                         3. Gender mainstreaming: Bhutan has made significant progress in closing gender gaps. However,
                         women still face challenges of lower education enrollment at higher levels, sex segregation in the
                         labor market, and requirements of traditional gender roles in household chores and child care. This
Public Disclosure Copy




                         results in very limited sectors for jobs for women and explains the higher percentage of women in the
                         agricultural workforce. The Bhutanese women in general enjoy relatively equal status in terms of
                         access to property, including agricultural land, as a result of the matrilineal inheritance system
                         practiced in some regions in Bhutan. At the national level, 60% of rural women have land registered
                         under their names. Women play a key role in both the production and marketing of farm products.
                         Increasing migration of male members of the household and their engagement in off-farm activities
                         are expanding the responsibilities of women in agriculture beyond their previous roles. All project
                         interventions will take this key factor into consideration and ensure women’s equal participation in
                         project activities, their representation in farmer groups, and active involvement in decision making.
                         There will be additional focus in areas where women’s proactive engagement is expected, such as
                         nutrition improvement, farm mechanization, access to extension services, capacity building and skills
                         development activities, and other labor saving technologies. Gender-disaggregated data will be
                         tracked and collected during project monitoring.

                         4. Proposed Areas of Intervention and Target Group: The target area for the proposed project will be
                         selected geogs in six chosen dzongkhags in south-west Bhutan—Chukka, Dagana, Haa, Samste,
                         Sarpang, and Zhemgang—which border Northeast India and could readily take advantage of demand
                         for off season vegetables, thus producing more nutritious foods for local markets as well. This area is
                         located near to the Siliguri pass, which is a focal area for a series of investments to open trade in the
                         Northeastern corridor between Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, and Nepal. While the project will focus on
                         this area, due to its combination of need and potential trade opportunities, it will follow a value chain
                         approach, which may require investments along the value chain beyond the geographic target area.
                         This will be outlined during preparation. Selection of the target group will take into consideration
Public Disclosure Copy




                         both poverty; and the production and marketing potential of agricultural products. From the lessons
                         learned from past and ongoing projects, this project will promote synergies across different activities
                         in order to maximize benefits and sustain outcomes. Even though the Bank has supported
                         interventions in all of the chosen six dzongkhags under previous projects, more efforts are needed to
                         enhance productivity and commercialization of agriculture in these dzongkhags. For example, only
                         one dzongkhag out of these six (Dagana) has had significant irrigation interventions. Two have no
                         infrastructure interventions, and three have only a few, very small irrigation interventions. The total
                         area that is covered by irrigation schemes in these six dzongkhags is almost half of the total
                         agriculture land that still needs irrigation. Moreover, market infrastructure in these six dzongkhags is
                         almost nonexistent. Without supporting the market in these areas, any gains made previously for
                         improved irrigation and agricultural productivity will not have proportional effects on increasing
                         farming income and the overall growth of the agriculture sector.

                         5. Reasons for changing the area of intervention from Eastern Bhutan: Initial GAFSP proposal
                         indicated that the project would be implemented in six eastern dzongkhags. However, the reason for
                         this change to the south-west is based on multiple considerations: On the one hand, there is a need to
                         build upon the gains made under previous projects that were also operating in some of these
                         dzongkhags; and on the other hand, compared to the previous eastern dzongkhags, the chosen
                         dzongkhags in the south-west are worse off. Moreover, IFAD already has significant presence in the
                         East, with a project in the pipeline, an ongoing project and two other completed agriculture projects.

                         6. Lessons Learnt from DRDP and RRCDP: (i) Successful project implementation requires a strong
                         project management team, led by an experienced project coordinator. Equally important is having in
                         place a robust monitoring and evaluation system led by a competent M&E officer to monitor, collect
                         and document project data (quantitative and qualitative), and accurately report on project
                         achievements beneficiary impact. (ii) Previous projects focused more on infrastructure development
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and overlooked the softer components on strengthening the beneficiaries in terms of creating
                         ownership and management of the assets for sustainability. (iii) The encouragement of double
                         cropping/crop diversification should accompany the provision of irrigation services. (iv) Institutional
                         capacity building is a key factor in sustainability example, the training of National Seed Center
                         (NSC) staff led to the propagation of high quality disease free basic seeds of potato, banana and
                         maize. (v) Multiple fragmented interventions do not yield the impact as a focused saturated
                         intervention. (vi) Organized community farmer groups such as the community-based seed producer
                         (CBSP) groups have significantly increased seed production. This model could be replicated by
                         future projects and (vii) Access to markets as a result of farm roads is important by not sufficient.
                         Organized marketing infrastructure, with linkages to buyers, fair pricing and guarantee markets is a
                         key ingredient for increasing agriculture production.

                         7. Based on experience from DRDP and RRCDP, the team is better informed about the
                         implementation systems preferred by the Government and the constraints that exist at the dzongkhag
                         level. Therefore, program design will work more closely with existing country systems for
                         implementation, with technical assistance and capacity building targeting engineering units in the
                         dzongkhags. While this project will target a particular dzongkhags, it will take a value chain
                         approach to (1) maximize the production of commercially viable and nutritionally valuable crops
                         (fruits and vegetables); and (2) help develop the conditions and infrastructure for improved market
                         access.
                         Proposed Project Components
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project will consists for four components:

                         Component 1: Increasing Agricultural Productivity (USD 4.0 million)

                         8. The objective of this component is to increase agricultural productivity which is vital for
                         improving food security and enhancing rural income. Under this component, the project will support
                         irrigation and water management schemes in close conjunction with other interventions, promote the
                         cultivation of high value commercial crops, use of hybrid and high yielding seeds; promote farm
                         mechanization to increase efficiency, and support new technologies focusing on high value and
                         climate smart crops.

                         Sub-components:

                         1A. Irrigation and Water Management: Irrigation remains the biggest constraint in enhancing
                         production, productivity and the commercialization of agriculture in the country. This sub-
                         component will consist of (i) development and modernization of irrigation infrastructure with a focus
                         on introducing improved water management technologies through an integrated approach to selected
                         areas and (ii) introduction and planned promotion of water-saving and efficient technologies like
                         mini-sprinkler and drip irrigation (micro irrigation) along with other water harvesting technologies to
                         support the production of high value cash crops like greenhouse vegetables, fruit, citrus and
                         cardamom. Wherever possible, micro-irrigation will utilize simple gravity fed low pressure designs
                         to minimize capital and operating costs. The cost of traditional flood irrigation in Bhutan for just a
                         single annual crop is simply too high - therefore this project will support those schemes that manage
                         water efficiently to provide irrigation to second and third crops, with a careful focus on integr ating
                         irrigation interventions with other interventions in the project including farm mechanization,
                         greenhouses and other protected cropping structures. Where possible a watershed approached would
Public Disclosure Copy




                         be assess on a per dzongkhag basis.

                         1B. Farm Mechanization: This sub-component will support farm mechanization through the
                         Agriculture Machinery Centre (AMC) of the MoAF, in order to address labor shortages; reduce the
                         cost of production and increase efficiency; create potential employment in rural areas, especially for
                         the youth; and raise farm incomes. Bhutan’s agriculture is under-mechanized compared to other
                         South Asian countries. The key impacts of mechanisation are: the reallocation of agricultural labour
                         from power intensive to management intensive tasks; cost reductions for tillage and reaping of cereal
                         and vegetable crops; increased germination rates and the resulting savings in seed costs, increasing
                         yields by reducing the number of days in the critical turnaround time between crops, and an increase
                         in employment in the supporting service infrastructure (tractor rental operators, service mechanics
                         and small scale dealers). Savings in production costs as high as 53% have been reported in Bhutan
                         with the use of machinery on farms. Machines supported through the project will include (i) power
                         tillers, power reapers, mini combines, and transplanting machines. (ii) Through the Japanese Social
                         Fund (JSDF) youth from target communities will be trained as mobile service providers in the
                         operation, repair and maintenance of these machines, and they will be trained in micro-business
                         management to enhance sustainability. (iii) Opportunities for the private sector to participate in
                         mechanization development will also be explored during project preparation, drawing on lessons
                         learned elsewhere in the region such as from Bangladesh. This may involve a concessionary
                         financing arrangement, technical capacity building of the dealer network, particularly for the 2-wheel
                         power tillers and mini-tillers. Particular attention will be paid to ensure women’s equal participation
                         in the trainings as well as entry into this job market.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1C. Improved Technologies for Agricultural Commercialization: This sub-component will introduce
                         technologies to support the increased productivity of high-value crops through (i) innovative
                         participatory irrigation management schemes to improve irrigation scheduling, delivery and
                         efficiency by user groups; (ii) new seed varieties that are market preferred, highly productive and
                         have improved disease tolerance; (iii) improved extension services with better access to knowledge
                         resources and work planning tools; (iv) electric fencing to mitigate human-wildlife conflict; and (v)
                         climate-smart agriculture including for efficient use of fertilizer, water, and integrated pest
                         management, and protected cropping structures for high value crop; and use of greenhouse
                         technologies such as plastic tunnels/houses s. Fruit and vegetable crops with high commercial and
                         nutritional value such as nuts, temperate fruits, citrus, cardamom, potato, tomato, cauliflower,
                         broccoli, and asparagus will be targeted. Where irrigation is not feasible, conservation farming
                         practices such as the use of mulching, cover cropping, use of short duration varieties and water
                         harvesting techniques will be promoted.

                         Component 2: Linking Farmers to Markets (USD 2.1 million)

                         9. The objective of this component is to improve and promote market access to enhance commercial
                         agriculture production. The component will support the development of an organized/structured
                         marketing system for agricultural products that will involve the strengthening of value chains,
                         creation of food marketing centers, and improvements to the post-harvest infrastructure.

                         Sub-components:

                         2A. Improving Market Access and Value-Addition: This sub-component will organize community
                         groups into marketing networks in order to facilitate the production, organization, and marketing of
                         RNR products. This will enable farmer groups/cooperatives to engage in profitable market-oriented
Public Disclosure Copy




                         production and to promote partnerships and market linkages with other value chain participants and
                         agribusinesses. The project will support and strengthen (i) farmer marketing groups/cooperatives
                         including in collaboration with the Department of Agricultural Marketing and Cooperatives
                         (DAMC); (ii) provide capacity building on group management including the standard group or
                         corporate governance roles of chairperson, secretary and treasurer, and the project will provide
                         mentoring support to facilitate compliance with procedures required by the Registrar of associations
                         and cooperatives; and (iii) support commercial farm management skill development with training and
                         mentoring (e.g. financial literacy, book keeping, business plan development, agricultural marketing
                         management). The project will also support (iv) demand-driven support to acquire targeted and well-
                         justified low-cost post-harvest and small storage technologies, handling, packaging, grading and
                         value addition equipment, including through mechanisms such as matching grants to attract linkages
                         with agribusiness and private sector. The success of market based farming will depend on the ability
                         of farmers to respond to market demand. The project will promote seasonal planning workshops
                         where farmers will be assisted by the extension workers to plan and grow crops with market
                         potential. The potential export market for Bhutanese produce is large. India and Bangladesh in
                         particular offer vast markets for vegetables, fruits, spices and potato.

                         2B. Market Infrastructure: The agricultural marketing system in Bhutan is unorganized and poorly
                         developed, lacking marketing facilities and other post-harvest infrastructure. This situation is
                         augmented by unplanned urbanization by local authorities having no clear policies on developing
                         facilities to meet future needs. This sub-component will support (i) urban planning processes for
                         agricultural market infrastructure including zoning of suitable land and supply of facilities such as
                         water, waste management, electricity and access; (ii) the establishment of marketing infrastructure
Public Disclosure Copy




                         identified by the planning processes in participation with local private sector or municipal authorities,
                         and also those jointly identified with Food Corporation Bhutan Limited (FCBL) and dzongkhag
                         stakeholders (e.g. collection sheds, sales outlets, packing houses, storage houses, local market outlets
                         and market facilities) which may be under leasing, grant or other financial support arrangements, (iii)
                         construction of new or support of existing “One Stop Farmers Shops” to improve access to, and cost
                         efficiency in, supply of improved farm inputs and grade, pack and on-sell commodities.

                         2C. Market Information and Improved ICT: The 11th Five Year Plan recognized ICT as an important
                         means for information and communication in the agricultural sector. All the dzongkhags and geogs
                         in project areas have access to various kinds of ICT facilities. According to the International
                         Telecommunications Union 2013 data, while Bhutan has a relatively high mobile phone subscriber
                         penetration rate of 72%, not counting prepaid users, only 16% of Bhutanese have mobile broadband
                         subscriptions, therefore information services would need to be adapted to an appropriate level of
                         technology. The objective of this sub-component is to provide farmers with market information, to
                         link farmers/farmer groups with markets and private sector stakeholders, and to pilot improved ICT-
                         based knowledge management and information exchange systems at the field level. Potential
                         activities will include (i) establishing a market information system for farmers in coordination/
                         linkage with market infrastructure support and deploying the system via SMS and mobile
                         applications appropriate to the phones used by farmers; (ii) including an SMS-based alarm or early
                         warning system to send weather advisories or other emergency information to farmers;(iii) releasing
                         the RGoB’s agricultural datasets (e.g. weather, prices) in open formats - machine readable, for free,
                         and with an open license - to enable mobile phone application developers to create new information
                         services and provide them directly to farmers either through sales or by making revenues via
                         advertising models; (iv) developing a crowd-sourced, peer-to-peer information sharing system with
                         varying functionality, e.g. pricing, such that farmers can report prices seen at markets; (v) creating an
                         online, mobile-accessible clearing house linking buyers and sellers of agricultural products; and (vi)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         equipping extension officers with data-collecting tablets that populate information services with
                         statistics in real time. Since information services provided by the private sector can be of higher
                         accuracy and quality than those provided by government, public-private partnerships would be
                         explored in all cases. Lastly, the RGoB could hold application challenges, whereby prize funding
                         under the project is granted to top applications that address specified challenges. Application
                         challenges tend to produce successful applications at a lower cost to government than an RFP, with
                         multiples of effort having been expended by multiple contestants to find a solution.

                         Component 3: Improving Nutrition and Food Security (USD 1.1 million)

                         10. The objective of this component is to contribute to an enabling institutional environment and
                         food-based nutrition awareness for improved dietary habits in select dzongkhags. Activities will be
                         informed by participatory qualitative and quantitative assessments and build on lessons-learned from
                         existing programs such as school linking programmes. This component will complement aspects of
                         components 1 and 2 (improving the availability and accessibility of nutrient-rich foods) with the
                         overall aim of improving nutrition and food security.
                         Sub-components:

                         3A. Integrated school feeding programme and food education: This sub-component will build on
                         existing programmes that procure produce from the community (especially through farmers groups)
                         and introduce food/nutrition education in schools. Special emphasis will be placed on raising
                         awareness of healthy balanced diets (to reduce under-nutrition and prevent over-nutrition) among
                         community members and on connecting smallholder farmers with local institutions with the aim of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         instigating market demand for nutrient-rich foods and help meet dietary deficiencies.

                         3B. Communication, awareness raising, and nutrition education. The objective of this sub-component
                         is to elicit behavior change by strengthening and/or scaling up existing nutrition education
                         programme(s), integrating nutrition into agriculture training institutes and/or agriculture extension/
                         farmer training, and developing media messages on healthy food preparation and eating habits.
                         Depending on needs identifi ed in study as described above in 3A, (i) develop training and learning
                         materials, (ii) deliver capacity development through Training of Trainers and (iii) complement
                         ongoing health media messaging with simple nutrition messages.

                         3C. Identify market opportunities and key areas of inter ventions which can be piloted based on
                         recommendations from various studies and informed by Governments Policy. Such interventions
                         may include adding value by processing and properly storing food and reducing post-harvest losses
                         with the aim of reducing seasonal food shortages and enhancing year-round access to nutritious
                         foods. The objective of this sub-component is to identify unmet market opportunities as well as
                         nutritional gaps and shifting dietary preferences, which may require some further qualitative and
                         quantitative assessments.

                         Component 4: Project Management and Institutional Strengthening (USD 0.8 million)

                         11. This component will support all aspects of project management at the national and dzongkak
                         levels, including M&E, communications/knowledge management and policy analysis. Activities to
                         be supported under this component include: (i) strengthening institutional capacity across the project
                         (trainings, exposure visits, and specific thematic/technical training); (ii) Setting up a robust M&E
                         System, including baseline surveys, mid-term assessment, and end of project evaluation; (iii)
                         strengthening communications and knowledge management, and (iv) supporting studies and policy
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis that would contribute to the long-term agriculture, food security and nutrition policy of the
                         country.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         12. The project will be located in six of the poorest rural dzongkhags in south-west Bhutan. In some
                         of these dzongkhags, two of the Bank-funded agricultural productivity projects—the Decentralized
                         Rural Development Project (DRDP) and the Remote Rural Communities Development Project
                         (RRCDP) are/were also operating. Experience from these projects suggests that long-term,
                         irreversible and large-scale environmental and social safeguards risks are minimal, if any. Most of
                         the impacts relate to effects on livelihoods due to land acquisition, use of pesticide and chemical
                         fertilizer, over withdrawal or misuse of irrigation water.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         13. Project management would continue to be the responsibility of the existing implementation
                         agency, the Ministry of Agriculture and Forest (MoAF). This project is designed and will be
                         implemented using the same approach of RRCDP for environmental and social safeguards. Because
                         of prior experience of working with Bank financed project, MoAF is familiar with the Bank's
                         safeguard policies. However, MoAF still needs capacity improvement with regard to environmental
                         management and to comply with Bank's safeguards requirements since the new project would
                           incorporate new activities that are concentrated more on nutrition, market facilitation and value
                           addition for sustainability.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Bandita Sijapati (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         Yes            While the project is designed to provide
                           OP/BP 4.01                                      opportunities for an overall positive impact, some
                                                                           interventions/activities may have adverse
                                                                           environmental impacts. The key environmental
                                                                           issues that will need to be addressed by the project
                                                                           are: (i) land slide/soil erosion; (ii) over-extraction or
                                                                           misuse of irrigation water; (iii) soil degradation; (iv)
                                                                           pesticide-related health and safety issues; (v) water
                                                                           pollution, and (v) workers and community health
                                                                           safety and sanitation.

                                                                           The project is classified as a “Category B” under OP/
                                                                           BP 4.01 with a partial assessment as the impacts are
                                                                           likely to be small-scale, site specific with no
                                                                           irreversible impacts and mitigation measures can be
                                                                           designed more readily. The implementing agencies
                                                                           will prepare an Environmental and Social
                                                                           Management Framework (ESMF) which will be
                                                                           supported by an assessment of environmental
                                                                           practices of currently on-going RRCDP, institutional
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           capacity assessment, some limited environmental
                                                                           baseline, as well as guidelines to carry-out sub-
                                                                           project specific environmental assessment,
                                                                           consultations, prepare site specific EMP, costing,
                                                                           review process, implementation, and monitoring.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04      No             The project will not implement any agricultural
                                                                           activities inside the Protected Areas (wildlife
                                                                           sanctuaries, national parks, etc). The infrastructure
                                                                           activities will be small scale. It is highly unlikely that
                                                                           any natural habitats formed largely by native plant
                                                                           and animal species would undergo transformation of
                                                                           use or would be affected or modified with support
                                                                           from the project.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36               Yes            Project will not implement any activities inside in the
                                                                           forest or protected forests or no forestry activities are
                                                                           envisaged in the project. However, some activities
                                                                           such as irrigation schemes, market infrastructure
                                                                           development may involve some clearing of
                                                              vegetation. Hence the policy is triggered. The ESMF
                                                              will address any issues related to forest.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09        Yes   The project is expected to have minor use of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              nationally approved pesticides and there are no
                                                              significant issues of pest management and pesticide
                                                              use to be addressed in the sub-projects. The
                                                              procurement and distribution of pesticides in Bhutan
                                                              is well controlled through a centralized system and
                                                              there will be no procurement of pesticides classified
                                                              as Class Ia, Ib and II by WHO. However, in
                                                              anticipation of higher yields, farmers could expand
                                                              the use of chemical fertilizers, and pesticides more
                                                              than what is recommended. Since the proposed
                                                              GAFSP project is expected to promote sustainable
                                                              production practices as a part of project design, the
                                                              above issues are not considered to be critical in the
                                                              project. However, as a matter of precaution to
                                                              address any potential and unforeseen issues of pest
                                                              and pesticide management, OP 4.09 has been
                                                              triggered. The ESMF will provide guidelines on safe
                                                              use of agrochemicals and promotion of green
                                                              agriculture technologies such as: (i) Integrated Pest
                                                              Management (IPM); (ii) balanced fertilizer use to
                                                              reduce the dependence on fertilizers; and (iii)
                                                              composting.
                         Physical Cultural Resources    No    The project would not impact any physical and
                         OP/BP 4.11                           cultural resources.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No    There are no known indigenous groups in the
                         4.10                                 country. However, particular attention will be given
                                                              to concerns of vulnerable groups including, women,
                                                              poor, marginal farmers and youths.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   Irrigation development and farm mechanization
                         BP 4.12                              might require land acquisition that could potentially
                                                              have impacts on livelihoods. However, due to the
                                                              size and linear nature of these activities, these
                                                              impacts are envisaged to be minimal.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No    The project will not construct or rehabilitate dams
                                                              larger than 10 meters in height.
                         Projects on International      TBD   The project intends to enhance agricultural
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 productivity by designing improved and efficient
                                                              irrigation schemes, such as sprinkler and drip
                                                              irrigation in Southwestern Dzongkhags of Bhutan.
                                                              The International Waterways policy (OP 7.50) may
                                                              trigger as raw water for irrigation from the existing
                                                              streams will be withdrawn, stored and distributed to
                                                              the agricultural fields through conveying pipes.
                                                                                                                        Since the project area and the streams to be selected
                                                                                                                        for irrigation water supply have not been identified
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        yet and types of streams, their hydrology or
                                                                                                                        morphology are not known yet, it is not confirmed
                                                                                                                        that withdrawal of water from these streams will
                                                                                                                        affect the neighboring country. A study will be
                                                                                                                        carried out to determine whether an International
                                                                                                                        Waterways (OP 7.50), in terms of affecting quantity
                                                                                                                        or quality of the streams, will be triggered to this
                                                                                                                        project or not. This will be determined at the
                                                                                                                        appraisal stage. If the OP/BP 7.5 triggers, Bank
                                                                                                                        policies will applied.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      Not triggered because the project dzongkhags are not
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                located in any internationally disputed areas

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Sep-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      ESMF will be completed by September 30, 2015
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Winston Dawes
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                                                                                                Date: 27-Sep-2015
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Shobha Shetty (PMGR)                                                                                                   Date: 29-Sep-2015
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
