                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC19814

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Dec-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Kyrgyz Republic                Project ID:      P161503
                            Project Name:        CASA1000 Community Support Project (Kyrgyz Republic)
                            Team Leader(s):      Janelle Plummer
                            Estimated Date       31-Oct-2017
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GSU03                          Lending          IPF
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 10                            Total Bank Financing: 6.67
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Community and Capacity Development Support Program                                          3.33
                              IDA recommitted as a Grant                                                                  6.67
                            Environment       B - Partial Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project Development Objective is to: (i) build local capacity and empowerment for
                           participatory development; and (ii) improve access to social and economic infrastructure services to
                           communities in the project area (including communities located along the CASA1000 transmission
                           line).
                           C. Project Description
                           13. The proposed project will consist of three components: (i) Community grants for (economic and
                           social infrastructure) sub-projects; (ii) Community mobilization, capacity building, communication
                           and outreach; and (iii) Project implementation support. The key features of each component are
                           likely to be:

                           Component 1: Community Grants for sub-projects ($7.50m)

                           14. Component 1 will provide grants directly to communities to fund social and economic
                           infrastructure subprojects (including sub-projects which will enable communities to obtain more
                           regular power supply). Targeted villages will be supported in developing local investment plans
                           through a participatory process in which local communities assess local needs, and carry out
                         participatory identification of priorities, similar to the VIP3 project approach. Special attention will
                         be paid to the participation of women so as to cater to their specific needs and priorities. The project
                         will also pay special attention to the participation of young men, especially in fragile and conflict-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         affected areas where they are often involved in violence and where there is a potential of
                         radicalization. The size of the block grants provided to participating communities will be based on
                         criteria agreed during preparation, similar to VIP3; the implementation arrangements for the
                         selection of the grants will also be defined before appraisal.

                         Component 2: Community-mobilization, capacity-building, communication and outreach ($2.00m)

                         15. The objective of this component is to build the awareness, develop capacity and mobilize
                         community participation in sub-project planning, implementation and, as appropriate, operations and
                         maintenance. As is the norm for Bank-financed CDD projects, community-level activities will aim to
                         ensure sub-investments are needs-based, empower communities with decision-making and build
                         ownership and sustainability of sub-projects in order to maximize the development outcomes for the
                         rural poor.

                         16. The IA will assign staff to help build capacity and ownership through a number of activities,
                         such as: (i) participatory planning and prioritization; (ii) community governance and accountability
                         systems, including mechanisms for conflict resolution; (iii) participatory monitoring of construction
                         and procurement; (iv) grass-roots financial management of community-implemented investment
                         schemes; and (v) the necessary communication with subnational and national government and
                         contractors building the CASA-1000 transmission line. These activities will not be limited to small-
                         scale infrastructure investment, but also potentially address other issues which affect the
                         development and security of target communities. Investments in activities that support youth
                         development, for instance, may also be eligible under this (and the first) component.

                         17. In addition to community mobilization, this component will also finance a highly visible and
                         intensive communications campaign and access to information effort designed to reach relevant
Public Disclosure Copy




                         stakeholders within the concerned oblasts in the south, but with a special emphasis on outreach to
                         communities in the project areas. A multi-media communications strategy will be at the core of
                         information sharing efforts, designed with the aim of ensuring that information on the CASA1000
                         project implementation progress and impacts is conveyed to interested members of Government,
                         civil society and the citizenry more broadly. To ensure that CSP communities living in the
                         CASA1000 corridor are effectively reached, the communications strategy will take into account their
                         infrastructure access, literacy rates, and language. In addition, it will also ensure that feedback loops
                         (perception surveys, community participatory monitoring and grievance handling mechanisms)
                         between the corridor communities and the implementing agency are put in place. The activities of
                         this subcomponent are aimed at creating the conditions for smooth construction of the CASA1000
                         transmission line.

                         Component 3: Project management, communication and outreach ($0.50m)

                         18. This component will finance incremental costs of the IA for project management, specifically
                         coordination and supervision of implementation activities, financial management, annual audits, and
                         monitoring and evaluation. The management and coordination of the project will be the
                         responsibility of a dedicated project management team established within the implementing agency.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The planned project activities will take place along the AC transmission line (approx. 450 km). The
Public Disclosure Copy




                           line will follow the borders of Uzbekistan and Tajikistan, passing through regions that are
                           economically weak and isolated, prone to regular ethnic tensions and heated exchanges between
                           Kyrgyz and Uzbek border guards (Jalal-Abad, Osh and Batken oblasts). Issues related to land,
                           particularly concerning involuntary resettlement, may be particularly sensitive. Careful attention will
                           be paid to land tenure and land issue as a conflict stressor during the project preparation to assess
                           potential consequences to resettlement should it take place due to project activities.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The implementing agency has prior experience of implementing Bank-financed projects and
                           demonstrates strong familiarity of and capacity to implement Bank safeguard policies.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Ekaterina Romanova (GSU03)
                           Rustam Arstanov (GEN03)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              An ESMF will be prepared prior to appraisal.
                           BP 4.01                                               The Project will have limited negative
                                                                                 environmental and social impacts, as physical
                                                                                 works will be undertaken to only construct/
                                                                                 rehabilitate local facilities. The expected
                                                                                 temporary environmental impacts and
                                                                                 inconvenience to the surrounding areas during
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 construction are limited and typical to small/
                                                                                 medium scale construction works, such as
                                                                                 generation of dust, noise and vibration;
                                                                                 movement of the construction vehicles and
                                                                                 machinery; piling of construction materials; and
                                                                                 accumulation of demolition/construction waste.
                                                                                 Some associated risks include improper disposal
                                                                                 of construction waste, asbestos, minor
                                                                                 operational or accidental spills of fuel and
                                                                                 lubricants from the construction machinery, and
                                                                                 improper reinstatement of construction sites
                                                                                 upon completion of works.
                                                                                 A general EMP including the mitigation
                                                                                 measures for most type of construction works
                                                                                 will be prepared at the project level, and will be
                                                                                 followed by derived site-specific EMPs that will
                                                                                 be prepared for each sub-project that will be
                                                                                 implemented.
                                                                                 Very effective measures have been put in place
                                                                                 under the Village Investment Project 3, also
                                                                 implemented by this PIU, to address safeguards
                                                                 issues, and they are being applied and closely
                                                                 monitored. They are laid out in detailed
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Guidelines for Environmental Review of Micro-
                                                                 Projects, which will also be part of the
                                                                 Operational Manual of the project and will be
                                                                 provided to all participating ayil aimaks. Each
                                                                 sub-project will be reviewed for environmental
                                                                 and social risks in line with the OP4.01.
                                                                 Implementation of environmental mitigation
                                                                 and compliance measures in a similar CDD
                                                                 project in KG was carried out by the contractors
                                                                 (construction firms) and monitored by PIU staff
                                                                 (engineers). This practice would be transferred
                                                                 to CASA1000 CSP. Appropriate training on
                                                                 WB safeguards will continue to be provided
                                                                 under the project to local officials and
                                                                 community safeguards volunteers.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The project will finance community-level sub-
                         4.12                                    projects and micro-projects such as construction
                                                                 of kindergartens, youth facilities and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 rehabilitation of village infrastructure that may
                                                                 require land acquisition. The impacts are not
                                                                 known until selected. A framework approach is
                                                                 selected at this stage as the infrastructure sub-
                                                                 projects under Component 1 will be determined
                                                                 during the project implementation. An RPF will
                                                                 be prepared prior to Appraisal. Voluntary land
                                                                 donation for the benefit of sub-projects and
                                                                 micro-projects will be considered and detailed
                                                                 guidelines for the process of donating land will
                                                                 be outlined in the RPF to ensure that such
                                                                 donations are entirely voluntary and not
                                                                 coerced.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No
                         Projects on International        No
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                         7.60
                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                           A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?: Yes
                               i. Explanation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  The scope of environmental and resettlement impact will be clarified in during project
                                  preparation. Safeguards instruments will be prepared, consulted and disclosed by Appraisal.
                               ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
                                  15-May-2017
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.
                              February 15- May 15, 2017
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Janelle Plummer
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Nina Chee (SA)                                               Date: 31-Oct-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Nina Bhatt (PMGR)                                            Date: 10-Nov-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
