                                  The World Bank
                                  Urban Networking to Complement and Extend the Reach of the Sustainable Cities IAP




                                                    Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                  Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                               Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Feb-2018 | Report No: ISDSC22819




                         Feb 08, 2018                                                                                            Page 1 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Urban Networking to Complement and Extend the Reach of the Sustainable Cities IAP



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                     Project Name                 Environmental Category       Country
                                                          Urban Networking to
                                                          Complement and Extend
                           P164635                                                     B - Partial Assessment       World
                                                          the Reach of the
                                                          Sustainable Cities IAP
                           Team Leader(s)                 Estimated Date of Approval   Managing Unit                Financing Instrument
                           Kevin A. Milroy, Xueman                                                                  Investment Project
                                                                                       GSUGP
                           Wang                                                                                     Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                           PROJECT FINANCING DATA


                          FINANCING


                          FINANCING SOURCES

                            Select all that apply

                           [ ] Counterpart Funding        [ ✔ ] Trust Funds                [ ] Parallel Financing



                           SUMMARY (USD)

                           Total Project cost                                                                          2,000,000
                           Total Financing                                                                             2,000,000
                           Trust Funds                                                                                 2,000,000
                           Financing Gap                                                                                       0

                           DETAILS  -OldFin1




                           Trust Funds
                           Source                               Currency                           Amount                       USD Equivalent
                           Global Environment Facility - IBRD
                                                                USD-US Dollars                   2,000,000                           2,000,000
                           as Implementing Agency(GFIA)




                         Feb 08, 2018                                                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Urban Networking to Complement and Extend the Reach of the Sustainable Cities IAP



                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To strengthen the Global Platform for Sustainable Cities (GPSC) for more integrated and sustainable urban planning
                           and development through city-to-city and network knowledge sharing.

                           C. Project Description
                           A. Activities/Components

                           1. City Access Point to RT Services - Identification and delivery of peer-to-peer opportunities in the city networks
                           that have presence and useful practical experiences in areas of work included in the child projects of the 28 SC-
                           IAP cities (e.g., transit-oriented development, water, finance for sustainability, planning, indicators):

                             a. Technical needs assessments, to capture the critical information on the cities’ technical needs for peer—to-
                           peer exchanges, learning and knowledge products relative to their efforts to enhance their sustainable
                           development plans, policies and programs, and to identify other potential partners to support the cities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             b. Capacity development plan for Resource Team action, specifying the requests/needs for each of the cities
                           and identifying what elements of the Thematic Areas (local climate action and sustainable development) would
                           be beneficial to each city, grouping where possible the city needs into “clusters” of knowledge topics, and
                           including a specific work plan for the Resource Team to be carried out under the project.

                             c. Delivery of peer-to-peer exchanges based on the demand/needs assessments, drawing on successful
                           methodologies for designing and delivering peer-to-peer learning, and including logistics (two participants from
                           each city) and content organization, based on the Capacity Development Plan and matching of cities and
                           knowledge clusters.

                              d. Peer exchange documentation, to compile material from P2P exchanges and produce a series of case
                           studies and learning material based on the technical knowledge delivered through the exchanges, to be posted
                           in web platform for other cities to access.

                           2. Learning Events, Webinars and Linkages to Global Events – Facilitating learning from the experiences of the
                           participating cities, and promotion of the work of the GPSC through awareness of and access to international
                           processes.

                             a. City academies, two-day practical training workshops for GPSC cities, focused on the main sectoral topics of
                           GPSC – integrated planning, low-carbon development, finance, and data. Two Academies are planned. Includes
                           demonstration on use of relevant frameworks and tools; sharing of best practices and lessons learned (including
                           related to GHG mitigation, and environmental and social assessment and management); opportunities for cities
                           to share their specific issues and challenges; interactive exercises and icebreakers to encourage dialogue and
                           collaboration;; and preparation by cities of key actions and takeaways.

                             b. Documentation and packaging of technical knowledge presented in City Academies, to be published on the
                           GPSC website.



                         Feb 08, 2018                                                                                                    Page 3 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Urban Networking to Complement and Extend the Reach of the Sustainable Cities IAP




                             c. Side events/panels (3-4 events) during global city forums, targeted at GPSC cities and on topics as
                           prioritized in the Capacity Development Plans, organized prior to or in parallel with major international events
                           such as the World Urban Forum, Cities and Climate Change Science Conference, and ICLEI World Congress.

                             d. Promotional events, designed to promote participation in GPSC to non-GPSC cities, organized on the side
                           of major events where WRI, ICLEI and C40 participate.

                             e. Webinars (8-9 events) for GPSC cities and WRI, C40 and ICLEI’s organizational network of cities, on topics
                           defined in the Capacity Development Plan, providing insights and shared experience on a particular strategy or
                           solution related to climate change and sustainable development, including best practices and lessons of
                           experience from other cities. Webinars would be complemented by other learning and knowledge activities.

                           3. Knowledge Management Documentation – Provide a platform to curate and catalog cutting-edge knowledge,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           advocate for good practices related to sustainable urban development, connect cities through the networks of
                           the GPSC, and assist potential applicant cities to the GEF grants in the preparation of their sustainability
                           programs.

                             a. Inputs into Urban Sustainability Framework (USF), which will serve as a comprehensive methodology to
                           support cities to adopt an integrated approach to urban planning and management and improve their urban
                           sustainability status over time. Development of the USF will be led by World Bank, supported by the Research
                           Team.

                             b. Library of knowledge for web platform, with state of the art information on the topics that fall within the
                           Thematic areas of local climate action and sustainable development. The Resource Team will select, organize
                           and sometimes adapt existing information, such as frameworks, methodologies, safeguards assessment and
                           management, reports, working papers, and share that information through the GPSC web platform.

                             c. New knowledge products and adaptation of existing tools, such as working papers, guidelines or tools,
                           which will be part of the technical knowledge library to be hosted on the GPSC platform. Six new knowledge
                           products will be produced, selected based on demand from cities and implementing agencies, and identified
                           GPSC knowledge gaps.

                           4. Project Management of the overall project, including coordinating different Components and activities led by
                           specific partners. Activities include sub-granting supervision, report writing, activity coordination,
                           representation at project meetings, periodic meetings with working groups, and related activities.




                         Feb 08, 2018                                                                                              Page 4 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Urban Networking to Complement and Extend the Reach of the Sustainable Cities IAP




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          The GPSC covers around 28 cities (originally 23 approved) across 11 pilot countries: Brazil, China, Cote
                          d’Ivoire, India, Malaysia, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru, Senegal, South Africa, and Vietnam.



                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          The WRI does not have direct experience implementing WB safeguards policy, but WRI project staff have
Public Disclosure Copy




                          previous experience working with the policies. WRI monitors the safeguards policies of the WB, Asian
                          Development Bank and others, as reported through WRI blog posts and working papers, and advocates for
                          application of strong global environmental and social safeguards.



                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Vincent Roquet, Social Safeguards Specialist
                          Brandon Enrique Carter, Environmental Safeguards Specialist


                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project              Triggered?                   Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                Yes                      The project involves conducting needs
                                                                                                      assessment and capacity development
                                                                                                      through knowledge sharing and
                                                                                                      development of knowledge products to
                                                                                                      promote good practice in environmental
                                                                                                      and social sustainability. This includes
                                                                                                      climate action planning and resilience
                                                                                                      planning through activities such as
                                                                                                      supporting GHG inventory and low-carbon
                                                                                                      infrastructure in the water and wastewater,
                                                                                                      mobility and transport, buildings, and
                                                                                                      energy sectors. The project also offers the
                                                                                                      possibility of disseminating new
                                                                                                      approaches for fostering social inclusion in
                                                                                                      infrastructure projects such as improved
                                                                                                      design for community cohesion and gender
                                                                                                      integration, for persons with disabilities, or


                         Feb 08, 2018                                                                                                        Page 5 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Urban Networking to Complement and Extend the Reach of the Sustainable Cities IAP



                                                                                                  for prevention of gender-based violence.
                                                                                                  This extends to new approaches to
                                                                                                  minimizing involuntary resettlement
                                                                                                  including in situ redevelopment and land
                                                                                                  consolidation and readjustment. The
                                                                                                  quality of practices and materials hosted on
                                                                                                  the GPSC platform will be vetted by WRI
                                                                                                  and the Bank’s GPSC Task Team.

                                                                                                  The project includes no physical works,
                                                                                                  results in no direct environmental or social
                                                                                                  impacts and is mainly focused on
                                                                                                  knowledge sharing . However, the project
                                                                                                  does involve technical assistance through
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                  the development of new knowledge
                                                                                                  products and adaptation of existing tools,
                                                                                                  such as working papers, guidelines or tools,
                                                                                                  which will be part of the technical
                                                                                                  knowledge library to be hosted on the
                                                                                                  GPSC platform. The provision of TA under
                                                                                                  the project triggers the Bank’s OP/BP 4.01
                                                                                                  on Environmental Assessment. Applicable
                                                                                                  requirements under this policy include the
                                                                                                  preparation and public disclosure prior to
                                                                                                  Appraisal of a brief Environmental and
                                                                                                  Social Management Framework (1 to 2
                                                                                                  pages) highlighting the E&S issues to be
                                                                                                  addressed in urban development plans and
                                                                                                  investments covered by the GPSC. Public
                                                                                                  consultations would be limited to an online
                                                                                                  public comments period on the Draft ESMF.

                                                                                                  Outcomes of the project will support
                                                                                                  knowledge sharing and capacity
                                                                                                  development for child projects, however
                                                                                                  implementation of the child projects is not
                                                                                                  causally or sequentially linked to the GPSC .
                                                                                                  The child projects may be implemented by
                                                                                                  different implementing agencies including
                                                                                                  the World Bank, UNIDO, IADB, ADB, Dev
                                                                                                  Bank of South Africa, etc, and will be
                                                                                                  subject to the relevant implementing
                                                                                                  agencies’ environmental and social
                                                                                                  standards or safeguards requirements. Any
                                                                                                  child project subject to future World Bank


                         Feb 08, 2018                                                                                                   Page 6 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Urban Networking to Complement and Extend the Reach of the Sustainable Cities IAP



                                                                                                  support will be subject to full World Bank
                                                                                                  safeguards requirements and due diligence.

                                                                                                  The World Bank’s environmental and social
                                                                                                  safeguards principles and good practice will
                                                                                                  be incorporated into the Knowledge
                                                                                                  platform (Component 3) and Learning and
                                                                                                  Promotional Events (Component 2), as
                                                                                                  appropriate. These principles will be set out
                                                                                                  in the Terms of Reference for the activities
                                                                                                  and included in the Operations Manual.


                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                         No
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                  No
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                             No
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11              No
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                       No
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                 No
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                           No
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50      No
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60               No


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? Yes
                           SafeguardAppraisalStage
                           a) Tentative target date for disclosing the appraisal stage ISDS
                           23-Feb-2018
                           b) Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                           The safeguard-related preparations, including ESMF and inputs to Operations Manual, will be undertaken
                           during February 2018.


                           APPROVALS

                           Team Leader(s):                            Kevin A. Milroy




                         Feb 08, 2018                                                                                                   Page 7 of 8
                                   The World Bank
                                   Urban Networking to Complement and Extend the Reach of the Sustainable Cities IAP




                              Approved By

                              Safeguards Advisor:                             Agi Kiss                                          05-Feb-2018

                              Practice Manager/Manager:                       Philip E. Karp                                    05-Feb-2018


                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Feb 08, 2018                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 8
