INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA13104
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Feb-2016
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Feb-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Benin                      Project ID:  P147014
Project Name: Public Investment Management and Governance Support Project (P147014)
Task Team       Robert A. Yungu
Leader(s):
Estimated       25-Jan-2016                Estimated    29-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GGO13                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Central government administration (100%)
Theme(s):       Administrative and civil service reform (60%), Managing for development
results (40%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      30.00            Total Bank Financing:   30.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                30.00
Total                                                                      30.00
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project development objective is to improve efficiency in public investment management and
enhance the performance of selected institutions of accountability in Benin.
3. Project Description
The proposed Project will be financed by an Investment Project Financing (IPF) loan of US$30.00
Page 1 of 12


﻿million. The modality for project implementation will consist of a blended approach which
combines technical assistance, for which disbursements will be based on inputs, with results-based
financing, which will be linked to the achievement of agreed-upon performance indicators
(Disbursement Linked Indicators - DLIs) and the reimbursement of a portion of eligible expenditures
O
of existing government investment programs.
The approach adopted by the Project seeks to support the Government in directly tackling the
technical and governance challenges that presently affect public investment management (PIM),
whilst simultaneously providing results-based incentives to specific line ministries to improve their
management of discrete investment projects. The technical assistance components have been
designed on the basis of comprehensive technical diagnostics conducted by the Government, with the
support of development partners. The results-based lending component supports discrete projects
within the Government's own public investment programs in the energy, water and justice sectors.
The Project consists of four strategically linked and mutually reinforcing components:
Component 1: Enhancing Efficiency and Effectiveness in the Public Investment Management
Expenditure Cycle (US$ 9 million)
Sub-component 1.1: Strategic Guidance and Appraisal (US$2.0 million)
The sub-component seeks to improve the coordination and timely preparation of well-appraised
projects. Envisaged activities include:
*      Elaboration of a PIM manual to serve as a mandatory reference framework for the
preparation and implementation of investment projects. The manual will include guidelines for
conducting feasibility studies, preparing concept notes and carrying out appraisal, supervision, and
contract management. It will also include guidelines and information on the vetting of projects, PIPs,
and recurrent expenditures. The manual will ensure that the National Directorate for the Control of
Public Procurement (Direction Nationale du Contr6le des March6s Publics, DNCMP) is mandatorily
implicated in the preparation of the budget. The Ministry of Development will ensure that line
ministries comply with the PIM manual guidelines by monitoring the processes and procedures used
at different stages of project cycle. There will be warnings and actions against ministries or units that
a        fail to meet required PIM standards.
* Technical assistance for the development of basic fiscal rules to be approved by the
government (cabinet) as guiding principles in support of the orderly implementation of the PIM
principles as this will limit the flow of politically-desirable projects into the PIP and the budget and
crowd out the more socially and economic viable ones that make more productive contributions to
national development.
*      Technical assistance to strengthen the financial and fiscal risk assessment and management
role of the Ministry of Finance, especially regarding contingent liabilities for the Government in the
case of PPPs and other emerging financial instruments like the refinancing public investment
mechanism.
*      Technical assistance to the General Directorate of Budget in setting-up of effective sectorial
budget monitoring centers in charge of budget dialogue with ministries (sectoral policies, sectoral
budgetary framework, budget decisions, budget implementation monitoring). This assistance will
Page 2 of 12


﻿include the i) creation of a budget synthesis function, ii) finalization of a Management Charter
clarifying the roles and responsibilities of different actors involved in the performance budgeting
approach (program-budget, fungibility of funds, commitment authorizations and payment allocations,
selection of performance indicators and evaluation), (iii) the design of a new organizational chart of
O
Q)       the General Directorate of Budget and its implementation plan, including the impacts in terms of
human resources, iv) support for establishment of sectorial budget costing models that help
simulations with agreed sectorial indicators.
*      Upgrading of the existing Integrated System for the Analysis and Programming of
Investment Programs (Syst6me Int6gr6 d'Analyse et de Programmation des Investissements Publics,
SIAPIP) with the Integrated Public Finance Information System, SIGFIP, the Procurement
Management Information System (Syst6me Int6gr6 de Gestion des March6s Publics, SIGMAP), and
the Harmonized and Integrated Public Investment Monitoring and Evaluation System (Syst6me
Harmonis6 et Integr6 de Suivi et Evaluation des Projets et Programmes d'Investissements,
SHISEPIP)1. The set-up of the intranet and extranet will make significantly enhance SIAPIP
functionalities.
*      Development of a database of projects which have feasibility studies, have been appraised,
and are 'ready for execution', which should be made public.
*      Workshop and training programs based on the new budget organic law (LOLF) on planning,
programming, and investment decision-making.
The execution of the above envisaged activities should lead to a substantive increase in the percent of
investment projects appraised in compliance with the PIM appraisal guidelines manual, including
cost-benefits analysis and independent review at the Ministry of Planning. It is expected that this
percent will rise from 15 in the first year to eventual reach 85 in five years at the end of project.
Sub-component 1.2: Multi-year Budgeting and Project Selection (US$1.0 million)
o
The sub-component will strengthen existing project selection mechanisms and budgeting procedures.
This will ensure that un-vetted or opportunistic projects are not included in the annual budget. It will
assure the advanced preparation of procurement plans (PPMs), annual work plan (PTAs), and credits
a        consumption plan (PCCs) in time for the submission of the budget to Parliament. Active involvement
of the DNCMP in the preparation of the budget will be emphasized. Key activities will include:
*      Technical assistance on the development of standard costs to improve cost planning and
monitoring.
*      Technical assistance to help project teams in selected line ministries to prepare PPMs, PTAs,
and PCCs to be presented before submission of the Finance Law to the Parliament.
*      Technical assistance to help ministries that have significant capital budgets to use the new
performance budgeting tools introduced by the new Organic Finance Law (LOLF) e.g. the multi-year
expenditure programming documents (DPPD), annual performance report, and multi-year liabilities
authorization (autorisation d'engagements pluriannuels, AEP).
*      Seminars and training on project ranking and selection based on assessments of economic
and social returns - a process that is critical for the optimization of finite budget resources
Page 3 of 12


﻿As a result of the execution of the these planned activities, a significant improvement is expected at
the end of project in: (i) the percent of projects selected for annual budgeting in line the PIM project
selection guideline (i.e. project selected should be part of the PIP and have a complete procurement
O
Q)        plan); and (ii) average time taken for release of budgets to credit managers for investment projects
selected for the year.
Sub-component 1.3: Project Implementation (US$2.0 million)
This sub-component aims to improve the timely and effective execution of investment projects. This
stage of the PIM cycle also involves developing institutional capacity for project restructuring to
respond to lessons-learned and difficulties encountered during project implementation. Procurement,
which is the major source of delays and cost overruns in the project implementation stage, will
clearly receive most of the technical assistance support under this sub-component. In the same vein,
the three sectors targeted by the results-based financing scheme (electricity, water, and justice) will
benefit the most from this technical assistance. Envisaged activities include:
*      Support for the organization of the mandatory monthly ministerial working group meetings
with credit administrators, treasurers, budget officers, and comptrollers of the Ministry of Finance's
DPP, Directorate of Financial and Assets Management (DRFM), and Directorate of Financial
Control (DCF) to prioritize project funding by the Treasury.
*      Support to the DGB, Treasury and Directorate of Budget control for the setting-up of
commitment ceilings for budgetary units (i.e. ministerial commitment plans) based on cash flow
forecasts and the overall national budget.
*      Progressive development of the electronic management of tender processes (e-procurement)
as and introduction of a bidder pre-qualification process and a categorization of enterprises. The
development of e-procurement will first entail the set-up of a robust internet system and deployment
of required equipment. The infrastructure network linking SIGMAP to different procurement
contracting units will thus be upgraded.
*      Technical assistance to support the creation of a professional cadre of procurement
a         specialists (with diplomas in Management of Public Procurement) within the public administration
system and the mandatory inclusion by all contracting authorities (ministries, public institutions,
local authorities, and agencies) of at least one procurement specialist from within the cadre
*      Capacity building through seminars and training of all key actors involved in the
procurement system in planning, execution, and contract management of procurement as well as on
project restructuring and closing of under-performing projects.
*      Improve the hierarchical system of risk-based controls for public investments along the
expenditures chain
*      Development of standardized technical specifications for the acquisition of common items to
assist the DNCMP in evaluating technical aspects of tender packages.
* Technical assistance for establishing the managing system of financial and non-financial
Page 4 of 12


﻿assets generated by public investments.
Expected results that will result from the above activities include improvement of the: (i) processing
time of public procurement; and (ii) execution rate of public procurement commitment plans in
O
selected line ministries.
Sub-component 1.4: Project Evaluation and Audit (US$1.5 million)
This sub-component will build capacity to evaluate project results against expected objectives,
facilitate learning for better design of future projects and ensure compliance with fiduciary
procedures. The following activities are proposed:
*      Technical assistance for the development and set-up at the Ministry of Development of a
dashboard for SHISEPIP (monitoring and evaluation system).
*      Seminars and training programs in project evaluation and audit, including the development
of risk-based auditing and performance auditing for the national oversight institutions (Auditor
General, General Inspectorate of Finance, Ministerial Inspectorates). Risk maps establishment and
strategic audit programs will be supported for all priority ministries like Education, Health,
Agriculture and infrastructure.
*      Technical assistance to improve and rationalize of the institutional and legal frameworks of
national internal audit institutions (Office of the Auditor General, General Inspectorate of Finance,
and general ministerial inspectorates).
*      Support for the preparation and the implementation of selected activities from the Chamber
of Accounts modernization plan which will lead to the conversion of the Chamber to a Court of
Accounts.
*      Support for the organization of quarterly portfolio monitoring meetings led by the Ministry
of Development that will include project managers from line ministries.
*      Training in the elaboration of quarterly consolidated information on financial, and physical
execution of projects.
*      Support for the organization of joint quarterly site visits of the General Directorate for
Programming and Monitoring of Public Investments (Direction G6n6rale de la Programmation et du
Suivi des Investissements Publics - DGPSIP) and Project Implementation Units.
*       Support for raising awareness of civil society organizations (CSO) including media on
a         investment project implementation outcomes and issues. CSO will be associated with the
Government in the monitoring process of public investment projects. Key CSOs that focus on
effectiveness and efficiency of public investments will receive appropriate training on PIM
monitoring and evaluation and will be called to make their assessment on the performance of
government investment program.
*      Training and assistance to DNCMP and ARMP in the conduct of procurement post review
and audit. This will include technical assistance for organizing the collection of procurement
performance statistics in line with the PEFA 2016 framework and support to improve public access
to procurement information.
The execution of the above activities shall lead to the increase in the percentage of projects audited
and projects formally evaluated.
Sub-component 1.5: Public Private Partnerships (US$1.5 million)
Page 5 of 12


﻿Activities indicated above for traditional public investments in terms of appraisal, project selection,
implementation, and evaluation also apply to PPPs. However, given the specific challenges involved
in establishing and managing PPPs, this sub-component will focus on the following activities that are
specifically dedicated to PPPs:
*      Technical assistance and advisory services to the Government to improve the PPP law by
addressing existing inadequacies in the current draft.
*      Elaboration of a PPP operational manual which will cover the four standard phases of (i)
PPP identification and screening, (ii) business case evaluation, (iii) negotiation and transaction, and
(iv) contract management. Specific guidelines will be developed on project viability, marketability,
value for money, transaction structure, drafting of PPP agreements, pre-qualify bidding, request for
proposals, evaluation and award, project risks management, PPP performance management, and
administration of agreements
*      Streamlining and strengthening the institutional framework governing PPPs.
*      Technical assistance to integrate PPP and PIM from the early stages of the project cycle.
Ideally final appraisal of traditional investment projects and PPPs should be done by the same unit.
*      Rapid assessment of proposed PPPs for which there are no feasibility studies.
*      PPP training programs on project finance, project appraisal, procurement and due diligence,
contract management, performance management, negotiations, fiscal risk management, fiscal
monitoring and reporting
The execution of these capacity building activities related to PPP should lead at the end of the project
to these key results: (i) increase in the number of PPP transactions and (ii) reduction in the number of
unsolicited PPP bids. Given the limited budget for this component the project will seek to mobilize
additional technical assistance support from sources such as the Public Private Infrastructure
Advisory Facility (PPIAF
Sub-component 1.6. Support for Centralized and Consolidated Monitoring and Evaluation of the
Government's Investment Program (US$1.0 million)
o
The sub-component will support the operationalization of the centralized monitoring and evaluation
system recently established by the Government for PPPs and flagship investment projects. In
particular, it will support the BOS within the President's office. The United Nations Development
o         Program (UNDP) and United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) are currently supporting the BOS
by providing $1.7 million over the next three years to help with the design and initial roll-out of an
M&E system Under this sub-component, the World Bank will focus on the scale-up and
maintenance of the system, to ensure that all projects in the portfolio are adequately monitored and
implementation bottlenecks are adequately addressed. Activities will include:
*      The development of a computerized dashboard, which will be public, to consolidate data
from ministerial information systems on flagship investments and development programs.
*      Change Management for development sessions for high level officials.
*      Coaching and training of coaches for the roll-out of Rapid Results Initiative (RRIs) processes
in the management / monitoring of selected investments.
Some of the key results expected to be achieved as the result of these activities include: (i) a
centralized monitoring dashboard; (ii) hiring of a good number of coaches supporting the
implementation of RRIs; (iii) annual high level seminars on change management; and (iii) orders
enacted annually as a result of high level change management seminars.
Page 6 of 12


﻿Component 2: Strengthening Good Governance and Accountability (US$3.5 Million)
O
This component seeks to enhance accountability throughout the PIM expenditure cycle by
reinforcing some of the principle government and judicial institutions that are responsible for holding
the public administration to account. Specifically, the component will provide technical assistance to:
(i) facilitate the installation and strengthening of administrative chambers in pilot First Instance
Courts and the three Appeals Courts (this will be done gradually starting with the Cotonou First
Instance Court); (ii) support the ANLC in investigating, reporting and referring for sanction,
corruption cases involving the public administration, including those related to public investment
projects; and (iii) stimulating public participation in improving quality of service delivery.
Sub-component 2.1 Support to the Justice Sector (US$2.0 million)
The sub-component will focus on strengthening the institutional capacity of the judiciary to
effectively adjudicate administrative law cases. It will adopt a two pronged approach by (i) assisting
the Government to pilot and strengthen administrative chambers in selected courts, and (ii) to carry
out a targeted backlog reduction program for administrative cases. Activities will include:
*      The elaboration of a specific strategy for the phased operationalization of the administrative
chambers (drawing upon existing analytical work). The first priority will be to operationalize and
strengthen the Cotonou First Instance Court which accounts for almost half of the cases filed in the
country;
*      Implementation of in-service training, study tours and professional development activities
relevant to the operationalization of the administrative chambers
*      Design and implementation of a backlog reduction program targeting specifically
administrative cases
* Revision of ENAM's initial training curriculum and design of modules tailored to
developing specific expertise (administrative law, economic crimes);
* Technical assistance to enhance the judicial in-service training program managed by the
MJLDH.
* Technical assistance to align the Ministry of Justice's recruitment strategy with the staffing
a        needs of the administrative chambers.
* Technical assistance for data collection including investigation skills and case management
in the administrative chambers.
*      Technical assistance to review the legislative and regulatory framework for administrative
law jurisdictions.
The key result indicators that will be monitored to ensure the effectiveness of these planned activities
are (i) the clearance rate of administrative cases, and (ii) a reduced backlog of administrative cases.
Sub-component 2.2 Support to the Anti-Corruption Authority (US$1.0 million)
The sub-component will contribute to the implementation of the ANLC's strategy and operational
plan to improve the coordination, investigation, reporting and referral functions of this newly created
institution. Activities will support:
* Training of ANLC representatives in complaints handling, investigation techniques, cross-
Page 7 of 12


﻿check information from asset declarations with other databases (property registry, tax declarations ,
etc.), preventative mechanisms, and online disclosure.
Technical assistance to (i) improve communication and coordination among stakeholders and
institutions involved in the fight against corruption; and (ii) enhance the tracking and public reporting
on public officials' compliance with the assets declaration requirements.
*      The establishment of a community of practice to support both officials and technicians in
promoting knowledge sharing on implementation of anti-corruption legislation and ANLC
collaboration with CSOs in monitoring implementation of the anti-corruption legislation.
Some of the key expected results of the carrying out of these activities include the increase in the: (i)
percentage of officials in compliance with the assets declaration requirement; and (ii) number of
corruption cases submitted by ANLC to the State Prosecutor.
Sub-component 2.3 Stimulating Public Participation in Improving Quality of Service Delivery (US$
0.5 million)
This sub-component will support social accountability objectives by promoting active citizenship and
providing platforms for citizen participation. The objective is to harness citizen voice to influence
outcomes of public services in the participating sectors (Justice, Electricity and Water). Activities
will include:
*      Implementation of Citizen Score Card (CSC) - to foster informed and productive discussion
between the sectors and citizens/civil society, with the view to identifying and addressing service
delivery bottlenecks in the sectors. The CRC process will identify biding constraints (e.g.
institutional, regulatory, capacity, governance etc.) of public services for different categories of
beneficiates. The results will include a comparative disposition of service performance and
governance issues across sectors, regions, districts, gender, and occupation with particular focus on
the poor.
*      A Platform for policy dialogue - to be managed by a consortium of stakeholders to facilitate
public discussion of the CRC findings to promote accountability of sectors. The consortium will
facilitate the elaboration and implementation of concrete and attainable commitments to address
public service challenges in the sectors. The CRC would be repeated at mid-term and towards the
o         end of the project to assess changes in performance of sector services attributable to the systematic
tracking of beneficiary feedback.
The key result expected to be achieved from these activities is improved responsiveness of sectors to
citizens through improvement in aggregate citizen report card scores of participating sectors.
Component 3: Results-Based Financing in the Electricity, Water and Justice Sectors (US$15 million)
Disbursements under component 3 will be based on the performance of selected ministries in
effectively managing specific public investments and reaching agreed-upon DLI targets. The
component aligns with the Government's commitment to results-based management and provides
incentives to the selected line ministries to harness the technical assistance available under
components 1 and 2 to achieve specific outcomes. From the 2016-2018 PIP, 6 projects in the
Electricity, Water and Justice sectors have been selected for support under this component. Eligible
expenditure programs (EEP) will include no-procurable budget line related to salaries and
miscellaneous operating expenditures. The project will monitor budget lines to reimburse expenses
Page 8 of 12


﻿on DLIs.
Electricity: From the PIP, the following two programs have been selected for results-based financing:
(i) promotion and development of electricity distribution in urban and semi-urban areas, and (ii) rural
areas electrification. The Government's contribution to fund these electricity distribution projects
through the national budget over the five years (2017-21) is estimated at US$24.06 million, and the
Bank's contribution through RBF will, if the relevant DLIs are achieved, amount to US$5 million, or
21 percent of the overall budget for these projects during that period of time. Two budget lines
(377629276100 and 7608676900) will be used respectively to monitor expenditures of the rural
areas electrification and promotion/development of electricity distribution projects.
Water: Two water projects have been selected for results-based financing. These projects are: (i)
provision of drinking water derived from surface water sources and (iii) provision of drinking water
in rural and semi-rural areas. The Government will be funding about US$17.2 million in these two
projects in the next five years and the Bank's contribution through RBF will, if the relevant DLIs are
achieved, amount to US$5 million.
Justice: The two justice sector projects selected for the justice sector are: (i) Operationalization of
Administrative Chambers; and (ii) Judicial Services Modernization. The Government will be funding
about US$10 million in these two projects and the Bank's contribution would amount to US$5
million dollars if the relevant DLIs are reached.
In summary, over the next four years, the results-based financing component could bring about US
$15 million to complement about US$ 50 million that the Government would be spending for the
implementation of six critical projects in the energy, water, and justice sectors. The Bank's
contribution through Component 3, thus, represents 30 percent of the Government own resources,
and will be conditional upon the attainment of the DLIs.
Three DLI focus areas have been selected to trigger results-based financing under Component 3. For
all three sectors, the capital budget execution rates and project implementation rates will be used to
assess performance in the management of selected sectoral investment programs . While the budget
execution rate measures efficiency improvements in the coordination and processing of financial
flows, the implementation rate ascertains real or physical implementation on the ground. Assuming
a        that the technical assistance provided under Component One has influenced PIM institutional
capacity and investment projects in the selected sectors have been well appraised, procurement
delays have been shortened, and funding has been made readily available, it would be reasonable to
expect higher budget execution and completion rates. For the justice sector, an additional DLI that
measures improvements in the judiciary's institutional capacity to adjudicate administrative law
cases has been chosen. Assuming that the capacity of the Ministry of Justice to manage its
investment projects improves with the technical support provided under Component One and
assuming that the steps required to operationalize the administrative jurisdictions are taken through
the technical assistance provided under Component Two and through the effective implementation of
the Government's investment projects, it is reasonable to expect that the selected courts will be better
equipped to manage administrative matters
Component 4: Support for Project Implementation (US$2.5 million).
Component 4 will support the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) in coordinating and managing the
implementation of the Project. Details of the implementation arrangements are outlines in Section III.
Page 9 of 12


﻿C and Annex 3. Activities will include: (i) the development of annual work programs and
corresponding procurement plans; (ii) the management of fiduciary and monitoring activities; (iii) the
coordination of technical work and the provision of support services to the technical units within the
relevant Ministries; (iv) the monitoring of and reporting on the implementation of the project's
O
U         activities; and (v) hiring of the independent third-party verification firm for DLIs and budget line
spending levels. The Project will provide the funding necessary for the acquisition of office
equipment and accounting software, as well as for the payment of the activities related to project
coordination and monitoring.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Abdoul Wahabi Seini (GSU01)
Abdoulaye Gadiere (GEN07)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           No          The project will not undertake any investments that may
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               induce potential environmental adverse impact
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          The project does not involve or affect natural habitats.
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          The project does not involve or affect forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          The project does not involve pest management.
Physical Cultural       No          The project will not undertake any investments that may
Resources OP/BP 4.11                impact on Physical Cultural Resources
0
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          Not relevant for Benin
BP 4.10
O
Involuntary Resettlement No         The project does not involve any physical structure or
OP/BP 4.12                          construction, there is no restriction or acquisition of land
planned in the projects activities. No new buildings are to
be constructed. The project is therefore Cat C and will
not trigger the OP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No          The project will not finance dams nor rely on dams.
4.37
Projects on International  No       The project is not expected to affect international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                waterways.
Projects in Disputed    No          The project will not be located in a Disputed Area.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Page 10 of 12


﻿Not applicable. The project is essentially about technical assistance and financial incentives for
line ministries and selected institutions of accountability to ensure good public investment
management and governance.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Not applicable.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
,          impacts.
Not applicable.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Not applicable.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Not applicable.
B. Disclosure Requirements
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Not applicable. Project Category C.
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
o          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Page 11 of 12


﻿Task Team Leader(s): Name: Robert A. Yungu
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)           Date: 18-Feb-2016
Practice Manager/     Name: Guenter Heidenhof (PMGR)           Date: 22-Feb-2016
Manager:
Page 12 of 12


