                                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA17674
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Mar-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Madagascar                        Project ID:   P150116
                            Project Name:     Public Sector Performance Project (P150116)
                            Task Team         Anne-Lucie Lefebvre
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         21-Mar-2016                       Estimated   13-Jun-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GGO13                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Central government administration (25%), Sub-national government
                                              administration (25%), Public administration- Education (25%), Publi c
                                              administration- Energy and mining (25%)
                            Theme(s):         Other public sector governance (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        40.00           Total Bank Financing:  40.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                 40.00
                              Total                                                                                     40.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve revenue management, and local service
                           delivery nationwide and in the education sector in Selected Regions.


                                                                     Page 1 of 10
                         3. Project Description
                         Component 1: Improving Revenue Management (US$16.8 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1.      This component seeks to address a number of functional problems that limit the efficiency of
                         revenue generation and collection in key revenues agencies (tax, customs, and mining). These
                         includes (a) weaknesses in revenue agencies’ capacity, as documented in recent IMF (2014 and
                         2015) and TADAT reports; (b) declining domestic revenues that leaves limited fiscal space for
                         service delivery; (c) overly cumbersome controls with limited results in preventing fraud and
                         leakages; (d) lack of efficient internal controls resulting in collusion and favoring corruption; (e)
                         human resources and behavior challenges undermining performance; (f) insufficient transparency
                         and accountability regarding activities and reporting; (g) limited enforcement of the mining code
                         undermining the management of mining revenues at both the central and local levels; and (h) a high
                         degree of informality, especially with respect to ASM of gold.

                         2.      The results to be achieved through this component are (a) the availability of improved
                         integrated revenue information management systems and (b) enhanced operational efficiency of
                         revenue agencies.

                         3.       The following intermediate indicators and/or DLIs will be used to monitor the performance
                         of this component:
                         •        DLI 1.1: Modernization of the Integrated Tax Administration System (ITAS)
                         •        DLI 1.2: Increased rate of confirmed suspicious customs transactions (in case of physical
                         examination)
                         •        DLI 1.3: Number of revenue offices that have been subject to an external evaluation of their
                         performance contracts/programs
                         •        Improved taxpayers’ registration
                         •        Establishment of a unique administrative identification number for taxpayers
                         •        Improve formalization of small-scale gold miners
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4.       With respect to improving revenue management, this component will support the following
                         activities through a combination of TA (US$4.8 million) and results-based financing (RBF) (US
                         $12.0 million) (for details, please see annex 2): (a) improvement and consolidation of taxpayers
                         registration and identification; (b) modernization of the ITAS; (c) strengthening of audit function and
                         control; (b) the creation of an enabling environment for performance-based management at the Tax
                         and Customs Departments; (e) improvement of revenue collection in the mining sector; (f)
                         improvement of accountability and transparency of revenue agencies; and (g) leadership, change, and
                         knowledge management.

                         5.       The eligible expenditure programs (EEPs) to be financed under this component are the ITAS
                         rollout, salaries, and purchase of equipment.

                         Component 2: Improving Service Delivery Capacity of Local Governments (US$12.00 million)

                         6.      This component seeks to address a number of functional problems that undermine service
                         delivery and resilience at the local level. These include (a) challenges in identifying and collecting
                         revenues; (b) poor awareness and enforcement of sectoral regulations; (c) delays by the central
                         government in the refund of selected local taxes to regions and communes due to treasury cash flow
                         challenges; and (d) limited management capacity challenges in M&E.


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         7.      The results to be achieved through this component are (a) an improved local governance
                         performance management system through the IGL and (b) greater efficiency of local governments’
Public Disclosure Copy




                         financial flow.

                         8.     The following intermediate indicators and/or DLIs have been suggested to monitor the
                         performance of this component:
                         •      DLI 2.1: Improved timeliness of fiscal transfers to local governments
                         •      Improved recovery of revenue (not including grants) by local governments

                         9.       With respect to improving the capacity of local governments, this component will support
                         the following activities through a combination of TA (US$1.0 million) and RBF (US$11.0 million)
                         (for details, please see annex 2): (a) providing grants to communes and strengthening of grant
                         transfer and equalization mechanisms; (b) developing a strategy and review of legal, institutional,
                         and technical framework of revenue collection and developing pilots to secure revenue collection;
                         and (c) reinforcing knowledge management for local governance, including selected impact
                         evaluations.

                         10.     The EEP to be financed under this component is local government grants.

                         Component 3: Improving Governance Mechanisms in the Education Sector (US$7.80 million)

                         11.      This component seeks to address a number of functional problems that affect budget
                         execution and service delivery at the local level and in the education sector, including (a) delays in
                         the payment of key expenditures such as payment of subsidies to community teachers and school
                         grants; (b) absence of sound budget planning that limits the ability of the MEN for implementation;
                         (c) constrained and inefficient budget execution; and (d) limited operationalization of the revised
                         school committees (Farimbon’Ezaka ho Fahombiazan’ny Fanabeazana eny Ifotony, FEFFIs) and the
                         school plans (Plan d’école contractualisés, PECs) that have recently been defined by law.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         12.      The results to be achieved through this component are (a) improved budget planning,
                         monitoring, and execution mechanisms; (b) improved efficiency in procurement and transfer of funds
                         to the local level; (c) operational FEFFIs (in project-supported areas) and increased use of
                         accountability mechanisms at the local level.

                         13.     The following intermediate indicators and/or DLIs have been suggested to monitor the
                         performance of this subcomponent:
                         •       DLI 3.1: Share of schools targeted by the component with an operational FEFFI and
                         planning and implementing PECs (citizens’ engagement DLI)
                         •       Percentage of parents’ association (Fikambanan’ny Ray Aman-drenin’ny Mpianatra, FRAM)
                         teachers in the areas targeted by the component receiving subsidies with less than two months of
                         delay

                         14.     With respect to improving service delivery and governance in the education sector, this
                         component will support the following activities through a combination of TA (US$2.3 million) and
                         RBF (US$5.5 million) (for details, please see annex 2): (a) strengthening the budget planning and
                         monitoring system at the local and central levels; (b) improving budget execution mechanisms in
                         procurement and the management of subsidy transfers for community teachers and school grants; and
                         (c) supporting the implementation of the FEFFI and the development of PECs through a combination

                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                         of TA and incentive processes.

                         15.     The EEP to be financed under this component is the payment of school grants.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 4: Improving Controls and Performance Monitoring (US$3.4 million)

                         16.      This component seeks to address a number of functional problems that undermine the
                         efficient use of scarce resources. These include (a) weaknesses in budget execution internal and
                         external oversight and (b) lack of transparency, accountability, and participation in budget debates
                         and management.

                         17.      The results to be achieved through this component are (a) more efficient use of resources as
                         well as reduced fraud and fund misuse resulting from improved control, oversight, and budget
                         transparency and (b) improved leadership and sectoral dialogue.

                         18.     The following intermediate indicators have been suggested to monitor the performance of
                         this component:
                         •       Timely availability of the auditor general public report (process indicator)
                         •       Number of high/substantial risk audits completed by Internal Audit Departments
                         •       Semiannual public debates on the Budget Law (annual budget law and loi de règlement) and
                         on the performance of revenue agencies (citizens’ engagement indicator)

                         19.      With respect to improving performance in the management of expenditures, this component
                         will support the following activities: (a) strengthening controls and oversight mechanisms; (b)
                         promoting transparency, accountability, participation, and media access to information; and (c)
                         project coordination and performance monitoring.

                         20.     There will be no EEP financed through this component.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project will have a nationwide coverage with a specific focus around the large cities in throughout
                         the country.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Paul-Jean Feno (GEN07)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            The project has a category B safeguards rating.
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                                                                    The investments under this project will focus on the
                                                                    improvement of the delivery of basic services and will
                                                                    result in improved living conditions. As such, the
                                                                    investments are likely to be sectorally varied given that
                                                                    they will be determined by local level priorities, which
                                                                    will differ from one local government to another. The
                                                                    types of investment are common community development
                                                                    projects (e.g. market places, schools, community clinics,



                                                                      Page 4 of 10
                                                       public offices, feeder roads, etc.) whose potential
                                                       environmental and social effects are well understood,
                                                       unlikely to be significant due to their site specific nature,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       and are readily manageable.

                                                       The potential social and environmental issues associated
                                                       with the project include soil erosion, health effects to
                                                       workers and surrounding beneficiary communities related
                                                       to construction, land disturbance during construction,
                                                       waste management for the schools, markets places, and
                                                       community clinics, and noise primarily during physical
                                                       construction.

                                                       As stated above, the potential sub-projects to be financed
                                                       will be selected after community grants are allocated via
                                                       participatory budgeting processes. Hence, at this very
                                                       time of the preparation of the project, these sub-projects
                                                       have not yet been clearly identified, nor have the exact
                                                       characteristics (nature, type and scope) and physical
                                                       locations of sub-projects can be clearly determined prior
                                                       to appraisal; therefore, the borrower has prepared an
                                                       Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                       (ESMF) in compliance with the Environmental Law in
                                                       Madagascar and the Environmental Assessment
                                                       Operational Policy (OP/BP 4.01).
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No   The policy is not triggered as following the National Law
                         4.04                          on Protected Areas, it is not possible to build
                                                       infrastructure within the protected areas in Madagascar;
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       therefore, no direct impacts on the protected areas and/or
                                                       natural habitats are anticipated.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No   The policy is not triggered. None of the proposed project
                                                       activities/sub-activities will be implemented in a forest or
                                                       nearby a forest, nor have an irreversible negative impact
                                                       on project areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No    The policy is not triggered. There is no indication of
                                                       activities that would lead to the use of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural        No   The policy is not triggered despite the foreseen
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11          construction and debilitation works expected to occur
                                                       during the project implementation stage; nonetheless, the
                                                       ESMF will make provision of the use of Chance-Finds
                                                       approach to adequately guide client on the proper way of
                                                       handling such encounters.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No   Though the project will have a national coverage, the
                         BP 4.10                       proposed activities are not expected to impact on the
                                                       Mikea community mostly living in the north-easter part of
                                                       the country. Moreover, according to a recent WBG re-



                                                        Page 5 of 10
                                                              assessment of the existence of IPs in Madagascar, the
                                                              Mikea community no-longer fits the WBG description of
                                                              IPs, and therefore, the policy is not triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes      Land acquisition, compensation and resettlement of
                            OP/BP 4.12                        people may be inevitable for certain categories of sub-
                                                              projects. This is a social issue of critical concern to the
                                                              Government and the World Bank as its impact on poverty
                                                              if left unmitigated, is negative, immediate, and can be
                                                              wide spread. The infrastructure projects developed in
                                                              several localities by the “collectivités territoriales” could
                                                              result in involuntary resettlement and land acquisition.
                                                              Such relocation could occur during the process of
                                                              widening the roads, with the construction of markets, or
                                                              the rehabilitation of schools or community clinics.
                                                              In addition, the Ministry of Decentralization could rely
                                                              the National Law on Land Acquisition, which is different
                                                              from the Bank Policy on Involuntary Resettlement OP
                                                              4.12. the Resettlement Policy Framework has been
                                                              prepared for the community development activities under
                                                              the decentralization component and to incorporate the
                                                              local development fund (FDL).
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No    Land acquisition, compensation and resettlement of
                            4.37                              people may be inevitable for certain categories of sub-
                                                              projects. This is a social issue of critical concern to the
                                                              Government and the World Bank as its impact on poverty
                                                              if left unmitigated, is negative, immediate, and can be
                                                              wide spread. The infrastructure projects developed in
                                                              several localities by the “collectivités territoriales” could
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              result in involuntary resettlement and land acquisition.
                                                              Such relocation could occur during the process of
                                                              widening the roads, with the construction of markets, or
                                                              the rehabilitation of schools or community clinics.

                                                              In addition, the Ministry of Decentralization could rely
                                                              the National Law on Land Acquisition, which is different
                                                              from the Bank Policy on Involuntary Resettlement OP
                                                              4.12. Therefore, it is proposed to prepare a Resettlement
                                                              Policy Framework for the community development
                                                              activities under the decentralization component and to
                                                              incorporate the local development fund (FDL).
                            Projects on International   No    The project activities do not involve international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50              waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed        No    The activities under this project do not involve disputed
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                  areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                                                               Page 6 of 10
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           Social Benefits: Cost of education has considerably increased for families as they directly support
Public Disclosure Copy




                           community-based teachers. By improving the payment mechanism for community-based teachers
                           in primary education, it is expected that the cost of access to education will decrease. In parallel,
                           quality of education is expected to increase through better teacher performance. Overall, this will
                           contribute to improving the learning outcomes and bolstering the country’s human capital.

                           The Project is classified as category B in the World Bank’s Environmental Assessment
                           classification due to the low size and site specific nature of its foreseen social and environmental
                           risks and impacts. The environmental and social Safeguard Policies triggered by this operation are:
                           OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement).

                           There are no potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts expected to arise from
                           this project. The investments under this project will focus on the improvement of the delivery of
                           basic services and will result in improved living conditions such as the construction/rehabilitation
                           of market places, schools, community clinics, public offices, feeder roads, etc. The potential
                           environmental and social effects are well understood, unlikely to be significant due to their site
                           specific nature and readily manageable. The proposed project requires no exceptions to the World
                           Bank’s policies on environmental and social safeguards.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           No long term risks or impacts are anticipated as a result of potential future project activities.
                           Overall project impacts are considered modest and will be site specific. No potential indirect and/
                           or long term impacts could be induce on the anticipated future activities to this proposed operation.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           There are no alternatives to the present project design.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           At the national level, Madagascar has a legislative and regulatory framework which is conducive
                           to good environmental management. In compliance with the Malagasy Environment National Law
                           under Décret N°2004-167 (MECIE, with the small size of potential social infrastructures to be
                           financed, It was recorded the no specific Environmental and Social Management Plan is necessary
                           to be prepared. The national environmental law will be reinforced by the World Bank safeguard
                           policies for this proposed project. The project has engaged the services of a consultant to prepare
                           two separated safeguards instruments. These instruments have assessed the potential impacts of all
                           activities to be supported by the proposed operation, the expected adverse environmental and
                           social impacts, and identified mitigation measures, including the principles, procedures to be
                           followed for the safeguards policies triggered: OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) and OP/
                           BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement).

                           An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared to be used to
                           screen sub-project proposals for environmental, social, gender, and health and safety impacts by
                           using the ESMF screening form and checklist. The ESMF includes an Environmental and Social
                           Management Plan (ESMP) for each subproject could be financed by the project. Due to the small
                           size of sub-projects, the impacts and risks are of site specific nature and easily manageable.


                                                                      Page 7 of 10
                          In line with GOM and World Bank policies, the ESMF/ESMP outlines guidelines: (i) an
                          environmental and social screening process,(ii) generic mitigation measures for each potential
Public Disclosure Copy




                          eligible subprojects, (iii) principles and dispositions to be followed and adopted during civil works
                          and exploitation phase of subproject to reduce risks, impacts to acceptable level. The screening
                          outcomes will determine the king of Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) to be
                          adopted and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or if no action will be needed. The screening of the
                          sub-projects will be done by the FDL technical team during subprojects identification. In frame of
                          this proposed operation, the technical studies of future subprojects will be prepared or updated
                          when the financing are available. The ESMF has considered a specific ESMP by subproject build
                          from the previous FDL’s support with similar subprojects. FDL with the commune will be
                          responsible for the selection and development of ESMP when subproject site identified. No
                          archaeological vestiges could be met and selected by the commune to identify their subprojects to
                          be financed by the project. For more assurance, the ESMF has made provisions for cultural
                          resources management in the event the Physical Cultural Resources OP 4.11 is triggered during
                          the implementation phase and includes “chance finds” procedures for inclusion in the contractors’
                          contract.

                          Since the precise physical locations and impacts of the small infrastructures are unknown at this
                          stage and the acquisition of land, loss of assets and/or means of livelihood are not characterized at
                          this stage, the Borrower has prepared a detailed Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) that sets
                          forth the basic principles and procedures that both the Borrower and the World Bank must follow
                          to mitigate any potential adverse social impacts. Because some project activities may lead to the
                          acquisition of land, loss of assets and/or means of livelihood that could result in the involuntary
                          resettlement of people. The RPF includes details information on legal and institutional framework,
                          eligibility criteria, assets evaluating methods, implementation arrangements, grievances redress
                          mechanism, resettlement budget totally covered by the Government and monitoring and
                          evaluation. The RPF contains the basic principles and procedures/directives to be followed by the
                          Borrower for the preparation of the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) once the physical locations of
Public Disclosure Copy




                          the proposed activities are known. The RPF has proposed specific RAP ToR.

                           FDL technical team will be in charge of the project safeguard environmental and social
                           compliance. This department will carry out ESMP/RAP, to ensure that the mitigation measures are
                           being effectively implemented, and will conduct field visits on a regular basis. Monitoring
                           checklists will be prepared on the basis of the mitigation plans for this purpose. Progress Reports
                           (PR) shall document the progress of ESMF implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           With respect to the applicable safeguards policies and instruments, the project preparation process
                           sought to identify and analyze the interests, concerns, and effects of project activities on major
                           stakeholders and vice-versa. During project preparation, the GoMthroughout PREA and a
                           Consultant has conducted public consultations and meetings on the project in the regions.
                           Extensive public consultations were also conducted during the preparation of ESMF and RPF to
                           take into account the local populations and communities views on the project activities and
                           impacts.

                          Likewise, during project implementation, FDL is expected to consult project-affected groups with
                          active participation of local governmental and nongovernmental organizations on all


                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                           environmental and social aspects of the project and take their views into account accordingly.
                           Public consultations will be carried out as early as possible and provide, in a timely manner prior
                           to consultation, all the relevant materials in the form and language(s) needed to be understandable
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and accessible to the groups being consulted. The draft ESMF and RPF have been received at the
                           Bank in January 20th, 2016. All the environmental and social safeguards instruments will be
                           approved by the Bank and disclosed in-country and at Infoshop, before appraisal, on February XX,
                           2016 in compliance with the relevant World Bank safeguards and national policies and Disclosure
                           Policies.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-Mar-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Madagascar                                                       15-Mar-2016
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   22-Feb-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Madagascar                                                       15-Mar-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?



                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Anne-Lucie Lefebvre
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Guenter Heidenhof (PMGR)                      Date: 13-Apr-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 10 of 10
