INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSAI 121
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Feb-2016
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Feb-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Kosovo                      Project ID:  P133829
Project Name: Kosovo Water Security and Canal Protection Project (P133829)
Task Team       Ahmed Shawky M. Abdel Ghany
Leader(s):
Estimated       22-Feb-2016                 Estimated    29-Jul-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWAO9                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Irrigation and drainage (40%), Water supply (25%), General energy sector
(25%), Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (10%)
Theme(s):       Water resource management (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      28.00             Total Bank Financing:    28.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                  28.00
Total                                                                        28.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The development objective of the project is to contribute to restoring the canal original capacity as
needed to secure bulk water for the various canal water users in Central Kosovo.
3. Project Description
The project consists of three components: (i) Canal infrastructure rehabilitation and modernization,
Page 1 of 17


﻿(ii) Water resources protection and monitoring, and (iii) Project management support.
To be ready for implementation once the project is approved, the SCADA system under component 2
has been designed up to the detailed design level, and bidding document has been prepared
(equipment and associated training and operation services), to be implemented in the first year of
O
project implementation.
Component 1: Infrastructure Rehabilitation and Modernization (categories: civil works)
This component would focus on physical improvements to the deteriorated sections of the canal and
its structures as well as improvements of hydraulic operations. Works under this component include
(subject to the detailed design which will be undertaken after project approval):
Subcomponent 1 (a) Small works for Gazivoda dam safety, canal repair and increased stability for
protection against renewed physical damage from landslides and unstable soils (through lining,
treatment of joints, abutments, foundations, cuttings, aqueducts, culverts, tile drains to control uplift
pressure).
Subcomponent 1 (b) Developing hydraulic-storage capacity along the canal. The project Legal
Agreement would comprise a flexible language on developing new water storage, conducive to
determining its exact size and location during the first Project Year after completing its detailed
designs and site-specific safeguards studies. One possible option (for which preliminary design was
undertaken under the FS) is to develop an emergency-and-balancing reservoir along the canal at
Mihaliq area (in Vushtri municipality), for short-term storage (10 days) in order to: (1) bridge peak
water demand and (2) enable continuation of water supply to the users during the temporary outages
for canal repair, or amid having extreme events that disrupt the canal flow. Another option is to
develop several micro storages along the canal.
Component 2: Water Resources Protection and Management (categories: civil works and equipment)
The project would also cover related water-resource management measures along the canal:
Subcomponent 2 (a) Protection of the canal against renewed pollution, accidental pollution and other
threats and man-made disruptions, through fencing, selective covers, or parallel interceptor drains
with vegetative beds (subject to the detailed design). This would help address the ambient water
quality in the canal, to meet the inflow quality requirements for the power plants and for the new
Pristina Water Treatment Plant.
Subcomponent 2 (b) Equipment for better management of gates and regulation of water flows, water
monitoring (for the main Iber canal and for its secondary delivery system), including provisions for
a        remote monitoring and controlling of related structures. A relatively advanced SCADA would be
installed given the importance of the canal. The equipment would also include instrumentation for
optimized operational schedule of the Gazivoda reservoir and its downstream balancing reservoir in
Pridvorica, integrated with the proposed canal SCADA (to balance the releases for hydropower with
the releases for the Iber canal).
Component 3: Project Management, Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation (categories:
consultants, training, and incremental operating costs)
This component would cover overall project management as well as coordination among the
different ministries/agencies involved in water management as related to the Iber-Lepenc Canal. The
activities would include the detailed design and supervision of the works contracts. The Project
Implementation Unit (PIU) to be located within the Iber-Lepenc Company, will be responsible for
day-to-day management of project activities and will work with relevant staff in other ministries such
as the MESP on the project's safeguard aspects (Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
Framework, ESIAF, and Resettlement Policy Framework, RPF) as well as on Monitoring and
Evaluation (M&E).
Page 2 of 17


﻿As an overview the works that might be financed include: new concrete, rehabilitation of joints,
rehabilitation of aqueducts, rehabilitations and new sections of access roads along the canal, bridge
rehabilitation, including walkway bridges, slabs covering, reconstruction of cross ing channels above
O
U         and under the canal, retaining walls, storm water culverts, water distribution boxes, clearing of
vegetation, fencing, 4000 m3 compensation reservoir, etc.
The project will establish a Project Steering Committee, comprising high level officials from the
various ministries engaged in the water sector (MESP, MED, Water Task Force, MAFRD) who
would work together to provide advice and oversight for project activities. Given the multi-sector
nature of water use, the Committee would be charged with reaching agreements as necessary in the
efficient management and distribution of water from the Iber canal. As for gender development, the
socioeconomic studies under the ESIAF includes the identification of any vulnerable groups,
including internally-displaced people or refugees, ethnic groups such as Roma, landless laborers, and
the rights of female household heads and women in common-law unions. The public consultation
and grievance procedure under the RPF/ESIAF with ESMF will comprise measures ensuring that
such vulnerable groups are consulted during subproject design and implementation.
The Bank intends to mobilize a small Bank-executed trust-fund grant (WPP/WSP) to improve the
capacity of ILC on the utility management aspects of managing the water restored/saved by the
project.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Environmental relevance of the project and majority of potential adverse environmental impacts
relate predominately to activities envisaged within the project Component 1: Infrastructure
Rehabilitation and Modernization which encompasses rehabilitation works on IL water canal and
Gazivoda dam as well as development of Mihaliq dam and emergency reservoir. Some
environmental impacts are also possible under the Component 2: Water Resources Protection and
Management, however, these activities are small scale and include mainly protection work such as
fencing of the canal area and light equipment purchase.
The Iber-Lepenc (IL) canal, subject to rehabilitation works, is 49 km man-made hydraulic structure
supplying water to central Kosovo. It runs from Gazivoda (Ujman) lake up to Prishtina city and ends
at Badovc Lake. The intake for the IL canal "sub-basin" is Gazivoda reservoir on the Ib6r River. The
IL canal conveys bulk water by gravity through a system comprising canal, siphons, aqueducts and
pipes to supply various users. The excess water is released in the upstream part of the Sitnica River
that flows back into the Ib6r River, carrying flow to Serbia. In its full length the canal passes through
the territory of four municipalities - namely: Zubin Potok, Mitrovica, Vushtrri and Prishtina - passing
through about 33 rural settlements and two cities.
The water resource from the canal is used for various purposes: domestic, irrigation, industries and
cooling of Kosovo A (in the summer months) and Kosovo B thermal power plants. It is expected that
the demand for water from the IL canal will increase significantly with the new water treatment
plants in Shkabaj and Vushtrri and the construction of KRPP coal power plant (600-MW lignite-fired
power plant). Nevertheless, this increase of water use would occur even without the canal
rehabilitation; and conversely, the canal rehabilitation would be needed even in the absence of these
other investments.
Page 3 of 17


﻿Current state of IL water management infrastructures is characterized by major leakages from wear-
down and insufficient maintenance, extensive water losses, and vulnerability to disruption by
landslides, leakages and pollution.
O
)         The section of the IL canal that will be rehabilitated under the World Bank project crosses two major
landscape units: the hilly areas with dense forest cover in the northern part and alluvial plain of
central Kosovo in its section between Buschta Village and Pristina. The landscape of the
geographical project area is fairly urbanized in the north, while the alluvial plain of central Kosovo is
more densely populated and characterized by open field landscapes (mostly agrarian with plots in
irregular forms and predominately planted with corn, maize, potatoes and forage crops), spangled
with settlements of various sizes. Close to Pristina and the KEK Power Plan, the anthropogenic
character of the landscape is intensified by the dense network of infrastructures (roads and power
lines).
The envisaged works on existing Gazivoda dam include small rehabilitation works related to
spillway gates and optimized operations and works on increased stability for protection against
landslides and unstable soils. Gazivoda dam is rock filled embankment dam which creates Gazivoda
Lake. It is located in the Mitrovica District, Northern Kosovo. The lake is surrounded by forested
hills and meadows and its shores are not populated. There are no nature protected areas located in
Mitrovica District.
IL Canal with Gazivoda dam present an existing infrastructure and the planned works will be
predominantly rehabilitation ones, therefore no negative, irreversible or lasting, impacts to landscape,
nature elements or environment are expected.
The proposed Mihaliq dam is located in Vushtrri District. The area is predominantly rural with
isolated farms and scattered settlements. The area for the emergency reservoir Mihaliq (ERM) lies in
both sides of the valley and is predominately agricultural (cereals and grazing) land. The area of
implementation of the future reservoir is about 30 ha and it is not inhabited.
ERM will be of large capacity approximately 3.7 million m3, with a dam about 20-25 m in height.
The relatively high dam results from the topography of the site selected for the planned reservoir
(deep and narrow). There are no protected areas in the vicinity of the proposed dam, nor anywhere in
Vushtrri District and no significant or sensitive species. The nearest village is located approximately
1 (one) km downstream from the dam. Besides the height of the proposed dam and nearby
a         downstream settlement, no other particular environmental risk factors have been identified relating to
the new reservoir (no impact on natural habitats, physical cultural objects, physical relocation of
population, etc.).
Social Safeguards - As the project will invest in the rehabilitation of the canal, one obvious impact
will be temporary land acquisition of the right of way to the canal and doing the rehabilitation works.
Depending on the feasibility study, and where the location of the short term storage will be
permanent, land acquisition impacts might be expected. For example if project will finance ERM
than there will be a need for expropriation of approximately 30ha (and much less likely involuntary
resettlement or demolition of structure in use) whereby 1/2 of land is cultivated only, with cereals.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Bekim Imeri (GSU03)
Natasa Vetma (GENO3)
Page 4 of 17


﻿6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The WB classified the project as category B project which
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               implies that the project will not cause long-lasting,
significant or/and adverse impacts to human health and
environment.
The environmental impacts are expected mostly from the
Component 1: Infrastructure Rehabilitation and
Modernization. Some construction works are also
envisaged in the Component 2: Water Resources
Protection and Management. Works on Gazivoda dam
and canal repair (sub-component 1 a) present works on
existing infrastructure and they include no widening or
extension works, only rehabilitation. Some access roads
might be extended.
National legislation does not call for ESIA for IL canal
lining or Gazivoda rehabilitation works. During the
project preparation, Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment Framework (ESIAF) with Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF) based on FS
findings and available technical documentation was
prepared as a form of environmental assessment for the
existing infrastructure and planned works. Based on
identified impacts and partly mitigation measures, process
based ESMF with templates and ToRs for EMP
checklists, EMPs and EIAs was prepared prior to the
appraisal. Based on the screening process of ESMF,
appropriate environmental due diligence documents will
be prepared during the project implementation.
Construction of the emergency reservoir at Mihaliq
(ERM) including its dam, might require full ESIA under
the Kosovo environmental legislation, depending on the
Ministry of Environment and Spatial Planning opinion.
Due to the size of the proposed Mihaliq dam and safety
risks, ESIAF was carried out based on component
preliminary designs and preliminary feasibility study
identifying issues requiring special attention during
preparation of full ESIA in accordance with national and
WB procedures.
The ESIAF identified major impacts and themes that
should be addressed in ERM ESIA. Based on these
concussions draft ToR for full ESIA was delivered as a
part of the document. The ERM ESIA, including site
specific EMP, will be prepared the during design period,
i.e. before the works on ERM commence as well as timely
Page 5 of 17


﻿disclosed and consulted with the public at least twice
through a website and public consultation meetings.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   No           The works envisaged on the existing IL canal, Gazivoda
4.04                                  dam or Mihailq dam will not impact any protected areas,
important habitats or fragile ecosystems. Gazivoda dam as
well as prospective Mihailiq dam are located in districts
(Mitrovica and Vusthrri) that encompass no protected or
sensitive areas on their territories. IL canal passes through
4 districts (Mitrovica, Vusthrri, Obiliq, Pristina) however,
neither Gazivoda dam or canal rehabilitation will claim
additional surfaces while ERM will be constructed on
predominantly anthropogenic land surfaces (agricultural
or deserted agricultural land). Development of ERM,
however, will pose a barrier to terrestrial animals which
was addressed in the ESIAF and will be reflected in
resulting environmental due diligence documents, ESIA
in particular.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No           Planned Gazivoda dam and water canal rehabilitation
works do not include widening or spreading to additional
land surfaces. Possible extension of access roads might
happened, but it is still not confirmed. ERM will be
developed in the valley of the Bencuk creek which does
not have forest communities present, only a small number
of individual trees and is comprised mostly from
agricultural land. Therefore, impact on the health and
quality of forests is not envisaged by ERM.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No            Increased efficiency of canal, foreseen decrease in losses
in the network and subsequent increased availability of
water resources could impact agriculture practices,
however, studies have shown that market access/
conditions, rather than water abundance, are the primary
constraint to agriculture in the service area. Increase in
amount of areas under irrigation is foreseen over time
therefore, however, increased availability of water is not
expected to lead to an expansion or intensification of
agriculture immediately, therefore this OP is not
triggered.
Physical Cultural        No           There are no cultural heritage sites or objects in the
Resources OP/BP 4.11                  vicinity of ILC according to ESIAF, and impact to
physical or cultural resources are not expected. The
chance findings due to earth works are, however, always
possible, which is reflected in the environmental due
diligence procedures and documents, meaning that chance
finds clauses are included to ESIAF with ESMF and
subsequently to EMPs and EMP Checklists.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   No
Page 6 of 17


﻿BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes        OP 4.12 is triggered because the area through which the
OP/BP 4.12                          canal passes is densely populated, so some of the
protection measures (e.g. fences along canal banks) are
likely to require some minor land acquisition, though not
expected to require any physical relocation. In addition,
land acquisition would probably be required for the
storage reservoir(s) if they are included in the project
(pending detailed designs). RPF is prepared to guide
expropriation for works to be defined and designed in the
following years. For every sub-project requiring land
acquisition, a sub-project-specific RAP will be prepared.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    Yes         The project envisages works (safety improvements) on
4.37                                Gazivoda dam and new construction of Mihaliq dam
(ERM development). Mihaliq dam is considered large (20
- 25 m h; 3.7 mil m3) and it is located in the valley of the
creek of Benquk only 1 km from the nearest downstream
settlement which presents a safety risk. For these reasons
OP/BP 4.37 is triggered. Pre-selection of Panel of
Experts (PoE) for the development of Mihailiq dam and
rehabilitation of Gazivoda dam has been completed. PoE
will be appointed in time to review all dam safety
documents, but possibly after the appraisal.
For Gazivoda dam, a plan for construction supervision
(CS) and quality assurance (QA) was prepared during
project preparation, as well as the Framework O&M and
EPP. For Mihaliq dam draft construction supervision
(CSP) and quality assurance plan (QAP); frameworks for
the Operation and Maintenance (O&M) plan and
Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) were prepared prior
to the appraisal. PoE must review all (Gazivoda and
Mihaliq) dam safety assessments and associated
Emergency Preparedness Plans (EPP) before the
development of detailed designs and site specific ESIA
(including ESMP).
Projects on International  Yes      Iber River is shared with Serbia both upstream and
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                downstream from IL canal so impacts to its water body
potentially present a trans-boundary impact issue. Iber is a
contributor to Black Sea basin.
As the proposed project, in the part of IL and Gazivoda
dam rehabilitation finances only repair / rehabilitation
works, it can be considered rehabilitation of existing /
ongoing scheme. For ERM, it is expected that the
development would only restore the original capacity of
the canal. Possible addition of equipment for better
management, and emergency or balancing reservoir along
Page 7 of 17


﻿the channel, would not change the purpose of the canal,
nor appreciably change the Iber-river water quantity or
quality.
The impact to trans-boundary waters was investigated on
two levels: (i) for impact of works on the canal and on
Gazivoda dam: per the advice from LEGEN, the team
sought an exemption from the notification as the
preliminary documentation indicated there was no
appreciable impact on the quantity or quality of the water
flowing back to Serbia. Moreover, the project would not
finance works that increase water consumption; and (ii)
for the development of Mihaliq dam and reservoir (ERM):
ESIAF and FS were developed and thereof, based on
preliminary analysis of the ERM impacts to downstream
waters , LEGEN was re-consulted on the notification
requirement. In more detail: The ERM reservoir's size
(3.7 million m3) would be as small as 1% of Gazivoda
reservoir. Canal operators are aware that the river flows
required by Serbia need to be maintained, including the
legally-mandated minimum environmental flow for the
Iber/Sitnica river, estimated at 0.50 m3/sec in monthly
average or 1.5 m3/sec in monthly peak, which can be met
given that the "as-built" canal discharge ranges from 5 to
15 m3/sec. Thus, expecting no appreciable harm to the
riparian countries, exception from the notification of
riparians was sought. The exception request for both
Gazivoda dam and IL canal rehabilitation as well as ERM
has been cleared by LEGEN.
After the detailed design and ESIA for the ERM, the
notification requirement would be re-assessed in
consultation with LEGEN (in case the findings deviate
from the preliminary findings of appraisal-stage FS and
ESIAF, which is not likely).
Projects in Disputed    No          Some administrative issues related to OP 7.60, might
Areas OP/BP 7.60                    occur due to the fact that Republic of Kosovo is not
recognized as an independent state by its immediate
neighbor and Ibar riparian country, Republic of Serbia. In
addition, Gazivoda dam, and part of the Canal, is located
in the Northern Kosovo, which does not recognize
National Government of Kosovo, and there is limited
accessibility for the representatives of the Republic of
Kosovo, as well as the WB team. However, LEGEC
concluded that, based on several agreements and accords
signed in 2012 and 2013, this policy would not apply.
Nevertheless, risks associated with problem
Page 8 of 17


﻿implementation because of the fact that the Bank team
and ILC Company has limited access to North of Kosovo
needs to be recognized. The team already discussed
various procurement measures to alleviate risk (hiring
local company, etc.)
O
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental and Social Assessment OP4.01
The project triggers OP 4.01. The World Bank classifies the project as category B project as the
project activities present no major environmental risks and no significant, unprecedented,
irreversible impacts to the environment are expected as a result of the project activities. Prior to
the appraisal ESIAF with ESMF was prepared and only Feasibility Study (FS) and SCADA detail
design were available which presented the basis for ESIAF development. Therefore, ESIAF, is a
rather technical framework reflecting FS and component-level preliminary designs. ESIAF serves
as initial environmental impact assessment for different components of the project. The impacts
are assessed based on field visits and pre-feasibility and feasibility studies available. ESIAF is
therefore conducted both for (i) Mihaliq emergency reservoir and dam and (ii) Gazivoda
rehabilitation and IL canal rehabilitation. The ESIAF provides baseline information and project
description for all components, and predicts impacts to the level possible depending on the level of
design. Mitigation measures are also proposed as part of the ESIAF, based on identified impacts
and description of works. ESIAF especially serves as preliminary ESIA for dam and reservoir as
full ESIA will be prepared later during the project implementation. It also identifies site
investigation and monitoring that needs to be done for the full ESIA and proposed ToR for the full
ESIA. Identified potential impacts of the dam and reservoir will be fully addressed in full ESIA
once all technical and other project details are known. The complementary ESMF, serves as
process oriented framework and defines type of environmental due diligence documents that need
to be prepared for different project components / activities. For small rehabilitation works, ESMF
provides template EMP checklist, prepared based on the impacts and mitigation measures
identified in ESIAF. ToRs and description of other type of due diligence document is also
provided.
The impacts associated with the canal rehabilitation and Gazivoda dam are small scale, temporary
and site specific, in a way typical for infrastructure rehabilitation works (noise, waste, resource
materials, etc.) therefore would be easily mitigated through implementation of respective site
EMPs.
The ESIAF however recognizes following: Main potential impacts of the Mihaliq reservoir will
result from the filling in the emergency reservoir. In association with this main impact will be the
change in regime from a highly oxygenated river stream to a lake with calm water and a risk of
accumulation of nutrients such as phosphorus and nitrogen. The Mihaliq dam is deemed a large
dam (due to terrain steep slopes) with the reservoir capacity around 3.7 million m3 and the dam
20-25 m high. Besides the height of the proposed dam and nearby downstream settlement (1 km
away), no other particular environmental risk factors have been identified relating to the new
reservoir (no impact on natural habitats, physical cultural objects, physical relocation of
population, etc.).
Page 9 of 17


﻿International Waterways OP 7.50
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 was initially triggered considering potential
O
Q)         impacts, amongst which, some could be labeled as trans-boundary impacts (e.g. potential impact to
velocity, water abundance and quality of water in the operational phase). The water in the IL Canal
is taken from the Iber river which, downstream from the reservoir and after its use in Kosovo,
returns to Serbia and flows into Morava River and further to Danube River. Adverse impacts on
the water body, including its quality and abundance, from the rehabilitation works on IL Canal and
safety upgrades on Gazivoda dam are not expected since the works are mostly rehabilitation
works, restoring the original capacity. It is also unlikely that Mihaliq emergency reservoir (ERM),
would impact features of downstream river courses. When constructed, ERM, with its reservoir's
size (approx. 3.7 million m3) would count as uptake as small as 1% of Gazivoda reservoir. The
current intake delivers about 3m3/s while the maximum assessed intake of the canal is 10.8m3/s.
This maximum presents a half of the originally designed intake capacity of 22 m3/s at head, which
again points to that Project activities implementation would merely restore the original capacity, or
part of the capacity, of the canal. Based on FS and ESIAF findings, expecting no appreciable
harm to the riparian countries, exception from the notification of riparians was sought and cleared
by LEGEN.
Dam Safety OP 4.37
The Component 1 includes development of a new dam (ERM) that is considered large and as such
the dam presents potential risk therefore Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 policy is triggered.
According to preliminary technical information, Mihaliq dam will be 600m long and 20-25 meters
high and the reservoir will accumulate 3.7mil. m3 or water. Although the terrain that is planned to
be flooded is not inhabited, the nearest settlement is located only 1 km downstream.
Disputed Areas OP 7.60
OP 7.60 Projects in Disputed Areas is not triggered for the Project, since Northern Kosovo, where
a part of the works will take place (e.g. Gazivoda Damand part of the IL Canal) does not officially
classify as a disputed area based on several agreements and accords signed in 2012 and 2013.
o          However, Republic of Kosovo is not recognized as an independent state by some districts in
Northern Kosovo as well as Republic of Serbia which can cause some administrative and access
issues presenting an implementation risk. Procurement and implementation arrangements will be
made to manage these risks.
Natural Habitats OP4.04
ESIAF analyses and pre-assessments showed that neither works on IL Canal and Gazivoda Dam
or Mihaliq Dam are located in PA, critical or sensitive areas or bordering them. The works on
existing infrastructure does not include uptake of new land or extensions. Development of ERM,
however, will pose a barrier to fauna which was addressed in the ESIAF and will be reflected in
full ESIA and mitigation or avoidance measures will be looked for in site specific ESMP. One
internationally protected bird species (white stork) was observed in the project area. The IUCN
classification of this species is Least Concern (LC) and its presence, impacts and eventual
mitigation measures will be further elaborated in the ESIA. Therefore, ESIAF findings concluded
no sensitive flora or fauna species or communities inhabit the area thus OP 4.04 Natural Habitats
Page 10 of 17


﻿was not triggered.
Forests OP 4.36
O
OP 4.36 was not triggered because rehabilitation works on IL canal, though passing along forests
in the northern part does not foresee widening of the canal thus this forest will not be affected.
Some small vegetation clearance for sanitation and Canal safety reasons will take place, but only
from the protective corridors. Some access roads might be extended but not in forest areas. The
construction of ERM is planned in the area comprised of agricultural land and other anthropogenic
land types.
Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12
The envisaged emergency reservoir Mihaliq (ERM), is considered relatively large, and the
topography of the terrain is requiring a high dam to create it. The preliminary design of the dam
and reservoir is not yet known and the risk assessment will follow the full ESIA which is
mandatory for this type of project under the current Kosovo environmental legislation. The works
on Mihaliq dam encompass (i) earth works including clearing the construction site, removal of
greenery, removal of top soil. As a result of these activities generation of large quantities of
mineral waste, organic waste and other types of waste is expected. (ii) Water management works
redirecting existing streams in order to conduct construction works are required and which may
cause waster turbidity, pollution with heavy metals, organic waste, suspended solids, cause
reduced oxygen presence in water and in general lower the water quality level which can
subsequently negatively affect animal as well as human health. (iii) Operating of heavy machinery
and transportation vehicles may result in increased noise and vibrations in the immediate
surrounding resulting in negative health effects to present workers and disturbance of animals. In
this specific case, amphibians, fish and birds (e.g. stork) will be mostly affected. (iv), Potential
influence on water quality and biological communities of both the lake (water reservoir) and the
Sitniza river subsidiary concerned are possible, but not yet known and will depend on the technical
design of the dam and reservoir. Other effects may also include: (v) Potential pollution of the
reservoir, particularly due to run-off and human activities; (vi) Deposit and spillage of domestic or
hazardous substances (pesticides), in the watershed and vicinity of the project, (vii) Impact to
a           ambient air due to heavy machinery during the construction and maintenance, but also changes in
water regime; (viii) Land cover and the stability of the soils; (ix) Landscape pollution, (x) Loss of
habitat which mostly consist of agricultural, anthropogenic areas.
Works related to sub-component 1 a, IL Canal and Gazivoda dam rehabilitation, since
encompassing rehabilitation works only and no additional works on widening or extension of the
IL canal will be financed, are expected to be smaller scale construction works (especially in
comparison to Mihaliq dam development). As such, no adverse significant, irreversible impacts
are expected to result from their implementation. Potential impacts will be localized and
temporary, predictable and typical for rehabilitation works: (i) Erosion in areas along the canal
which present a steep slope; (ii) Impacts from inadequate sewage systems in housing near the
canal and from work camps, (iii) Excavation of construction materials and all different kinds of
solid waste previously dumped near the IL canal, (iv) Vegetation removal, (v) Potential pollutant
discharges in the canal due to works; (vi) Noise and air emissions during the works; (vii) Animal
and human disturbance.
This also partially, and to the smaller scale, applies to and component 2 activities which envisages
Page 11 of 17


﻿only light concrete work and equipment purchase as those that might produce any environmental
impact. Aforementioned impacts are typical and predictable relatively easy to mitigate.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Many potential indirect impacts of potentially associated projects in the construction and
operational phase of the project have been discussed, including construction of Kosovo C power
plant, water treatment plants, possibility of increased irrigation, and more. The preliminary
assessments showed that these investments are predominantly stirred by other factors and
circumstances and would develop independently form the Water Security and Canal Protection
project. Potential impacts can be grouped in two themes: (i) potentially associated projects and (ii)
impacts from development of Mihaliq emergency reservoir, the second being already elaborated in
the previous section (II A. 1).
IL Canal and Gazivoda dam present existing and operating water distribution and management
infrastructure. Although these improvements will most certainly benefit already planned projects,
none of them occurred as a result of the planned IL Canal improvements. Works on this
infrastructure consist of repair and rehabilitation activities impacting, in the long term, mainly its
efficiency and water quality and both in the positive sense. Amongst other things, as a result of
project subcomponent 1 a implementation, improvements in water quality and abundance along the
IL Canal is expected. Additionally, even if a reservoir would be built along the IL Canal and
meeting the legally-mandated minimum environmental flow for the Iber/ Sitnica river, estimated at
0.50 m3/sec in monthly average or 1.5 m3/sec in monthly peak, can be easily accomplished given
that the "as-designed" canal discharge ranges from 3 to 15 m3/sec.
Currently, LC canal feeds 2 large secondary irrigation canals: Hamidi-Vasileve and Besi-
Gracanka. In theory, changes in water abundance could impact agriculture practices, however, it is
unlikely scenario in this case since: (i) studies have shown that market access/conditions, rather
than water, are the primary constraint to agriculture in the service area, (ii) no irrigation expansion
projects will be financed from this project, (iii) agricultural sector is not very developed in this part
of Kosovo and the Government of Kosovo has no specific plans to promote irrigation expansion in
the near future.
o
Although there is a number of planned off-takes from the Iber canal (a new power plant Kosovo C,
a new water supply and intake for Pristina and Mitrovice water supply), these planned investments
are not considered to be associated/linked with the present project because they are expected to
proceed with or without the canal upgrading. Each of the planned projects will have an EIA
carried out under national law and/or the requirements of involved IFIs (e.g. KFW) or private
investors.
Main existing road accessing the Mihaliq dam will probably be rehabilitated, and short stretch of
road constructed, due to planned construction works as well as the operation of dam. Impacts
related to increased accessibility of the area will be considered in the full ESIA.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Currently, it is not possible to close the Ib6r canal even for a few hours for maintenance, cleaning
or any unforeseen emergency. For this purpose option of several smaller reservoir vs ERM were
discussed and analyzed. The development of Mihaliq reservoir was chosen (although still not
confirmed) as favorable solution due to two main factors:
(i) The topography of the location allows building the reservoir with the required storage size
Page 12 of 17


﻿(around 3 million m3). This size can bridge demands from inter alia the new KRPP Power Plant,
the new treatment plant in Shkabaj, and irrigation peaks in case formerly-irrigated areas are
restored.
(ii)   There is no need for resettlement of inhabitants. The large surfaces of land are already
O
state owned (only a limited voluntary acquisition of farm lands will be sought).
In addition to unforeseen emergency, issues of: (i) bridging the peak demands, (ii) decreasing
water turbidity after rain episodes making water incompliant with bulk consumers demands such
as Pristina Water Company, and (iii) satisfying long-term increase in population and irrigation
were considered as well.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower, ILC, in line with the project categorization and preliminary environmental and
social screening as well as Feasibility Study for the prospective works and component-level
preliminary designs, prepared Environmental Impact Assessment Framework (ESIAF) with
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for both rehabilitation works on the
existing infrastructure (Gazivoda dam and water canal) and the planned new Mihaliq dam and
reservoir.
Based on project components, the following activities are subject to the ESIAF:
a.     Works for canal repair and increased stability and for protection against renewed physical
damage from landslides, pollution and unstable soils at canal works;
b.     Equipment for modernization and urgent repairs of the optimized operational schedule of
the Gazivoda reservoir and dam - guidance and timeline on what and when will be prepared for
the rehabilitation works;
c.     Development of Mihaliq emergency/balancing reservoirs along the canal - impacts and
mitigation measures that are identifiable at the feasibility stage, identification of missing
information and defining ToR for the ESIA to be conducted before construction commencement.
Kosovo environmental legislation does not require full ESIA for canal and dam rehabilitation
works therefore ESIAF presents impacts assessment for Gazivoda dam and IL Canal
rehabilitation, in the present environmental context and for known technical design. For Mihaliq
dam and emergency reservoir (ERM), ESIAF presents a preliminary assessment aiming at
identification of potential impacts that need special attention in the full ESIA and identifies site
investigation and monitoring that needs to be done for the full ESIA.
Based on ESIAF findings, ESMF was prepared as a guiding document which defines
environmental and social screening, mitigating, monitoring and auditing procedures and
management plans for the project activities. The documents required for different activities under
project include, EMP checklists, EMPs, and EIAs.
For Gazivoda dam and IL Canal rehabilitation appropriate due diligence draft document or
templates were prepared as a part of ESMF: (i) Site specific Environmental Monitoring Plan
(EMP) template, including environmental monitoring plan and (ii) overall EMP Checklist
prepared for the environmental management of the works related to all canal rehabilitation and
safety enhancement. While site specific EMPs are to be applied to construction and other works in
specific circumstances that can have more significant or lasting impact, EMP Checklist presented
in the ESIAF with ESMF is used for small scale works that have predictable, typical effect that
can be easily mitigated with standard and generally applicable measures. A particular EMP
Checklist would apply per section of canal on which works would be carried on. Both, EMP and
Page 13 of 17


﻿EMP Checklist will become an integral part of the bidding documentation. They should be
finalized by works contractor and supervising engineer, as well as approved by the ILC and WB
Environmental Specialist and disclosed, before commencement of works.
The suggested mitigation measures identified for ERM, will be reevaluated and adjusted based on
O
conclusions of full ESIA. For Mihaliq reservoir a full ESIA will be prepared according to Kosovo
environmental legislation, and according to WB procedures, during the project implementation.
The project will support installation of the new instrumentation plan and monitoring (as part of the
SCADA turnkey contract) to determine what if any other safety improvement measures are
required for Gazivoda dam. Therefore CS, QA, Framework O&M and EPP were prepared for
existing dam. PoE will prepare updated / detailed dam-safety assessments and the associated
safety plans, e.g. O&M, and EPP, during project implementation, but prior to works
commencement.
For Mihaliq dam (ERM), draft construction supervision (CSP) and quality assurance plan (QAP);
frameworks for the Operation and Maintenance (O&M) plan and Emergency Preparedness Plan
(EPP) were prepared prior to appraisal. Detailed Construction Supervision and Quality Assurance
Plan and Instrumentation plan; updated / detailed dam-safety assessments and the associated safety
plans (e.g. O&M plan and EPP) for Mihaliq dam should be prepared significantly prior to
preparation of detailed design and specific ESIA /ESMP.
The borrower prepared Resettlement Policy Framework to address potential land impacts and
acquisition temporary and permanent for both canal rehabilitation works and Emergency Reservoir
sub-project. ILC legal department will formally process any land acquisition for the need of the
project. However once the project implementation starts ILC will have to have external support to
be able to comply with World Bank Operation Policy 4.12.
Strengthening the ILC capacity is necessary to implement WB safeguards and the national
environmental requirements. The key safeguards personnel on the ILC-PIU (at least one
"safeguards officer") would be identified at project appraisal and most probably would be the head
of the Legal Department of ILC. The identified personnel would undergo WB safeguards training
in the first year of project implementation (via the project budget, component 3). A consortium of
international-and-national implementation consultants would be recruited under competitive
selection after project approval, to support the Government/PIU with detailed design, safeguards,
a          and construction supervision. The safeguards officer on the ILC-PIU (legal department) would be
tasked with the overall oversight of project safeguards (in coordination with the Ministry of
Environment and Spatial Planning), including overseeing the activities and deliverables of the
aforementioned safeguards implementation consultants. [Prior to project appraisal, the Bank
assisted ILC to undertake "advance procurement" of an individual international expert, selected
competitively, to help the ILC-PIU with all procurement activities, including procuring the
aforementioned project-implementation consortium as well as the dams Panel of Experts (POE) as
per OP4.37].
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders to the project and consultation procedures are Iber-Lepenc Canal Corporation,
Ministry of Economic Development, and Ministry of Environment and Spatial Planning.
The ESIAF with ESMF, and RPF were disclosed on February 10, 2016 on ILC web sites where
they remained available to public for two weeks. Documents were also available in hard copy on
Page 14 of 17


﻿premises of ILC, Vushtrii municipality as well in Norhern part of the Kosovo more specifically
Zubin Potok in English, Albanian and Serbian language. In parallel with publishing the ESIAF
with ESMF, call for comments was issued, with electronic and postal addresses at disposal for
sending comments. Public consultations would take place in Pristina on February 26, 2016,
Zubin Potok on February 25, 2016, and Vushtrii municipality on February 23, 2016. All relevant
comments and Public Consultation Minutes would be included in the final version of ESMF.
The WB disclosure and consultation procedures apply also to the other environmental due
diligence documentation to developed during the project implementation such as EIA for Mihailiq
reservoir and relevant EMPs or EMP Checklists for works. Public consultation invitations,
announcements, list of attendants, summaries of comments received, etc. should be collected and
attached to the project/sub-project ESIAs/ESMFs/EMPs for Infoshop disclosure. The documents
are only considered final when public consultation minutes and disclosure conclusions are
included to the document.
Prior to appraisal following Dam Safety documents were disclosed: a) For Gazivoda dam:
Construction Supervision (CSP) and Quality Assurance Plan (QAP); Framework Operation and
Maintenance (O&M) plan and Framework Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP); b) For the new
dam: draft Construction Supervision (CSP) and Quality Assurance Plan (QAP); Framework
Operation and Maintenance (O&M) plan and Framework Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP).
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              12-Jan-2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                           10-Feb-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Kosovo                                                   10-Feb-2016
Comments: The ESIAF with ESMF is available on the web site of ILC from February 10, 2016
for two weeks. In the same time, a hard copy of the documents was available for
consultations at the reception of ILC premises in Pristina, Zubin Potok and Vushtrii
municipality.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              12-Jan-2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                           10-Feb-2016
"In country" Disclosure
Kosovo                                                   10-Feb-2016
Comments: The RPF is available on the web site of ILC from February 10, 2016 for two weeks.
In the same time, a hard copy of the documents was available for consultations at
the reception of ILC premises in Pristina, Zubin Potok and Vushtrii municipality.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Page 15 of 17


﻿C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [    ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?            Yes [  ] No [X]     TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [ ] No [ ] TBD [ X]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                     Yes [ X] No [    ]  NA [    ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent  Yes[X]   No[    ]  NA
Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and Yes[X]  No[       NA
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?   Yes [  ] No [X]     NA [    ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [ X] No [    ]  NA [    ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                  Yes [X] No [     ]  NA [    ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Page 16 of 17


﻿Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes[X]  No[     NA
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes[X]  No[   NA
o          in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]  No[       NA[
0          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[      NA[
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ahmed Shawky M. Abdel Ghany
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                   Date: 18-Feb-2016
Practice Manager/     Name: Steven N. Schonberger (PMGR)         Date: 18-Feb-2016
Manager:
Page 17 of 17


