                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC1118

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Jun-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Jun-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Vietnam                          Project ID:      P150060
                            Project Name:      Vietnam Enhancing Teacher Effectiveness (P150060)
                            Task Team          Michel J. Welmond
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          09-Nov-2015                      Estimated        15-Mar-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEDDR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General education sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for the knowledge economy (50%), Education for all (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       100.00               Total Bank Financing:       95.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             5.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   95.00
                              Total                                                                        100.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to build capacity to assess and improve teachers’ effectiveness
                           through quality professional development delivered in schools.
                           C. Project Description
                           Herewith summarizes the underlying rationale of the proposed project:

                           •       The FCER intends for all Vietnamese students to obtain higher-order cognitive and
                         behavioral skills, such as the ability to think critically, apply knowledge from many subject areas to
                         solve practical problems, work in teams, and convincingly communicate verbally and in writing.
                         •        Developing these skills will require a range of sophisticated pedagogical approaches that can
Public Disclosure Copy




                         be tailored to the various learning needs of a diverse population of students (nationally, regionally,
                         locally and in schools and classroom)
                         •        Success will depend on whether teachers adopt a professional profile that includes: the
                         ability to shift approaches to address unforeseen challenges; evaluate and adjust teaching practice in
                         terms of learning outcomes; remain up to date on latest research and practices; ensure that all
                         students learn; and most importantly, work collaboratively with other teachers.
                         •        In order for teachers to possess and maintain these qualities, the teacher training and support
                         service should provide, inter alia:
                         o        Continuous training and guidance at the work place provided for the school team and the
                         individual teacher.
                         o        Easily accessible and usable knowledge about innovations and best practice to meet real-time
                         challenges at the school and classroom.
                         o        Assessment and feedback to all stakeholders that can drive the development, implementation
                         and modification of teacher training and support services.
                         •        To provide such support in a systematic and inclusive manner, the government has chosen to
                         develop a Vietnam Teacher Education Network (VTEN)
                         •        The VTEN will encompass national teacher training universities and departments, regional
                         teacher training colleges, DOETs and BOETs and schools that collaborate in order to meet a
                         common goal. Its overall purpose is to ensure that teachers possess the qualities and receive adequate
                         assistance to meet the new expectations proposed in the FCER and those of any subsequent reform
                         programs.
                         •        National Teacher Training Universities and departments selected because of their reputation
                         and capacity will serve as key VTEN institutions that steward the collaboration of Network members
                         located within a defined catchment area.
                         •        Since networks are not hierarchical structure, the Government intends to put in place
                         incentives for ley VTEN institutions to work with other members of the Network towards to meet
Public Disclosure Copy




                         specified goals.

                         National teacher training universities and university departments will provide intellectual leadership,
                         creating innovative training content and delivery mechanisms, developing and curating demand-
                         driven knowledge management mechanisms, furnishing technical guidance to other Network actors,
                         assuring the quality of teacher training and services, and conducting relevant research. Regional
                         teacher training colleges will design and provide demand-driven training and support services for
                         teachers and teacher trainees. The DOETs and BOETs will coordinate training and services, ensuring
                         that teachers receive customized support and training to meet school-based needs. The MOET/
                         DTEM will provide strategic management of the Network, including the development and
                         maintenance of a Teacher Management Information System and a Knowledge Management Facility.

                         In a first phase, the MOET has selected seven national teacher training universities and university
                         departments to be the first “key VTEN institutions” in defined catchment area. Each catchment area
                         will approximately cover two provinces (on average), their districts and schools and selected teacher
                         training colleges.

                         The Department of Teachers and Education Managers (DTEM), which is responsible for developing
                         and overseeing the implementation of national teacher policy, will oversee and manage the
                         development of the TVEN and provide national level guidance. Furthermore, the DTEM will
                         establish and manage a teacher education management information system and a knowledge
                         management facility that can be shared by all VTEN members. Finally, the DTEM will promote
                         exchanges and collaboration between the key VTEN institutions.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Considering the non-hierarchical nature of the VTEN, the Project will provide grants to the seven
                         key institutions that aim to promote partnerships with regional teacher training colleges and DOETs
                         to provide quality and relevant teacher training and support services. The key VTEN institutions will
                         make proposals that explicitly address the kind of teacher training and support strategies indicated
                         above for their respective catchment area.

                         The partnership proposals will be reviewed by the DTEM and, upon agreement, approved and signed
                         as a performance contract between MOET and the respective key VTEN institution. The proposals
                         will finance the implementation of identified activities and capacity building of the key institutions to
                         take on their new functions.

                         The MOET has indicated that the project should finance four types of interventions or inputs for the
                         seven key TVEN institutions and the DTEM. These are: (i) Establishing new organizational
                         structures; (ii) Helping the key VTEN institutions prepare new curricula to train teachers and teacher
                         trainees; (iii) Reinforcing the capacity of the human resources of the key institutions and the DTEM;
                         and (iv) Upgrading facilities and equipment of the key institutions and of the DTEM. Partnership
                         proposals will allocate resources for these inputs and actions.

                         2. Preliminary Description of Project Components

                         The project will consist of four components that respectively aim to: (i) develop the organizational
                         structure and policy environment needed for the success establishment and functioning of the
                         Vietnam Teacher Education Network; (ii) put in place a mechanism to finance partnership projects
                         implemented by the seven key VTEN institutions; (iii) reinforce the human resource capacity of the
                         seven key VTEN institutions; and (iv) establish and sustain the project management structure for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Bank-financed operation within the DTEM.

                         Component 1: Establish the organizational structures and policy framework necessary for the
                         successful functioning of the Vietnam Teacher Education Network:

                         Whereas it is expected that the individual partnership proposals will finance the reorganization of the
                         seven key VTEN institutions, this component will provide for the development of the change and
                         strategic management capacity of the DTEM, which will be responsible for the overall VTEN
                         initiative. The component will also finance the development of a Teacher Management Information
                         System (TMIS) to track and evaluate the provision and impact of teacher training and support within
                         the Network. It will also support the development of knowledge management mechanisms that will
                         facilitate information flow within and between key VTEN institutions. In this regard, the component
                         will support the development of IT platforms and related interventions to make knowledge resources
                         easily available to all teachers, education managers, lecturers, officers, technical experts and other
                         interested stakeholders throughout the Network.
                         The project will also facilitate the development and implementation of necessary strategies and
                         policies, for example:

                         •       The rationalization of teacher training colleges, university and departments in line with the
                         new distribution of teacher needs – geographically and in terms of expertise and specialization.
                         •        The modification of teacher academic degree programs to prepare the pedagogical, subject
                         and professional expertise of teachers in line with new learning objectives. This will include a larger
                         requirement for supervised school-based practicums.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        The development of new teacher standards that reflect the new professional competencies
                         expected of teachers and can be used as incentives and for guiding training content and planning
                         training and support interventions.
                         •        The development of incentives (for teachers, schools and members of the Network) to
                         promote school-based training and support services, and establish more horizontal and vertical
                         collaboration between Network actors.

                         Component 2: Building the Vietnam Teacher Education Network through partnership projects:

                         This component will finance partnership projects proposed by key VTEN institutions. Each key
                         VTEN institution will receive technical assistance on how to prepare proposals and specific criteria
                         on approaches, outcomes to be achieve, eligible and ineligible expenses, and reporting obligations.

                         Potential topics of Network partnership projects include:

                         •        Development of school-based training and support programs for that are co-designed, co-
                         implemented and co-evaluated by Network teaching training colleges, DOETs and BOETs (e.g., for
                         the roll out of the new curriculum).
                         •        Joint training needs assessments for teachers working in schools with specific characteristics
                         (overcrowded, poorly resourced, lacking key infrastructure), found in particular locations (industrial
                         zones, remote rural areas), serving specific population (ethnic minorities) that would lead to
                         coordinated responses from the Network.
                         •        Design of programs that address specific issues (e.g., delivery the new curriculum to ethnic
                         minorities; preventing dropout within new migrant communities in urban areas; ensuring that gender
                         equality is improved or maintained in terms of learning outcomes).
                         •        Development of evaluation capacity that can examine the effectiveness of training and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         support services.
                         •        Development of ICT based teacher training and support services that support and promote
                         the new teacher professional profile.

                         Component 3: Develop the capacity of the technical, research, managerial and teaching staff of the
                         key VTEN institutions:

                         If the key VTEN institutions are to be effective stewards, the professional profile of their staff must
                         also change. Lecturers, administrators, managers, researchers, program developers, and evaluators
                         should also adopt a problem-based approach, be continuously informed by latest research and
                         practice, and work collaboratively. To help build such competencies, this component will finance:

                         •        Technical assistance and provision of training, upgrading and support services to key VTEN
                         institutions staff.
                         •        Staff-exchange programs between key VTEN institutions.
                         •        Carefully targeted study tours for key VTEN institution staff.
                         •        Technical assistance to help the key VTEN institutions prepare viable proposals to be funded
                         under component 2.

                         Component 4: Project management
                           The DTEM will be responsible for overall management of the Project. This component will provide
                           technical assistance and other support services to the DTEM to create the appropriate Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           management structure and develop the overall accountability framework for the VTEN, including
                           Monitoring and Evaluation mechanisms (for both outcomes and for the implementation of
                           partnership projects).
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The Project will be implemented in north, central and south regions of Vietnam. Specific locations of
                           the seven selected Teacher Effectiveness Institutions and salient physical characteristics will be
                           determined during project preparation.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           MOET has become familiar with Bank safeguard procedures and practices since MOET has
                           successfully partnered with the Bank on a number of projects. Current portfolio of education project
                           includes The School Readiness Promotion Project (SRPP), The School Education Quality Assurance
                           Program (SEQAP), The Vietnam Escuela Nueva Project (VNEN), and Russian Education Aid for
                           Development (READ) (READ is closed, please take this out). Project that closed in the last seven
                           years include the Primary Education for Disadvantaged Children Project, the Primary Teacher
                           Development Project, the Support for National Education-for-all Plan, Vietnam Higher Education
                           Project I, Vietnam Higher Education Project II, and Higher Education Development Policy.
                           Additional capacity building for the client and implementing agencies as well as on-the-job training
                           will be provided to ensure adequate capacity for the review and implementation of safeguard
                           policies.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Giang Tam Nguyen (GSPDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         Yes           The project will finance upgrading facilities and
                           OP/BP 4.01                                     equipment of the key institutions and of the DTEM,
                                                                          so it may cause negative environmental and social
                                                                          impacts associated with civil works. Negative
                                                                          environmental and social impacts associated with
                                                                          civil works may include generation of noise, dust and
                                                                          waste, traffic and social disturbance. However, these
                                                                          impacts are expected to be small, localized,
                                                                          temporary and mitigable. No new construction
                                                                          activities are proposed under this The project is
                                                                          categorized as a Category B. A comprehensive
                                                                          Environmental Codes of Practice ECOPs/
                                                                          Environmental Management Plan EMPs appear to be
                                                                          the right safeguard instrument for various typologies
                                                                          of rehabilitation/upgrading activities.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04      No            The project is proposed to take place in existing
                                                             university premises. As such, the project will not
                                                             convert or degrade any known natural habitats
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No    The activities of upgrading education facilities and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             equipment will be implemented within existing
                                                             university premises, and thus will not have adverse
                                                             impacts on natural or plantation forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No    The project will neither finance procurement of any
                                                             pesticides and laboratory chemicals nor cause
                                                             increased use of these substances as a result of the
                                                             project.
                         Physical Cultural Resources   No    The project will not affect any physical cultural
                         OP/BP 4.11                          resources as upgrading education facilities and
                                                             equipment will take place within the existing
                                                             Teacher Effectiveness Institutions. In any event, a
                                                             chance finds procedure will be prepared and included
                                                             in the ESMF, site-specific subproject EMPs, and
                                                             bidding and contractual documents.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      Yes   OP 4.10 is triggered given the nature of this project.
                         4.10                                Component 2 will finance partnership projects
                                                             proposed by Network key institutions. Potential and
                                                             expected topics for the proposed Network
                                                             partnership projects may include joint training needs
                                                             assessments for teachers working in schools with
                                                             specific characteristics, found in particular locations,
                                                             and serving specific population (ethnic minorities)
                                                             that would lead to coordinated responses from the
                                                             Network. The topics may also include design of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             programs that address specific issues found of their
                                                             respective catchment area (e.g., delivery the new
                                                             curriculum to ethnic minorities; ensuring that gender
                                                             equality is improved or maintained in terms of
                                                             learning outcomes). These initiatives will be
                                                             specified at the project appraisal stage.
                                                             However, recent development studies in Vietnam
                                                             have indicated a growing concern about the widening
                                                             gap in education opportunities and outcomes
                                                             between Kinh-dominated areas and ethnic
                                                             minorities-dominated ones. To address this concern,
                                                             the above-mentioned joint training needs
                                                             assessments and programs should be designed and
                                                             implemented so as to seek specific and effective
                                                             measures that are culturally appropriate to ethnic
                                                             minorities beneficiaries involved. This includes
                                                             teachers, teacher trainees and students, so that they
                                                             can enjoy more inclusive benefits, especially more
                                                             equal education opportunities and outcomes, from
                                                                                                                        the financed partnership initiatives. In addition, the
                                                                                                                        design of needs assessments and programs financed
                                                                                                                        under Component 2 should reflect gender analysis/
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        monitoring in order to improve gender balance in
                                                                                                                        both learning opportunities and outcomes amongst
                                                                                                                        the related ethnic minorities beneficiary groups.

                                                                                                                        A robust social assessment will be prepared for the
                                                                                                                        Project in order to identify any relevant social issues,
                                                                                                                        such as those pertaining to inclusive education of
                                                                                                                        ethnic minorities, taking into account also gender and
                                                                                                                        disability.
                                                                                                                        The findings of social assessment will be translated
                                                                                                                        into a bias-avoidance framework in which an Ethnic
                                                                                                                        Minority Development Plan EMDPs/IPPs will be
                                                                                                                        included to (a) ensure that the ethnic minority
                                                                                                                        peoples receive social and economic benefits that are
                                                                                                                        culturally appropriate; (b) avoid potentially adverse
                                                                                                                        effects on the ethnic minority communities; and (c)
                                                                                                                        minimize, mitigate, or compensate for such effects.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                No                         Component 2 will finance partnership projects
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                proposed by Network key institutions, including joint
                                                                                                                        training needs assessments for teachers working in
                                                                                                                        schools with specific characteristics (overcrowded,
                                                                                                                        poorly resourced, lacking key infrastructure), found
                                                                                                                        in particular locations, serving specific population
                                                                                                                        that would lead to coordinated responses from the
                                                                                                                        Network. However, no construction activities are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        proposed under the project that are outside the
                                                                                                                        confines of existing universities. Therefore, the
                                                                                                                        project will not involve involuntary taking of land
                                                                                                                        and involuntary restrictions of access to legally
                                                                                                                        designated parks and protected areas.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         The project will not involve activities relating to
                                                                                                                        construction or rehabilitation of any dam and is not
                                                                                                                        vulnerable in any way to any upstream dam.
                                 Projects on International      No                                                      The project is not implemented on international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The project is not located in any disputed areas.
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Dec-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             Safeguard-related documents will be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in-
                             country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to
                             potentially affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader(s): Name: Michel J. Welmond
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                                   Date: 18-Jun-2015
                           Practice Manager/    Name: Harry Anthony Patrinos (PMGR)                       Date: 30-Jun-2015
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
