INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR13279
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Apr-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Ghana                      Project ID:  P118112
Project Name: Ghana Skills and Technology Development Project (P118112)
Task Team       Peter Darvas
Leader(s):
Estimated       06-Dec-2010                Estimated    29-Mar-2011
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDDR                       Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         General industry and trade sector (44%), Vocational training (39%), Public
administration- Education (11%), Tertiary education (4%), Public
administration- Information and communications (2%)
Theme:          Education for the knowledge economy (38%), Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprise support (25%), Improving labor markets (20%), Technolo gy
diffusion (17%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
U        Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                   No
Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      80.00            Total Bank Financing:   70.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              10.00
International Development Association (IDA)                     70.00
Total                                                           80.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
Page 1 of 7


﻿The project's development objective is to improve demand-driven skills development and increase
adoption of new technologies in selected economic sectors.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
O
U        The project's development objective is to improve demand-driven skills development and increase
adoption of new technologies in selected economic sectors.
O
3. Project Description
The proposed operation is a five-year investment complementing ongoing government reforms and
programs. The proposed GSTDP will combine interventions to improve the institutional framework
and overall capacities of the Technical and Vocational Education Training (TVET) and Science,
Technology and Innovation (STI) systems while promoting demand-driven training opportunities and
improved linkages between private sector employers and training institutions through a competitive
fund. The project will target programs to provide skills and technology to selected industries. These
industry-focused programs would be designed so that they could be replicated in other industries as
needs and priorities evolve over the medium and long term, including beyond the duration of the
project.
Component 1: Institutional Strengthening of Skills Development (estimated base cost US$4
million). The objective of this component is to strengthen the governance and capacity of providers
of skills development to more effectively rational ize and coordinate relevant training activities to
meet the demands of the labor market. Support will be provided to strengthen the Council for
Technical and Vocational Education and Training (COTVET) and key elements of their strategic pr
ogram including the development of a national skills strategy, a comprehensive information system
on TVET and labor market observatory, support the guidelines f or developing the National
Qualifications Framework and Competency Based Training and support various policy studies. The
project will also provide technical assistance to key training institutions in priority economic sectors.
Component 2: Institutional Strengthening of Science and Technology Development (estimated base
cost $4 million). The objectives of this component are to (i) strengthen the planning, management,
and coordination of national science, technology and innovation (STI) policies and programs in order
to make efficient use of resources and complement the national economic development plan; and (ii)
support technology development and diffusion that is more responsive to the needs of the economy
by enhancing interactions between selected research institutes, university departments, and their
external clients (e.g., private sector), thereby encouraging domestic innovation.
Component 3: Financing of Skills and Technology Development Programs through the Skills
Development Fund (estimated base cost US$50 million). The objective of this component is to
finance skills and technology development programs in prioritized economic sectors through a
demand-driven skills development fund (SDF) managed by COTVET. The Fund represents the main
project instrument to achieve the government's long term objectives of supporting both demand-
driven skills and technology development which requires productive and strategic partnerships
between firms, service providers and industry associations. By focusing on enterprise development,
stimulating demand and encouraging cost-sharing, the SDF will assure that activities are focused on
the economic agenda and that the demand for skills and technology increases. This in turn would also
lead to more relevant supply of skills and technology services as well as cost-sharing between
employers and training and technology providers. Furthermore, the competitive and transparent
financing process would enable the Government to focus on coordination and quality assurance
instead of being a provider of such services itself. The SDF also sets up a framework for harmonized
Page 2 of 7


﻿donor support while ensuring that technology development is well integrated with skills
development.
SDF Funding windows: The SDF established by COTVET has three existing funding windows
U         aimed at skills development. The first window focuses on larger scale skills development for
medium and large enterprises. The second window focuses on smaller scale skills development,
mostly for micro and small enterprises in the informal sector, and the third window focuses on
innovative training approaches. For the GSTDP, the fund will open a fourth window to support
partnerships between industry and technology providers. An SDF manual prov ides the guidelines
and details for accessing, managing and reporting on SDF grants.
Component 4: Project Managementand Monitoring and Evaluation (estimated base cost US$5
million): The objective of this component is to provide effective implementation of the project by
establishing a project support unit embedded within COTVET that manages all development
partner project funds. The Project Support  Unite (PSU) will be a small group of dedicated staff
assisting COTVET and all participating ministries for effective coordination and monitoring and
evaluation , as well as the implementation of an information and communications strategy. T he
PSU will also support and report to the Project Steering Committee. The technical support for
implementation includes a team of short and long-term consultants, specializing in project
implementation (including project management, financial management, procurement, environmental
and social issues, and M&E), resident in COTVET, and providing regular support to all
participating ministries, agencies and industry associations. The capacity building support for
implementation would begin during the project preparation stage and necessary training would b
e provided to project implementers. For the monitoring and evaluation, COTVET wi 11 continue to
update data to facilitate accurate reporting on the key progress indicators identified in the results
framework. Most of the data for monitoring project outcomes will come from regular project reports,
key surveys and the labor market observatory. This data will be supplemented by project preparatory
studies in key economic sectors and a baseline survey undertaken prior to effectiveness.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The beneficiaries of the Skills Development Fund will include employers, employees, industry
associations, public and private training institutes, universities, and other agencies engaged in
technology development throughout the country. In the short and medium-term, the project will
benefit employers and employees of designated economic sectors who gain additional skilled
employment, higher earnings, and improved productivity. In the medium to long-term, it will benefit
a larger group of economic actors through better access to modern training and technology
services as an outcome of an improved institutional structure and policy regime.
The project will mostly fund training and technical assistance. The project may finance minor
rehabilitation of existing buildings or construction of new buildings on existing sites - work that will
be guided by applicable local and national laws and regulations. The project will also finance training
equipment, technology and consulting services. The project will not finance projects that require
involuntary land acquisition nor will it deprive people of access to their usual means of livelihood.
No significant adverse environmental or social impacts  are anticipated.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Beatrix Allah-Mensah (AFCW1)
Demba Balde (GSURR)
Page 3 of 7


﻿Felix Nii Tettey Oku (GENDR)
Gloria Malia Mahama (GSURR)
Martin Fodor (GENDR)
0
Q         6. Safeguard Policies  Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental          No
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36     No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural      No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP   No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed   No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
0
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
O
The project is rated as a Category B. Under Component 3 the project was expected to provide
financing for grants that will be used towards small-scale rehabilitation within already existing
structures or the construction of new structures. At appraisal there was also expected to have
minor rehabilitation of existing infrastructure under components one and two. The environmental
and social impacts of the rehabilitation were expected to be minor. GSTDP were not expected to
finance any subprojects resulting in the involuntary acquisition of land, loss of physical and
economic assets, and/or loss of livelihoods.
In February 2015, the Government indicated that the minor renovation planned under component 3
changed into a construction of a new building for the Science, Technology and Innovation
Directorate. The Government submitted an environmental safeguard and social safeguard
mitigation plan, which is attached to the restructuring package. Upon review, the Bank found the
level of assessment and proposed mitigation actions within the EMP is consistent with the scope of
civil works baring some minor edits/formatting to allow for disclosure. The geotechnical report
provides additional information (ground information, type of piling, foundation design, details of
civil works etc.) to help review the EIA but does not itself address issues on environmental
safeguards so there is no need to review it as a stand alone document.
Page 4 of 7


﻿Overall, the proposed Project is expected to have a positive social impact. The promotion of firm
growth and development are key sources of economic and employment growth, which in turn
contribute to poverty reduction.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Minor impacts associated with rehabilitation and some newer construction may include noise,
dust, possible water pollution, drainage issues, burrow pits and safety issues. These impacts will
be mitigated by ensuring that all burrow pits are back-filled, that construction workers adhere to
the safety plan, that water points are protected from accidental contamination and that there is an
adequate sanitation and waste water plan in place to treat waste from the new buildings. The
detailed impact and mitigation plan can be found in the ESMF.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
To avoid resettlement (even though this possibility is covered in the ESMF), the project focuses
on using existing buildings and land that are Government or privately owned. In addition, a
negative list will be created to ensure that project activities do not trigger resettlement. The STI
building construction scheduled as mentioned above is being planned on the place of an existing
Government owned garage. The ESMP attached includes measures to address the issue of street
vendors and squatters whose kiosk and livelihood is affected.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The measures undertaken by the borrower include the provision of an ESMF, capacity building
for environmental management and the provision of an operational manual that includes a negative
list of activities that cannot be funded, particularly those that may negatively impact the
environment and communities.
Through Component 3 the Skills Development Fund may finance subprojects that require
rehabilitation and construction of new buildings on already-owned premises. To ensure proper
assessment and mitigation of the potential adverse environmental and social impacts of activities
under the Fund, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be in place to
guide the implementation agency on how to address any environmental and social impacts of
project investments. Under the Education Sector Project (EdSeP) completed in 2011, an ESMF
was prepared in 2003 by the Ghana Institute of Management and Public Administration (GIMPA).
The scope of potential activities for the planned project is likely to be similar to some of the
current investments under EdSEP, therefore the government has decided to update the existing
ESMF to detail the safeguard procedures that would apply to the proposed GSTDP. The
operational manual for the SDF will include a negative list of items that may not be funded,
especially those items that would cause environmental issues and/or trigger additional safeguards
(e.g., pesticide management, resettlement). In addition, the members of the Project Steering
Committee a nd the Skills Development Fund Committee, and the groups of potential contractors
are to be provided with Environmental Awareness Training. For the last two groups the training
would also be aimed at developing and improving on skills to screen for site selection and
potential environmental and social impacts, to be able to comprehend and take mitigation
measures and steps for monitoring of potential impact. Finally, close monitoring by the PSU will
ensure that activities comply with the ESMF and if necessary, an Environmental Management
Plan will be developed.
Page 5 of 7


﻿The project will adopt a three-pronged approach to promoting and addressing social inclusion by
including: a robust outreach and communication program to ensure that a broad range of actors
throughout the project target areas will be famili ar with the goals and objectives of the project; a
funding window to the informal sector which will provide access to training to less skilled workers
O
and owner s of small-scale enterprises; and attention to monitoring participation of beneficiaries
by firm size and gender.
O
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders include employers and employees in the formal and informal sectors,
industry associations, public and private training institutes, universities, and other agencies
engaged in technology development. Extensive outreach will be conducted priorto the call for
proposals and will include discussions a round safeguard policies regarding what can and cannot
be funded under the SDF. The ESMF was disclosed in country and at the Infoshop. Already,
notices have appeared on line and in some key newspapers and the ESMF will continue to be
available in public locations.
B. Disclosure Requirements
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
O
C.         place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Peter Darvas
Approved By
Page 6 of 7


﻿Practice Manager/    Name: Meskerem Mulatu (PMGR)             Date: 01-May-2015
Manager:
P
Pae7o0


