INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC1 156
Country:         Philippines                Project ID:   P153042
Project Name:    inclusive Partnerships for Agricultural Competitiveness (P 153042)
Task Team        Rabih H. Karaky
Leader(s):
Estimated        30-Jun-2015                Estimated     29-Jan-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFADR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (30%), Agro-industry,
marketing, and trade (20%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (20%),
Agricultural extension and research (15%), Irrigation and drainage (15%)
Theme(s):        Rural markets (30%), Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Rural non-farm
income generation (20%), Other rural development (10%), Rural policies and
institutions (10%)
Financing (In USD Million)
U
Total Project Cost:     231.72             Total Bank Financing:   100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                        131.72
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development           100.00
Total                                                           231.72
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The higher level objective of the project is to contribute to rural poverty reduction, job creation, and
increased rural economic growth and households' incomes in the targeted agrarian reform
community (ARC) clusters. While the PDO may be subject to refinement over the course of project


﻿preparation, the proposed PDO is to improve access to markets and enhance the competitiveness of
smallholder farmers in the targeted ARCs. This would be achieved by strengthening farmer
organizations, investing in productive partnerships, and upgrading support services delivery.
C. Project Description
Achievement of the PDO would be measured by the following indicators:
1)     Targeted Farmers Organizations (FOs) adopting improved practices in production and
business/financial management.
o       2)     Increase in the volume of sales from productive partnerships.
3)     Reduction in post-harvest losses in key commodities supported by the project.
Project Description:
The project would enhance the linkage of farmers to viable markets and strengthen the productive
partnerships between FOs and buyers by providing technical assistance, matching grants, and
necessary support infrastructure. The project would work with small FOs to enhance their technical,
operational, and managerial capacity, and with larger FOs and their rural enterprises to engage in
productive partnerships as well as help them develop into local business development service
providers. It would champion an inclusive and beneficiary led selection of what the project would
help support.
1.     Description
It is expected that the project would cover 50 ARC clusters across 44 provinces. The estimated
number of beneficiaries is 300,000, including beneficiaries in poor municipalities. The total size of
the project is about USD231.72 million including USD100 million from the World Bank loan. The
proposed lending instrument is the Investment Project Financing. The project would have the
following three components.
Component I: Support Services to Enhance Market Linkages
0
Extension and Organizational Development - This sub-component would provide technical training
and capacity building to FOs through an approach similar to Farmer Field School approach (FFS)
which could be the vehicle for extension services. Training would focus on Good Agricultural
Practices (GAP), Integrated Pest Management (IPM), on-farm soil and water management, quality
and safety certification, and postharvest management. Funding would be provided to adopt/
disseminate new varieties/technologies. This sub-component would also finance the efforts to
empower and organize the farmers into producers groups through community consultations and
development activities.
Business Development Services - Support would be provided to FOs/ rural enterprises on all aspects
of managing their business affairs including business planning, accounting and auditing practices,
loan applications, etc. Training would be facilitated though the recruitment of local business
development service providers (NGOs, agri-universities, bigger FOs, etc.) who would train the FOs.
The sub-component would also provide support to FOs to prepare their investments/business plans
for submission under the project to avail of the matching grants, either solely or jointly with a private
enterprise as part of a productive alliance.
Land Tenure Improvement Services - The lack of clear land ownership rights could constitute a
hindrance to farmers being able to maximize the full potential of any economic activity currently


﻿undertaken or those that may develop in the future. This sub-component would provide support to
strengthen land tenure improvement services. More specifically, it would provide advisory and
financial assistan ce to the FOs and other smallholders in the subdivision of their collective
Certificates of Land Ownership Award (CLOAs), land surveys, demarcation of plots, and titles
O
registration. In addition, the project will support the DAR to strengthen its land tenure improvement
program through conduct of policy studies, identification of new land tenure instruments and conduct
of pilot activities to clarify succession planning for inter-generational land transfer, avoid land
fragmentation and enhance the likelihood of longer term productive land use.
Possible intermediate outcome indicators for Component I include:
1)     Number of farmers accessing appropriate technical services.
2)     Number of business development service providers that provide training in enterprise
building, financial education, and operational management.
3)     Number of collective CLOAs processed.
Component II: Investments in Productive Partnerships
Market Forum Facilitation - This subcomponent would support information and communication
campaigns activities to introduce scaling up programs and productive partnership alliances
initiatives. These campaigns would highlight the mutually enhancing benefits of increased public-
private-cooperation in order to strengthen the competitiveness of the agriculture sector. Calls for
proposals and wide dissemination of the productive partnership's operational procedures associated
with the provision of project support would also be undertaken. In addition, an active networking and
match-making effort would be supported to reduce the search costs for farmer organizations and
agribusinesses in identifying suitable partners, and to assist partnerships in finding public and private
service providers and other support institutions.
Productive Partnerships Sub-projects - This sub-component would support the establishment of
productive partnerships between FOs exclusively, including their members, or with private
agribusiness enterprises. The aim would be to develop a long-term, voluntary and commercial
relationship and implement a detailed partnership/enterprise business and investment plan that would
help the participating partners to improve their competitiveness in terms of price, cost of production,
productivity, quality and sales volume. It would also build on and expand successful value chain
a       partnerships between farmer groups and agribusinesses, helping them to broaden their activities,
outreach and impact. Value chains that are eligible for scaling-up could be pre-determined or could
be allowed to surface naturally through the competitive selection process.
Sub-projects support would be provided on a matching grant basis for eligible expenditures,
including advisory services and training in support of FOs and the respective agribusiness partner, as
well as goods, materials and works to allow for improved production and post-harvest management
to be undertaken by FOs, all on an incremental basis. Matching grants would be allocated on the
basis of a competitive selection process utilizing transparent appraisal procedures specifically
designed and established under the project to result in the selection of commercially viable
partnership/enterprise business plans. Sub-projects would be demand driven and could include
production facilities (nurseries, green houses), value addition investments (post-harvest, storage, and
small scale processing), and other priority rural infrastructure specific to the productive partnerships
investments and to local agribusinesses.
Technical Assistance - This sub-component would finance technical assistance to conduct feasibility


﻿studies, including market analysis specific to agribusiness partnerships. It would also provide
technical assistance to market partners to mitigate the relatively higher costs and risks associated
with entering into financing a nd marketing arrangements with small rural producers.
O
U       Possible intermediate outcome indi cators for Component II include:
1)     Number of FOs linked to viable/commercial value chains.
2)     Number of productive alliances formed.
3)     Volume (or incremental increase in volume) of sales of FOs to markets.
Component III: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
The purpose of this component is to provide support to the project implementing agencies at central,
regional, and provincial levels in project management, financial management, procurement, social
and environmental safeguards, monitoring and evaluation, and impact assessment. The component
would also finance: (a) training of Project Management Office (PMO) staff and partner line agencies
on pr oductive partnerships; and (b) studies related to DAR's program, productive alliances,
agricultural marketing or other areas of interests.
Possible intermediate outcome indicators for Component III include:
1)     Number of person-days of training provided to project PMO staff and partner line agencies
(including women).
2)     Number of policy studies undertaken.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project would cover 50 ARC clusters across 50 provinces with approximately 20,000 farm
households per cluster. Within the identified clusters, the exact location of the sub-projects is not
known at this time, given the demand-driven nature of the project.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
0
The DAR (through its Support Services Office), would be the lead implementing agency for the
project. It would develop the institutional arrangements for project implementation including the
O
overall oversight, fiduciary and implementation arrangements at the central, regional and provincial
levels. It would be beefed up with appropriate number of personnel with qualifications and
experiences needed by the project at the various levels of implementing units. It would coordinate at
the local level the provision of services from other partner line agencies (DA, National Irrigation
Administration, Department of Public Works and Highways, Department of Trade and Industry) as
well as the Local Government Units (LGUs) and FOs.
The proposed implementation arrangements would build on the arrangements that DAR had used in
its past and ongoing programs and projects wherein the overall project coordination and supervision
is with the Support Services Office at the central and regional level. Implementation is lodged with
the corresponding unit at the provincial level. The structure and arrangements have been proven
effective in the past World Bank-assisted projects. DAR has successfully implemented the two
phases of the Agrarian Reform Communities Development Project (ARCDP 1997-2003; and
ARCDP II 2003-2010), as well as the complementary JSDF-funded projects. The projects were rated
Satisfactory by IEG. DAR has demonstrated knowledge and skills in managing mitigation and
enhancement activities to address adverse and positive impacts respectively. Nonetheless, given the
implementation of the DAR's Rationalization Plan, the proposed structure and arrangements would


﻿be revisited to ensure that the needed capacity and staffing are sufficient to address the requirements
of the project.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz (GENDR)
Victoria Florian S. Lazaro (GSURR)
o
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
afeguard Policies         Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment     Yes         The project would finance demand-driven productive
OP/BP 4.01                               partnerships between smallholder organizations and
private commercial sector that would contribute to
raising farm productivity and household income of
beneficiaries. Environmental impacts are expected to
be mostly temporary and/or short term and are
readily manageable. The project is categorized as a
"B" consistent with the nature of these impacts and
the requirements of OP4.01.
Since the sub-projects and specific sites within the
clusters targeted by the project still have to be
determined, the borrower will prepare an
Environment and Social Management Framework
(ESMF), which will include Environmental Codes of
Practice (ECoPs). The ESMF will include screening
procedures to guide the proponents on the type of
safeguards instruments that need to be prepared
depending on the sub-projects that would be funded.
All sub-projects would be screened according to the
following categories: (a) Category A - if it is likely to
have significant adverse environmental impacts that
are sensitive, diverse, or unprecedented. Independent
EA experts will prepare the environmental
assessment report with consultation and disclosure.
Category A sub-projects are highly unlikely because
the environmental impacts are expected to be modest
since the scope and nature of the sub-projects are
mainly small-scale, rural and agriculture-based; (b)
Category B - impacts are site-specific; reversible;
less adverse than Category A and mitigation
measures can be designed more readily; (c) Category
C - minimal or no adverse environmental impacts, no
EA required. Part of the environmental assessment
(EA) process, public consultations with all
stakeholder groups (potentially affected
communities, NGOs, POs and farmer groups) will be
conducted. For Categories A and B, a social


﻿assessment will be conducted as part of the EA
process.
OP 4.01 also applies to the technical assistance (TA)
activities in Components 1 and 2 which would
provide training support to the farmers and farmer
associations to enhance their technical and business
management skills. The Terms of Reference (TORs)
for the capacity building activities and TA activities
will be reviewed by the Bank to ensure that the
environmental and social issues relevant to the
project and raised during public consultations are
taken into account. The ESMF will be consulted with
concerned stakeholders and publicly disclose at the
national and local levels and in the World Bank's
Info Shop.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes           While the project is not envisaged to lead to loss of
natural habitats, this policy is triggered as all
subprojects can only be identified during
implementation and it is possible that any of the
subprojects might affect natural habitats. The ESMF
will include screening for impacts on natural habitats
and measures to address these impacts.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           No           The project is not envisaged to trigger this policy as
project activities will be undertaken in agricultural
areas. There may be cutting of few trees for some of
the infrastructure support facilities but is not
expected to affect forests and forest health or forest-
dependent communities. The ESMF explicitly
prescribes avoidance of significant environmental
impacts of proposed subprojects on forest areas.
Pest Management OP 4.09      Yes          This policy is triggered since the project will finance
agriculture operations that could raise potential pest
or disease vector management issues and require for
the increase usage of pesticides under the project.
The screening procedures of the ESMF will include
the scanning of pest management concerns. The
ESMF will contain a Pest Management Framework
that will provide the scope and coverage in the
preparation and implementation of a Pest
Management Plan (PMP) to address pest
management issues. In sub-projects that require an
EA, the ESMP will be accompanied by a PMP.
Where pest management concerns are present, even
if the sub-project does not require an EA, a PMP will
still be prepared to adequately prescribe the
appropriate alternative technologies or mitigating


﻿measures. The EA will be presented in a public
consultation and disclosed. The PMP is based on on-
site evaluations of local conditions conducted by
appropriate technical specialists with experience in
participatory integrated pest management (IPM).
IPM trainings will be conducted as part of the project
to educate the agricultural workers and farm
organizations. The IPM approaches include certified
pesticides, its proper application and handling, as
well as biological control, cultural practices, and the
development and use of crop varieties that are
resistant or tolerant to the pests. In case the need to
procure chemical-based fertilizers and pesticides
arises, the proponent will indicate how the list of pest
control products was developed and agree this with
the Bank before the list is authorized for
procurement.
Physical Cultural Resources   Yes          OP 4.11 is triggered since the sub-projects may
OP/BP 4.11                                 involve the restoration and rehabilitation of existing
agricultural lands or the reconstruction of small civil
works in rural, open areas where physical cultural
resources may be present.. In case of chance finds,
procedures on how to manage them would be
described in the ESMF. A chance finds clause would
be included in the bidding documents and all
construction works contracts.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      Yes          Several of the target ARC clusters are located in
4.10                                       provinces known to have Indigenous Peoples (IPs)
and ancestral domains. However, the project is
demand-driven so it is difficult at this stage to
identify whether Indigenous Peoples and their
ancestral domains would be involved and affected by
the project. An IP Framework (IPF) would be
formulated to ensure that IP participation is not
undermined and that the design of capacity building
for FOs also makes provision for assistance to
organizations of which IPs are members. The IP
Framework will be disclosed nationwide with
subsequent IP Plans disclosed locally. The IPF and
the IP plans will be disclosed in WB InfoShop.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes          Component II may include small infrastructure
BP 4.12                                    investments as identified by the FOs and their
partners to improve access to markets. This may
include production and marketing infrastructure,
such as greenhouses, storage facilities, solar dryers,
access roads and other priority small scale rural
infrastructure specific to productive partnerships


﻿investments. A simple Land Acquisition and
Resettlement Policy Framework (LARF ) will be
prepared, with clear protocol for Voluntary Land
Donation and other land acquisition modalities. DAR
has satisfactorily formulated and implemented a
LARF under the ARCDP2 which will be used as a
reference in formulating a new LARF for the project.
The LARF will be disclosed nationwide with
subsequent Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)
disclosed locally. The LARF and RAPs will be
disclosed in WB InfoShop.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    Yes           The project will trigger this policy as it will fund
community based multipurpose infrastructure that
may include small-scale earthen reservoirs for
irrigation and water supply. The Project's screening
checklist will identify potentially related impacts to
ensure that appropriate measures are incorporated
during site selection, project design and
implementation. For small dams that will be
supported by the project, the project will require that
these dams be designed by qualified engineers. This
requirement will be spelled out in the ESMF.
Projects on International     No           The project would not trigger this policy.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No          The project would not trigger this policy.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
o
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Apr-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: April 2015
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Rabih H. Karaky
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                        Date: 16-Jun-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Nathan M. Belete (PMGR)                   Date: 19-Jun-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


