                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC15209

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Philippines                    Project ID:       P157325
                            Project Name:   Philippines Program for Climate Resilience: TA for the Risk Resiliency and
                                            Sustainability Program
                            Team Leader(s): Christophe Crepin
                            Estimated Date 10-Jun-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GENDR                          Lending           IPF
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (25%), Central government
                                                 administration (25%), Sub-national government administration (20%), Rural
                                                 and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (10%), General water, sanitation and
                                                 flood protection sector (20%)
                            Theme(s):            Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (15%), Natural
                                                 disaster management (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (15%), Climate
                                                 change (50%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost: 0.15                           Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Climate Investment Funds                                                                    0.15
                            Environment        C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective of this recipient-executed grant is to enable the Government of
                           the Philippines to increase climate adaptation and resilience investments and their effectiveness in
                           reducing climate risks impacting people and livelihoods in key vulnerable landscapes of the
                           Philippines.

                           The engagement builds on the work developed in the past three years by the Cabinet Cluster on
                           Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation, and on the World Bank Technical Assistance undertaken
                           at the request of the Government under the Climate Budgeting programmatic ASA (P148455),
                           following the Climate Public Expenditure and Institutional Review (P130126).
                         The project is designed to provide technical assistance, capacity strengthening and stakeholder
                         consultations to allow the Philippine Government to develop a national investment program for
                         climate adaptation and resilience. This will be underpinned by (i) providing an operational
Public Disclosure Copy




                         framework for a climate adaptation and resilience investment program to generate and leverage
                         investments, (ii) building government capacity and convergence for responding to climate risks
                         through risk-informed identification, planning, financing, execution, monitoring and evaluation of
                         adaptation and resilience investments, and (iii) developing and applying climate analytics and tools
                         to enhance understanding of climate risks and enable risk-informed decision-making.
                         C. Project Description
                         This activity will support the preparation of a national RRSP with a focus on better climate resilient
                         planning, decision-making, investing and on-the–ground delivery. The engagement builds on the
                         work developed in the past three years by the Cabinet Cluster on Climate Change Adaptation and
                         Mitigation, and by the World Bank Technical Assistance undertaken at the request of the
                         Government under the Climate Budgeting programmatic ASA (P148455), following the Climate
                         Public Expenditure and Institutional Review (P130126). It also takes into account a series of other
                         activities and achievements related to climate adaptation and risk resiliency recently completed, or on
                         going, which will be closely reviewed and consulted during implementation. The Program’s
                         preparation process is Government-owned, closely involving the Cabinet Cluster, led by the DENR
                         with close coordination and inclusion of oversight agencies such as the Department of Budget and
                         Management (DBM), the National Economic Development Authority (NEDA), the Climate Change
                         Commission (CCC), and the Department of Finance (DOF) as well as sector agencies such as the
                         Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) and the Department of Agriculture (DA),
                         LGUs, the private sector, civil society groups and highly affected communities, and Development
                         Partners.

                         The preparation of the Program will be accomplished through the five building blocks below which
                         have been developed, designed and validated through consultation with the Government. As agreed
                         with the Government, this recipient-executed grant will finance selected expenditures supporting part
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of the consultations (Building Block 5) and capacity readiness for program roll-out (Building Blocks
                         3), and will complement a Bank-executed support for the remaining activities.

                         • Building Block 1. Business case and knowledge for the RRSP: The objective of this block is to
                         develop the technical, socio-economic, and policy-based rationale for a national program that enables
                         risk-informed planning, financing, prioritization, and implementation. Building on an initial
                         stocktaking, this will include: (1) knowledge and rationale background paper with a synthesis of
                         existing knowledge and rationale for a national program including a strategic review and analysis of
                         current gaps in institutional, financing (including their current distribution) and legal frameworks and
                         policies; (2) WAVES coastal valuation study assessing the economic value of coastal protection
                         services of mangroves; (3) a national-level risk assessments of climate hazards and their potential
                         socio-economic and environmental impacts across provinces and landscapes, (4) a national-level
                         economic analysis of investment needs and their financial and social costs subject to uncertainty; (5)
                         a business case report that summarizes the climate hazards and their socio-economic and
                         environmental (current and projected) impacts, investments and their social and financial costs and
                         current gaps in institutional and legal frameworks, policies, financing, and execution; (6) a planning
                         update to integrate climate risks into key policy frameworks.


                         Building Block 2. Scope, content, and approach: The objective of this block is to develop criteria and
                         tools to prioritize, plan and formulate the scope, content, and approach of the RRSP. This will
                         include: (1) focus and prioritization technical paper with an overview of existing criteria, analyses,
                         decision-support tools, information and data used for site selection and prioritization of adaptation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and resilience investments; (2) in-depth case studies of climate risks, including different hazards and
                         their impacts in selected sites in key landscapes; (3) in-depth case studies of costs and benefits of
                         investment options to make selected sites and landscapes more climat e-resilient, including subject
                         to uncertainty; (4) scope and content note specifying (i) the technical and socio-economic (e.g.,
                         gender, poverty) and spatial criteria for site selection, including prioritization of landscapes through
                         vulnerability assessment tools; (ii) the criteria for eligibility, prioritization and types of investments
                         and actions (including benefits and costs); (iii) the of criteria for determining eligibility, capacity and
                         implementation readiness; and (5) first-phase action plan outlining the potential scope and content in
                         terms of landscapes, provinces and sites, as well as the institutional requirements, the overall
                         investment needs, incremental costs and potential funding sources for roll-out in the first 18th
                         months.

                         • Building Block 3. Execution processes and modalities: The objective of this block is to develop
                         institutional and operational mechanisms and procedures to translate plans into budgets and executed
                         actions and to initiate program roll-out. This will include: (1) implementation guidance note
                         summarizing the institutional and planning arrangements for the RRSP including the identification of
                         the required institutional processes, planning, budgeting, and implementation modalities; (2)
                         incentive and finance framework outlining the potential incentive mechanisms and funding
                         arrangements to incentivize NGA-NGA and NGA-LGU convergence and participation; (3) processes
                         and procedures to implement area-based investments at landscape and LGU level; (4) operational
                         manuals detailing the technical requirements for technical design, selection and approval processes,
                         procurement, financial management, safeguards, O&M, and M&E; and (5) convergent national and
                         local investment plans to initiate RRSP roll- out in 2017 and learning process to guide subsequent
                         plan formulation and financing. This grant will finance the finalization of the development of the
                         roll-out phase of the Program with details to be provided in the Project Paper,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         • Building Block 4. Monitoring, evaluation, and reporting: The objective of this block is to develop
                         the system to track, report, monitor and evaluate RRSP results and allow feedback and learning. This
                         will include: (1) Tracking and M&E analytical note mapping current roles, responsibilities,
                         capacities, institutional arrangements, procedures, and processes for adaptation and resilience related
                         M&E and to identify existing gaps and options to develop a systematic approach to investment
                         tracking, results monitoring, impact evaluation, knowledge management and learning; (2) RRSP
                         results framework outlining the program-level results chain that maps the expected cross-sectoral
                         outputs, outcomes and impacts of the various RRSP inputs and activities; (3) RRSP scorecard
                         template with key program-level results indicators for Cabinet-level oversight and management; (4)
                         investment-specific protocols for results monitoring of the different PAPs; (5) Evaluation manual
                         that describes impact evaluation options (including data collection and analysis methods) for
                         strategic elements of the RRSP; and (6) work plan for conducting a baseline survey for the first-
                         phase of the RRSP with an outline of the methodology for data collection (including sampling
                         strategy) and analysis (including statistical techniques).

                         Building Block 5. Consultative process: The objective of this block is to secure inclusive cross-
                         sector, cross-level dialogue and/or consensus across key stakeholders to prepare and implement the
                         RRSP. This will include: (1) the development and implementation of a multi-stakeholder (e.g.,
                         NGAs, LGUs, CSOs, NGOs, DPs, Private Sector, Academia) consultation plan for the preparation of
                         the RRSP; and (2) the development of a consultation and stakeholder engagement plan for
                           implementation, monitoring and feedback on the program. This grant will finance some of this
                           consultations with details to be provided in the Project Paper.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis (if known)
                           This small grant is purely of a technical assistance nature. It aims to assist the government to further
                           consult and build its capacity during the process of developing a national investment program for
                           climate adaptation and resilience (see above mentioned PDO). Discrete investment proposals and
                           enhancements arising from this grant will each include their own risk management and sustainability
                           strategies as per the relevant institutions and development partners involved. This grant will finance
                           only support services, workshops, travel, and operating costs. No investment on ground is financed
                           by this grant. For this reason no safeguards policies are triggered. Category C is recommended along
                           with transfer to the delivery unit.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Not applicable.

                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Leonardo Jr. Batugal Paat (GEN2A)
                           Marivi Amor Jucotan Ladia (GSU02)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No               The thrust of this project is to assist the
                           BP 4.01                                               Government to identify, prioritize, and
                                                                                 mainstream risks to development faced by
                                                                                 current and future vulnerability to climate
                                                                                 change risks
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 The small grant will support only consultancy
                                                                                 services, non-consulting services, workshops,
                                                                                 consultations, travel and operating costs. No
                                                                                 specific investment on ground will be financed
                                                                                 by this grant nor any detailed and specific
                                                                                 investment plans. When applicable, the studies
                                                                                 arising from this project will include principles
                                                                                 of environmental sustainability including
                                                                                 references for the assessment, monitoring and
                                                                                 mitigation of potential environmental and social
                                                                                 impacts of investment programs. No civil works
                                                                                 is expected to take place so it is recommended
                                                                                 that no further safeguards instruments be
                                                                                 required.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No               The project does not involve any specific civil
                                                                                 and development works that may have impacts
                                                                                 on natural habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No               The project does not involve any specific civil
                                                                                             and land development works that will have any
                                                                                             adverse impacts on forests.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09                      No                   The project does not anticipate use of pesticides
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/              No                   The project will not affect physical cultural
                           BP 4.11                                                           resources. No specific locations identified in the
                                                                                             analyses
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No                   The activities of the project will not have any
                                                                                             adverse impacts on indigenous peoples and
                                                                                             communities
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No                   The project will not cause any involuntary
                           4.12                                                              resettlement.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No                   The project does not involve any dam
                                                                                             construction and development.
                           Projects on International        No                               The project does not involve locations on
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                              international waters.
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                               The project does not involve sites located in
                           7.60                                                              disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Christophe Crepin
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                                           Date: 26-Apr-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Practice Manager/                Name: Iain G. Shuker (PMGR)                                        Date: 01-May-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
