                                  The World Bank
                                  Morocco - Community-Based Rural Roads Maintenance




                                                   Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                 Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                               Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Jan-2018 | Report No: ISDSC23157




                         Jan 02, 2018                                                                                            Page 1 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Morocco - Community-Based Rural Roads Maintenance



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                     Project Name                 Environmental Category    Country
                                                          Morocco - Community-
                           P165411                        Based Rural Roads            B - Partial Assessment    Morocco
                                                          Maintenance
                           Team Leader(s)                 Estimated Date of Approval   Managing Unit             Financing Instrument
                                                                                                                 Investment Project
                           Vincent Vesin, Vincent Vesin                                GTD05
                                                                                                                 Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Financing (in USD Million)

                           SUMMARY             -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                0.00
                           Total Financing                                                                                                   0.00
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                     0.00


                           DETAILS  -NewFin2




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Development Objectives of this proposed project are to provide employment and livelihood to disadvantaged rural
                           inhabitants in lagging areas (particularly women and youth) and to maintain the road access of local communities to
                           markets and essential services in the project area.

                           C. Project Description
                           The project will include the following components to achieve its objectives:

                           Component 1: Rural roads preventive maintenance activities

                           The first sub-component of this Component will finance the maintenance works for around 1,000 kilometers
                           of rural roads by civil society associations, cooperatives and/or social microenterprises employing rural
                           citizens in socio-economically lagging areas with the goal of improving the living conditions of the population
                           in a highly participatory manner. Maintenance activities will include clearing of the road, the road shoulders,
                           the road slopes, culverts, drainage ditches, and bridges from landslides, obstacles, and loose materials that
                           cause damage to the road, and repairing minor damages (potholes, cracks, joints, etc.) to the road, the road

                         Jan 02, 2018                                                                                                   Page 2 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Morocco - Community-Based Rural Roads Maintenance




                           shoulders, and retaining walls. The specific road sections to be maintained by the project will be identified
                           and prioritized with the participation of local rural communities during the first year of implementation
                           within the geographic scope of the proposed project which is select socio-economically lagging regions in
                           Morocco, namely the Oriental, Beni Mellal – Khenifra, Draa – Tafilalet, Souss – Massa and/or Marrakesh –
                           Safi regions that include most of the poorest provinces in the country (Tata, Jerada, Figuig, Driouch, Zagora,
                           Chichaoua, El Haouz, Ouarzazate, Errachidia, Essaouira, etc.) with a poverty rate at least 50 percent above
                           the national average. The second sub-component of this Component will provide as direct income support
                           and other benefits such as healthcare checks, literacy (particularly for women and girls), work and health
                           insurance, access to mobile banking if available (to avoid potential governance issues), etc. to the
                           participants (around a thousand).

                           Component 2: Capacity building activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The first sub-component of Component 2 will finance capacity building activities to participating regional and
                           local governments staff (around 20 professionals in total) in efficient decentralized road asset management
                           and performance-based contracting and supervision. The second sub-component will finance capacity
                           building activities (in the form of both theoretical and hand-on trainings) to select members (around a
                           thousand in total) of participating community-based organizations (CBOs) in (i) the soft and technical skills
                           and know-how required for carrying out the financed maintenance activities and on (ii) entrepreneurship to
                           foster non-farm rural entrepreneurial activities (in particular by youth and women) in the targeted
                           communities, both by members of the microenterprises themselves and by their family members and
                           neighbors.

                           Component 3: Project Management and Administration, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge
                           Dissemination

                           The first sub-component of Component 3 will finance project management and administration incremental
                           costs, including administrative costs, reporting costs (including annual audits), and general operational costs
                           through the provision of goods, consulting and non-consulting services. The second sub-component of
                           Component 3 will finance M&E activities for the project through the provision of consulting and non-
                           consulting services, including (i) a web-based Management Information System based on third-party
                           monitoring by local communities, and (ii) an impact evaluation study entailing a baseline survey, a mid-term
                           evaluation, and a final outcome-impact evaluation feeding into the implementation completion report by the
                           implementing agency focusing on the project’s successes and shortfalls. The third sub-component of
                           Component 3 will finance, through the provision of non-consulting services, knowledge dissemination
                           activities in the form of public awareness workshops, local media campaigns, etc., to share lessons of this
                           project and raise awareness about this initiative within central and regional levels of government as well as
                           local communities and civil society to increase likelihood of replicability and scalability of this initiative.




                           SAFEGUARDS


                         Jan 02, 2018                                                                                              Page 3 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Morocco - Community-Based Rural Roads Maintenance




                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          The project will be located in non-disputed lagging areas. The exact location (i.e. the rural roads to be
                          maintained by the project) will be determined during implementation. The project will consist in routine
                          maintenance of rural roads without any anticipated significant environmental and social negative impacts.
                          Maintenance works will be carried out on the roads' right-of-way, meaning there will no land acquisition. As
                          these maintenance works will be handled by civil society associations, cooperatives and/or social
                          microenterprises employing rural citizens, a significant risk on occupational health and safety is detected to
                          be managed correctly by all counterparts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          The Borrower has satisfactorily complied with the World Bank's safeguards policies during the
                          implementation of a recent more complex road project (Second Rural Roads Project - P094007),
                          demonstrating its ability to properly manage the impact of the proposed project. Support for local
                          community labor skills on occupational health and safety is necessary.



                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Markus Friedrich Vorpahl, Social Safeguards Specialist
                          Mohamed Adnene Bezzaouia, Environmental Safeguards Specialist


                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project              Triggered?                   Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                Yes                      The project is categorized as B.

                                                                                                      Component 1 of the project (Rural roads
                                                                                                      preventive maintenance activities) has the
                                                                                                      propensity to generate during works
                                                                                                      minimal and site specific environmental
                                                                                                      impacts related essentially to the
                                                                                                      management of wastes, noise, air
                                                                                                      emissions, wastewater and disposal of
                                                                                                      some hazardous materials. All these
                                                                                                      impacts are easily remediable and will be


                         Jan 02, 2018                                                                                                     Page 4 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Morocco - Community-Based Rural Roads Maintenance



                                                                                      easily mitigated. Because the project will
                                                                                      employ community labor, there are other
                                                                                      risks related to occupational health and
                                                                                      safety, child labor, and forced labor which
                                                                                      will need to be mitigated.

                                                                                      All the other components of the project are
                                                                                      primarily institutional development,
                                                                                      technical assistance and capacity building.

                                                                                      An Environmental and Social Management
                                                                                      Framework (ESMF) will be prepared since
                                                                                      the exact activities and localizations to be
                                                                                      financed under component 1 are not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                      known. This ESMF will develop a negative
                                                                                      list of subprojects excluded from support;
                                                                                      high risk subprojects with potential
                                                                                      Category A-type impacts, subprojects
                                                                                      impacting critical habitats or protected
                                                                                      areas, impacting forests areas and forest
                                                                                      resources, or posing risks of damaging on
                                                                                      the existing community cultural property,
                                                                                      and will describe how risks related to
                                                                                      occupational health and safety, child labor,
                                                                                      and forced labor will be managed. The
                                                                                      ESMF will be reviewed, approved, disclosed
                                                                                      in-country and at the Infoshop prior to
                                                                                      appraisal.

                                                                                      The project will not finance subprojects
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                    No           impacting critical habitats or protected
                                                                                      areas.
                                                                                      The project will not finance subprojects
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                             No           impacting forests areas and forest
                                                                                      resources.
                                                                                      The project will not support the use or
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                        No           involve investments in pesticides or other
                                                                                      related products.
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11         No           The proposed operation is not expected to
                                                                                      pose risks of damaging on the existing
                                                                                      community cultural property. If these
                                                                                      properties will be discovered during project
                                                                                      implementation, cultural property and
                                                                                      chance find procedures will be applied and
                                                                                      appropriate mitigation measures for both


                         Jan 02, 2018                                                                                       Page 5 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Morocco - Community-Based Rural Roads Maintenance



                                                                                                  the identification and protection (from
                                                                                                  theft, mistreatment of discovered artifacts)
                                                                                                  of cultural property.
                                                                                                  No groups qualifying as Indigenous Peoples
                                                                                                  under OP/BP 4.10 will be among the
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                       No
                                                                                                  project affected people or project
                                                                                                  beneficiaries.
                                                                                                  The project will maintain existing roads that
                                                                                                  have already been upgraded under a series
                                                                                                  of projects, lastly Morocco Second Rural
                                                                                                  Roads Project - AF2 (P148003). No
                                                                                                  enlargement of existing roads will be
                                                                                                  necessary under the project, so no
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                 No
                                                                                                  acquisition of land, involuntary or other,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                  will be necessary. The screening
                                                                                                  mechanisms under the ESMF will include
                                                                                                  measures to exclude road sections should
                                                                                                  the project encounter non-titles users, e.g.
                                                                                                  vendors on road shoulders.
                                                                                                  The project will not construct or rely on
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                           No
                                                                                                  dams.
                                                                                                  The project will not affect international
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50      No
                                                                                                  waterways.
                                                                                                  The project is not located in a disputed
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60               No
                                                                                                  area.


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? Yes
                           SafeguardAppraisalStage
                           a) Tentative target date for disclosing the appraisal stage ISDS
                           01-Dec-2017
                           b) Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                           The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be launched in the next few days/weeks
                           and is expected to be completed by the end of November 2017.


                           APPROVALS

                            Team Leader(s):                           Vincent Vesin




                         Jan 02, 2018                                                                                                   Page 6 of 7
                                   The World Bank
                                   Morocco - Community-Based Rural Roads Maintenance




                              Approved By

                              Safeguards Advisor:                             Nina Chee                                         10-Oct-2017

                              Practice Manager/Manager:                       Olivier Le Ber                                    10-Oct-2017


                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Jan 02, 2018                                                                                                                              Page 7 of 7
