                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSR16680
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Mar-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                                        Project ID:           P121289
                            Project Name:       Ningxia Desertification Control and Ecological Protection Project (P121289)
                            Task Team           Jin Liu
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           10-Jan-2012                                  Estimated   17-May-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GEN02                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:           General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%), Forestry (50%)
                            Theme:            Land administration and management (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                 No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:         97.45                 Total Bank Financing:          80.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                                Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                              17.45
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                 80.00
                              Total                                                                                                 97.45
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The project development objective is to control desertification and degradation and protect key
                           farmland and infrastructure in strategically selected locations in Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region.
                           Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)


                                                                                 Page 1 of 11
                         The project development objective is to control desertification and degradation and protect key
                         farmland and infrastructure in strategically selected locations in Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Project Design

                         The project aims to strengthen the Chinese Government's Program to Combat Desertification through
                         support to demonstration activities which aim to control desertification and rehabilitate degraded
                         areas in the Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region of Northeast China. Project areas are located in
                         strategically important fragile and desertified areas where sandstorms threaten the well-being of
                         millions of people, and where environmental degradation poses serious threats to agriculture,
                         industry and infrastructure. The PDO aims to address these threats by developing the most cost-
                         effective and sustainable approaches to desertification control and environmental rehabilitation in
                         selected, strategically important locations of the Region.

                         The project comprises three components, namely:

                         (a)     Component 1: Controlling Desertification and Degradation. The component will address the
                         main drivers of desertification and degradation which relate to moving sand through wind erosion
                         dynamics and unsustainable land use practices through (a) the establishment of straw checker boards
                         combined with the seeding and planting of indigenous shrub and grass on about 19,000 hectares of
                         moving and semi-moving sand dune areas in Ningxia and (b) through closing, protecting and
                         managing for natural re-vegetation about 42,000 hectares of degraded arid and semi-arid areas, and
                         shrub planting; and (c) implementing the livelihood alternative program for local communities to
                         compensate for access restrictions to grazing areas.

                         (b)      Component 2: Protective Shelterbelt Plantations. This component includes carrying out a
                         program to protect key farmland and infrastructure from desertification and sand encroachment
                         through, inter alia, the establishment of tree and shrub shelterbelts in about 5,500 hectares along
Public Disclosure Copy




                         roads, irrigation canals and around agricultural fields and fruit orchards.

                         (c)     Component 3: Project Management, Capacity Building and M&E. This component includes
                         the provision of technical assistance support for carrying out: (a) the technical assistance to local
                         planting entities and project implementation agencies; (b) the technical design, field implementation
                         and construction, construction supervision, and final acceptance checks of desertification control
                         works, safeguards supervision, and Project progress reporting; (c) applied research; (d) training and
                         extension; and (e) desertification control impact monitoring.

                         Project Progress

                         The project made a slow start, with progress being hindered by challenging field conditions, a
                         shortage of counterpart funds, inadequate technical capacity, and changes in proposed project sites in
                         some counties. Recognizing that progress was falling behind, Bank supervision missions maintained
                         a watchful eye on the situation, and worked closely with project agencies to resolve issues as they
                         arose. This involved providing strong support to the project management offices (PMOs), especially
                         with regard to the priority actions needed to get the project back on track. During the last mission in
                         October 2015, the Bank Task Team (TT) was impressed by the serious efforts made by project
                         agencies to tackle the challenges being faced, and by the progress being made during 2015. It also
                         noted that the capacity of Regional PMO had been greatly strengthened and that project management

                                                                      Page 2 of 11
                         had much improved. For example, an expert (advisory) team had been set up and was starting to
                         provide the required technical services to the local PMOs and planting entities on key tasks, project
                         monitoring arrangements had been put in place, and procurement and financial management had
Public Disclosure Copy




                         been significantly enhanced. It also found that project physical progress had accelerated, with around
                         22,100 ha of sand dune areas having been planted with trees and shrubs - around 35% of the project
                         target. In addition, progress was being made to resolve the counterpart funding issue.

                         However, some issues confronted by the project need to be further addressed by project restructuring,
                         which include: (a) counterpart funding shortages at county government levels; and (b) delay in
                         planting and vegetation restoration; and (c) delays in implementing the training, research and
                         technical services activities. As following up the reached a course of action required to get the
                         project back, while the Ningxia Government agencies have greatly intensified their efforts to speed-
                         up the counterpart mobilization and the loan disbursements, a project restructuring is necessary to
                         help address those fundamental constraints. The project restructuring plan, which was proposed and
                         assessed by Ningxia Regional and county PMOs, comprises: (a) rebalancing project field activities
                         among its components and sites to help ensure that the PDO is met; (b) increasing the Bank loan ratio
                         to help compensate for the shortage of counterpart funding shortages in impoverished counties; (c)
                         reallocating IBRD loan funds from civil works and goods to critically important institutional capacity
                         building, for example, technical services, training and research and extension; and (d) extending the
                         project closing date for one year to enable the completion of those activities currently behind
                         schedule. These proposed restructuring plan was reviewed by the Bank team and found to be
                         acceptable. The project MTR quality enhancement review (QER) fully supports the proposed project
                         restructuring plan.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will support desertification control, vegetation rehabilitation and ecological protection
                         measures in five cities/counties of Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region, including: Lingwu City, Litong
                         District, Yanchi County, Qingtongxia City, and Zhongwei City. Two counties (Xinqing and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pingluo), which was included in the project design at appraisal, were dropped by MTR point. The
                         project is expected to generate local environmental benefits for the entire population within the
                         participating cities/counties, as well as to protect a number of key infrastructure facilities on the East
                         Bank of the Yellow River, which are of strategic important for the economic development of the
                         region. Since the project areas are located in a wind corridor affecting major parts of Northern China
                         and have been identified as one of the major sources of sandstorms, the project would also indirectly
                         benefit a much larger number of people living as far as Beijing or Tianjin. Safeguard relevant
                         physical characteristics include: the inclusion of some sites of natural habitats of Ammopiptanthus
                         mongolicus shrub lands, which are protected under government regulations; the protection of open
                         access lands through closure, access restrictions, and vegetation rehabilitation, large-scale plantings
                         of local shrub and grass vegetation for sand movement control, and establishment of shelterbelts in
                         strategic locations, which require pest control measures.

                         As the project restructuring will be conducted within the project design framework, no changes are
                         necessary for the project social and environmental safeguards.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Yiren Feng (GEN02)
                         Zongcheng Lin (GENDR)



                                                                       Page 3 of 11
                         6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental            Yes        At Appraisal: An Environmental Impact Assessment was
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01               carried out in accordance with OP4.01. It included an
                                                             analysis of potential positive and negative project
                                                             impacts, alternative project analysis, description of
                                                             mitigation measures, and an environmental monitoring
                                                             plan that is integrated into the project's overall M&E
                                                             approach. The EIA confirmed that the project will bring
                                                             significant positive impacts to the natural and socio-
                                                             economic environments. Negative impacts will be
                                                             minimal and if occurring only of temporary nature.
                                                             Project activities and investments have been designed in
                                                             ways to avoid or minimize any adverse impacts on the
                                                             physical environment. Environment Protection Guidelines
                                                             (EPG) have been developed that specify mitigation
                                                             measures in case any negative impact might occur. The
                                                             EIA process also included a Social Impact Assessment
                                                             (SA) to identify potentially adverse impacts and risks to
                                                             people in project-affected areas. The SA focused on those
                                                             sites that have been selected for hill closures and
                                                             vegetation rehabilitation. It included an analysis of
                                                             livelihood conditions, an assessment of potential impacts
                                                             of hill closures on households, field surveys, and
                                                             consultations with stakeholders in all counties. The SA
                                                             proposed various safeguard measures to mitigate potential
                                                             negative impacts and provide livelihood alternatives,
                                                             which have been fully integrated in the project design and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             budget. In addition to the Environmental and Social
                                                             Impact Assessment reports, EPG, a Pest Management
                                                             Plan (PMP) and a Process Framework (PF) have been
                                                             prepared. Detailed public consultation was carried out
                                                             during the process as is documented in the EIA/SA
                                                             reports.

                                                             At Restructuring: the mission noticed that the project has
                                                             complied with all relevant environmental safeguard
                                                             requirements during the implementation of plantation
                                                             establishment and vegetation restoration activities. As the
                                                             proposed project adjustments are being undertaken within
                                                             the framework of the Project Design Framework, no new
                                                             EPG is needed.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes        At Appraisal: A small number of project sites selected for
                         4.04                                restoration include natural habitats of Ammopiptanthus
                                                             mongolicus, a second-class protected species indigenous
                                                             to the desert areas of Western China. Despite the current
                                                             status of severe degradation, the areas still represent
                                                             valuable natural habitats. The EIA and EPG describe the


                                                              Page 4 of 11
                                                       current status of these habitats in the project areas and the
                                                       threats to be addressed by the project. The guidelines also
                                                       detail measures to successfully rehabilitate these
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       vegetation communities.

                                                       At restructuring: The habitats of Ammopiptanthus
                                                       mongolicus are located in Xinqing District. As the
                                                       Xinqing has been dropped from the project during the
                                                       project implementation. There is no protected species and
                                                       critical natural habitats in the project areas. However, the
                                                       PF might be apply for any necessary land screening in the
                                                       remained project period.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36     No     OP4.36 is not applicable. The project aims to establish
                                                       grass and steppe vegetation cover in desert and degraded
                                                       steppe areas and some tree shelterbelts around farmland
                                                       and infrastructure, including some high value fruit trees.
                                                       None of the areas treated under the project is dedicated to
                                                       timber production.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes   At appraisal: The establishment and management of
                                                       protective plantings and shelterbelts may require the
                                                       control of pests and disease and the use of pesticides. A
                                                       PMP has been prepared. It describes a range of pest and
                                                       disease control and management methods, emphasizing
                                                       IPM, and the scope of the recommended application under
                                                       various conditions. The PMP also provides a list of
                                                       pesticides and herbicides that may be required under the
                                                       project in compliance with World Health Organization's
                                                       recommended categories. The PMP includes detailed
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       provisions for training for project stakeholders and a
                                                       monitoring program. Implementation of the training and
                                                       monitoring programs has been budgeted in the project
                                                       cost.

                                                       At restructuring: the mission noticed that the PMP has
                                                       been well implemented during the project
                                                       implementation. Nevertheless, the PMO has updated the
                                                       PMP to include guidance on pest management for the two
                                                       additional native species to be included in the project
                                                       under the proposed multifunction protection pilot
                                                       operation. The bank environmental specialist has
                                                       reviewed and approved the updated PMP, and it was
                                                       disclosed both in the project areas on January 13, 2016
                                                       and in the Bank Infoshop on January 28, 2016.
                         Physical Cultural      No     OP4.11 is not applicable. The detailed site selection
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11          process and environmental screening confirmed that the
                                                       Ming Dynasty Great Wall is not located in any of the
                                                       selected project sites and/or impacted by the project.


                                                        Page 5 of 11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/      No   OP4.10 is not applicable. Ethnic Hui people are
                         BP 4.10                          recognized as an ethnic minority in project areas, but Hui
                                                          people do not meet the criteria of Indigenous Peoples as
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                          defined in OP 4.10. Hui practice Islam but do not possess
                                                          economic, social, or political institutions that are separate
                                                          from those of the dominant society and culture nor do
                                                          they have an indigenous language. Hui people share
                                                          Mandarin as common language with their Han Chinese
                                                          neighbors and Hui communities are part of the
                                                          mainstream society of Ningxia with similar income levels
                                                          and living standards as the Han and are not marginalized.
                                                          The SA process did not provide any indication that there
                                                          is any specific vulnerability of Hui communities in the
                                                          project area with regard to possible negative project
                                                          impacts or lack of equal opportunity to access positive
                                                          benefits of the project that needs to be addressed by the
                                                          project. Hui people comprise about one third of the
                                                          population in the project areas.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes     At appraisal: OP4.12 will be applicable. The project will
                         OP/BP 4.12                       involve the protection and rehabilitation of degraded
                                                          steppe and grassland areas. These sites are not legally
                                                          designated protected areas but have been closed by the
                                                          government. Project activities for vegetation
                                                          rehabilitation may reinforce the government's grazing ban
                                                          and result in reinforcing access restrictions to this land
                                                          with some livelihood implications. A Process Framework
                                                          has been developed to address the restriction impacts,
                                                          supporting alternative livelihood activities to local
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                          communities and households.

                                                          A restructuring: the original closure target was 42, 000 ha,
                                                          but this has had to be reduced to 18,740 ha during the
                                                          project implementation, due to the non-availability of
                                                          land. As a result, only Yanchi and Lingwu counties
                                                          remain in the land-closure activities. The project
                                                          continues the support for alternative livelihoods in the
                                                          areas of land-closure and revegetation, as required by the
                                                          Project Process Framework. Therefore, no changes are
                                                          needed to social Safeguards, and no involuntary
                                                          resettlement or land acquisition is needed.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP        No   The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation
                         4.37                             of any dams as defined under this policy.
                         Projects on International   No   The project is not located in any international waterways
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50             as defined under the policy.
                         Projects in Disputed        No   The project is not located in any known disputed areas as
                         Areas OP/BP 7.60                 defined under the policy.



                                                           Page 6 of 11
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               As the project is implementing under the design project framework, including its restructuring,
                              there is no safeguard issues and impacts associated with the restructuring project. Therefore, the
                              following relevant descriptions are kept to reflect the assessments at project appraisal and for its
                              implementation.

                              Overall the project would generate positive social and environmental impacts. No long-term large
                              scale and/or irreversible negative impacts are expected. Environmental: The project is designed
                              and would generate significant positive environmental impacts in the project areas and to result in
                              improvements of the overall ecological environment in Ningxia. Project investments are directed
                              at: (a) reversing the environmental degradation trend through restoring natural habitats and
                              increasing natural vegetation cover on the Eastern Bank of the Yellow River; (b) protecting
                              farmland areas, infrastructure, and urban/industrial sites through stabilizing and arresting the
                              moving sands of the Mao Wu Su and Tengger Deserts in Ningxia; and (c) protecting rural
                              livelihoods through integrated land management.

                              Environmental risks have been managed through the appropriate planting model selection and the
                              safeguards measures designed under the project, which are included in the project implementation
                              manual, EPG, environmental monitoring plan, and PMP. During past around three-year project
                              implementation, the positive impacts in three aspects mentioned above have appeared and the
                              negative impacts have not been identified due to that appropriate technical models have been used
                              and the EMP and PIP have been well implemented for the restoration and rehabilitation of
                              vegetation activities, and they are unlikely in the remained project period.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Overall social and socio-economic impacts are positive and possible negative impacts are
                              mitigated through the project's safeguards provision. Specifically, the project involves the
                              protection of open access degraded grassland areas through hill closures. These closures have been
                              reinforcing the Government's general grazing ban policy and may result in access restrictions to
                              resource use on those lands. During the project implementation, the original targeted closure areas
                              have been reduced from 42,000 ha to 18,740 ha. This is because that more than 20% of land
                              originally ear marked for project use has been allocated to other uses such as vineyards, landscape
                              greening, solar panels, infrastructure and industry. In other cases, government financed programs
                              planted areas originally allocated to the project. As a result, only Yanchi and Lingwu counties
                              remain in the land-closure component. The project includes support for alternative livelihoods
                              development in local communities/households affected by land-closure and revegetation, with this
                              being developed and implemented under the Project Process Framework, the identified impact are
                              appropriately addressed.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               The project is generating environmental benefits for the entire population within the participating
                              cities/counties estimated at around 3 million people, as well as to protect a number of key
                              infrastructure facilities on the East Bank of the Yellow River, which are of strategic important for
                              the economic development of the region. Since the project areas are located in a wind corridor
                              affecting major parts of Northern China and have been identified as one of the major sources of


                                                                         Page 7 of 11
                           sandstorms, the project would also indirectly benefit a much larger number of people living as far
                           as Beijing or Tianjin. No long-term adverse or negative environmental or social impacts are
                           expected.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            In addition to the "no project" scenario, the Borrower has conducted a detailed site screening to
                           identify the strategically most appropriate sites for treatment and carried out effectiveness analysis
                           of the various technical planting models available. The final project site selection includes only
                           areas of the highest possible impact. In areas of strategic importance, sand dune stabilization
                           through straw checkerboards and seeding/planting is proposed. Hill closures will cover those areas
                           that are under threat of further degradation and are unlikely to recover naturally. Multi-layer
                           shelterbelt plantations are being selected only in areas of importance for high value agricultural
                           production (e.g. grape and fruit development areas) and along important roads and canals.
                           Technical models designed represent an appropriate balance between technical and cost
                           effectiveness and are environmental and ecological best choices.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            At appraisal, An EIA was carried out in accordance with the Bank's Operational Policy OP4.01
                           and local government regulations. The EIA Report includes an analysis of the potential positive
                           and negative project impacts, an alternative project analysis, a description of mitigation measures,
                           and an environmental monitoring plan that is integrated into the project's overall M&E approach.
                           The EIA report documents the public consultation carried out during the preparation of the project.
                           EPG has been developed that specify mitigation measures for any potential negative impact might
                           occur. EPG/EMP also specify the treatment models and measures to successfully rehabilitate
                           these vegetation communities and ecosystems to comply with the Bank's policy on Natural
                           Habitats (OP4.04), and no conversion of the critical natural habitats. In accordance with OP4.09, a
                           PMP has been prepared to guide the control of pests and diseases and, if warranted, the application
                           of pesticides during the establishment and management of protective plantings and shelterbelts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The PMP describes a range of pest and disease control and management methods, including
                           Integrated Pest Management (IPM), and the scope of the recommended application in various
                           situations. The PMP also provides a detailed list of pesticides and herbicides that may be required
                           under the project and that are in compliance with the provisions of the World Health
                           Organization's recommended categories. During the project implementation, the mission noticed
                           that the PMP has been well implemented during the project implementation, and it has been
                           updated to include guidance on pest management for two additional native species to be included
                           in the project under the proposed multifunction protection pilot operation.

                           A Social Impact Assessment was carried out during preparation to identify risks and potentially
                           adverse impacts to local people in project-affected areas. The assessment focused on those sites
                           that have been selected for hill closure and vegetation rehabilitation investments. These sites are
                           not legally designated protected areas but closures may reinforce the public grazing ban in effect
                           since 2003 and thus the project may result in the reinforcement of access restrictions to these open
                           access lands with some livelihood implications. The assessment included an analysis of local
                           livelihood conditions, an assessment of potential impacts of closures on households, field surveys,
                           and consultations with farmers on collective land and workers on state farms of all project
                           counties. The assessment defined various safeguard measures to mitigate and offset potential
                           negative impacts and provide livelihood alternatives. These measures have been integrated in the
                           project design and fully costed (Component 1(c)). A Process Framework has been developed to

                                                                      Page 8 of 11
                           guide the implementation of the safeguards measures and provide a framework for household
                           participation in project implementation. The framework defines the mechanisms for information
                           dissemination, training, and the participation of affected people in the design and implementation
Public Disclosure Copy




                           of compensatory measures to restore income losses. It also sets forth appropriate compensatory
                           and mitigation measures to ensure people's livelihoods are compensated and negative livelihood
                           impacts brought about by the project are being avoided or mitigated. The framework also sets
                           forth the provision for social impact monitoring and includes a complaints handling mechanism.

                           Overall the technical design of the project is straightforward with no specific technical complexity.
                           There is only a limited number of tested models for desertification control and rehabilitation
                           available, such as vegetation grids, seeding and planting, small-scale irrigation, mountain closure
                           and assisted vegetation rehabilitation, which keep technical challenges limited. During project
                           implementation, its activities have been implemented based on clear design. In addition,
                           stakeholder responsibilities have been clearly defined; the relevant training, monitoring and
                           guidancehave been provided by the Bank and the RPMO to local PMO staff and planting entities.
                           As the results, the mission noticed that the project safeguards have been implemented
                           appropriately over past years. The continued training and monitoring will be carried out in the
                           remained project period.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Key project stakeholders include local governments, the farmers in collective areas and local
                           forest farms in the five cities/counties of Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region, including: Lingwu
                           City, Litong District, Yanchi County, Qingtongxia City, and Zhongwei City where the project is
                           under implementation. In accordance with the Bank's disclosure policy, consultations with
                           project-affected people were conducted during the Environmental/Social Assessment processes
                           during project preparation and are documented in the respective reports. The assessments included
                           detailed field surveys and site screening, as well as direct consultations with farmers in project
                           counties. The Environmental and Social Assessment Reports, including the EPG, PMP, and PF
Public Disclosure Copy




                           were reviewed by the Bank as part of project appraisal and disclosed locally in the project areas in
                           Ningxia (November 2011) and in the InfoShop (December 2011) at project appraisal.

                           During project implementation, the consultation with local farmers and relevant stakeholders have
                           been continuing to be conducted for community livelihood activities development as well as for
                           the adjusted planting location under the set project framework. The updated PMP has also been
                           disclosed locally in the project areas including Yangchuan and all the project counties on January
                           13, 2016 and in the Bank Infoshop on January 28, 2016, respectively.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         21-Nov-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      20-Nov-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                               30-Nov-2011
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process

                                                                     Page 9 of 11
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      21-Nov-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   20-Nov-2011
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           China                                                            30-Nov-2011
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      21-Nov-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   20-Nov-2011
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            30-Nov-2011
                           Comments: The updated PMP was disclosed locally on January 13, 2016 and in the Bank
                                         Infoshop on January 28, 2016, respectively.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?

                                                                   Page 10 of 11
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [    ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)

                             1290 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Jin Liu
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name:                                                 Date:
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Iain G. Shuker (PMGR)                          Date: 03-Mar-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 11 of 11
