INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSAI 134
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Apr-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Congo, Democratic Republic  Project ID:  P152903
of
Project Name: DRC Reinsertion and Reintegration Project (P 152903)
Task Team       Abderrahim Fraiji
Leader(s):
Estimated       02-Dec-2014               Estimated     15-May-2015
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSURR                      Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Other social services (100%)
Theme(s):       Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     21.50            Total Bank Financing:    15.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         0.00
IDA Grant                                                                 15.00
Transitional Demobilization and Reintegration Program                      6.50
Total                                                                     21.50
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support the socio-economic reintegration of
demobilized ex-combatants.
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 10


﻿This project will finance the socio-economic reinsertion and reintegration of the current "emergency
phase" caseload of approximately 4,700. The Government and MONUSCO will fund and complete
all disarmament and demobilization (D&D) activities and a portion of the sensitization activities. In
addition, the construction and management of the DDR centers, medical support, and transportation
of ex-combatants and dependents of ex-combatants to and from the DDR centers will be financed by
Government and MONUSCO funds.
o
The project is prepared under Bank Operational Policy 10 paragraph 12. This policy for Projects in
Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints is applicable due to DRC's man-
made conflict and fragility situation. The RVP has authorized processing this project under OP 10,
para. 12.
In this context, the project would achieve the PDO through five (5) components: Reinsertion;
Reintegration; Support to Demobilized Ex-combatants' Households; Support to Vulnerable Groups;
and Project Management, Sensitization, and Monitoring and Evaluation.
Project Components:
Component 1: Reinsertion
Reinsertion activities will follow disarmament and demobilization and will be provided for all
demobilized ex-combatants at the Reintegration Preparation Centers (RPCs) over a six-month period
to allow sufficient time for the various trainings. Reinsertion activities provided through this project
will include:
*      Livelihoods/career guidance, counseling, information and referral.
*      Holistic Combination of Trainings:
o      Literacy and numeracy training.
o      Relevant and targeted life skills training.
o      Entrepreneurship, small business, and financial literacy training.
O
 o              Economic association creation training.
o      Vocational training - agrarian and non-agrarian.
 *    Targeted psycho-social support.
*      Targeted medical referral.
 *    Sports and recreational activities.
Reinsertion activities will focus on providing a foundational set of skills to ex-combatants as they
begin the transition to civilian life. These trainings will provide critical information to facilitate this
transition. An ex-combatant representative council will be formed at the camp through which camp
management and lead training staff will hear concerns and suggestions and work together with the
ex-combatants to determine functional adjustments on a frequent basis. Additionally, the council will
provide input on programming preparations for the reintegration phase in such areas as toolkit
contents.
Component 2: Reintegration
The reintegration period will encompass two years after the ex-combatants' return to their
communities. This will be supported by the ongoing sensitization activities detailed in Component 5.
The Government and MONUSCO will organize transportation for beneficiaries from reintegration
Page 2 of 10


﻿preparation centers (RPCs) to their areas of return. The project will provide the following main
services to all participating demobilized during the r eintegration period:
Provision of start-up kits (one time event);
*     Outreach Services and Support: community-based follow-up training, including training on
O
Q)       initiation of income generating activities (IGA) by individual/small groups or economic associations,
advisory and referral services for month 1 to 12 of reintegration; and
 *    Drop-in Services and Support: information, advisory, and referral services from month 13 to
24.
Ex-combatants may opt to either (i) join economic associations with other ex-combatants and
community members or (ii) engage in individual or partnership IGAs (For ex-combatants who are
unable to reach the membership levels required by the project for the formation of economic
associations). The inclusion of community members in associations will not only strengthen the
individual ex-combatant's reintegration through building community connections and economic
relationships, but will also promote successful reconciliation with communities. Community
members of the economic associations will benefit from joining the economic associations, which
will receive support through the project including supplementary training for the joining community
members on the basics of association formation and operation and start-up in-kind support to the
economic association, as well as follow-up visits for the association as a whole.
Direct in community follow-up training, advisory and referral services will be offered to ex-
combatants. The implementing partners using the MIS case file system will initiate a follow-up
program whereby each ex-combatant or his or her economic association will be visited at least once
every three months over a 12 month period. Female ex-combatants will be visited once every two
months. These follow-up meetings will be designed to assist the ex-combatant or his or her economic
association with their economic and livelihood process as well as to monitor how well ex-combatants
are integrating socially.
Drop-in Reintegration Services, including information, advisory and referral services will be made
available during the second year of the ex-combatants reintegration journey. Herein, ex-combatants,
regardless of whether they are in economic associations, partnerships or working individually, will
have the opportunity to drop into the implementing partners' permanent or mobile offices and discuss
any issues relevant to their reintegration process, receive advice and be referred to if necessary and
where services are available. In the case of economic associations, ex-combatants could be
o        accompanied by members of their association.
Component 3: Support to Demobilized Ex-combatants' Households (US$3.242 million)
The project will assist households of ex-combatants via primary support to the spouse and some
additional support to other household members. In the aftermath of conflict and displacement,
families are not necessarily cohesive, functional units, and frequently lack the resources, capacity,
and skills to manage the re-establishment of their own lives, much less to accommodate the special
needs and demands to assist returning ex-combatants to reintegrate socially and economically.
Additionally, psycho-social trauma confronts not only ex-combatants, thereby impairing their ability
to resume their roles and functioning in the home, but also frequently affects spouses and children
who have similarly been subjected or witness to violence and conflict. Further, in the ex-combatant's
absence, key household roles may have been assumed by others in the household including non-
traditional gender roles.
Ex-combatant households will receive assistance through a support package that will include
reinsertion sensitization, life skills training, and basic livelihoods training to the spouse or a
Page 3 of 10


﻿household member selected by the ex-combatant in the absence of a spouse as well as psycho-social
counseling to members of the ex-combatants' household. This support is designed to increase the
likelihood of the ex-combatants' successful reintegration by complementing the individual training
received with training for the household, increased livelihood capacity of the household, and
O
Q)        reduction in the immediate financial demands on the ex-combatant.
Component 4: Support to Vulnerable Groups
While UNICEF will serve the CAAF who are another critical vulnerable group, the project will
support some cultural and sport activities for children to promote their social reintegration and
conduct analytical work on the CAAF. Furthermore, TDRP/WB will provide technical support to the
UEPNDDR in terms of M&E of CAAF. While UNICEF will be responsible for the overall family
tracing, reunification and socio-economic reintegration, the project will seek synergies with the
forthcoming Bank project on Quality and Relevance of Secondary and Tertiary Education (P149233)
which will target Katanga, Province Orientale, Kinshasa, Bandundu, Equateur and Kasai Occidental.
Female ex-combatants will be offered an identical base package as male beneficiaries. A gender
sensitive lens, however, will be applied throughout the implementation of all project components to
ensure differentiated needs of male and female ex-combatants are taken into account. . UEPNDDR
officers will be trained to work with female ex-combatants for whom separate facilities will be
provided in all demobilization centers and at least one of the reintegration centers. Specialized
medical practitioners and caregivers as well as additional facilities for their children will be made
available but these practitioners will only provide basic medical screening. All beneficiaries with
medical issues will be referred to specialized health centers and hospitals. Hence there will be no
medical waste generated within the project. All training and benefits granted to men will be offered
to women as well. Vocational training will be sensitive to potential female interest and needs. In
order to ensure that differentiated needs of women are addressed, dedicated facilities will be
provided and targeted activities undertaken. These will include, but will not be limited to, physical
and medical needs in camps (e.g., reproductive health, psycho-social needs, unwanted pregnancy),
physical security, separate accommodation, life skills training (e.g., careers, training and support on
issues related to SGBV), child care support during activities, and support to care for child dependents
(e.g., pediatric medical screening).
o         Chronically-ill and disabled ex-combatants: The project will provide specialized support to
chronically ill and disabled ex-combatants for a period of 6 months at the RPCs. UEPNDDR will not
set-up dedicated centers but will have medical doctors present at the demobilization centers. The
project will not hire a separate implementing agency to support this caseload but will supplement the
activities being undertaken by MONUSCO.
The World Bank will provide UEPNDDR with technical assistance early on to develop a clear
strategy for support to the chronically ill/disabled ex-combatants during the demobilization,
reinsertion, and reintegration phases. This technical assistance will include support in establishing the
process and final criteria for screening and categorization of the chronically ill/disabled/traumatized
caseload (including formal classification of disability). This technical assistance will encompass both
the chronically-ill, disabled and psycho-social support sub-components.
Psycho-social support for traumatized ex-combatants: This group of ex-combatants will receive all of
the same benefits as able-bodied ex-combatants. The objective of the support to traumatized ex-
combatants is to provide psychological treatment and social support to enhance their psycho-social
Page 4 of 10


﻿wellbeing, strengthen positive coping mechanisms, and overall social and economic reintegration
success while at the same time decreasing tendencies to violent behavior of ex-combatants toward
themselves and others. The project will provide specialized support to traumatized ex-combatants for
a period of 6 months at the RPCs. Along with the screening process for chronic illnesses and
O
disability, during the demobilization process, medical personnel will screen all ex-combatants for
psychological trauma and socially challenging behaviors.. The following psycho-social support will
be provided in the RPCs:
a.     Provision of counseling while assessment and diagnosis are being confirmed
b.     Full treatment package in the RPCs (8-10 sessions spread over 3 months/ average of 2 hours
per session)
c.     Assessment at discharge and individual recommendation for follow-up.
Follow-up monitoring and psycho-social support will be provided to those who are still in need when
returning to their communities. In addition, referral options will be explored, including linkages with
other projects in the areas of return. This community-based support would be cont ingent on existing
capacity for the provision of such support which will be determined through an assessment of
capacity.
Advocacy work on behalf of the adult vulnerable groups will be undertaken through sensitization
campaigns which will actively encourage family support, seek synergies with World Bank or other
projects to develop networks, community protection mechanisms, and medical, disability and
psycho-social support. Technical support will be provided to develop a strategy from the outset for
work beyond the project on the provision of support through mainstream services, facilitating
ongoing support after the DDR process.
Component 5: Project Management, Sensitization, Monitoring and Evaluation
Sensitization activities will begin before the start of the demobilization process, and thus Bank-
supported sensitization work will build on the preceding communications activities of the
Government and will continue throughout the project life cycle. Sensitization through the DDR
process involves a robust communications and public information strategy to restore a climate of
trust regarding the new phase of DDR. Sensitization activities will help beneficiaries and their
communities to better understand the DDR process, its advantages and components, and help to
a        manage expectations. Communication activities will not be limited to disseminating information but
will provide a voice to the project beneficiaries and, therefore, involve bottom-up communication
approaches, such as community meetings and beneficiary outreach. This is a critical piece of
ensuring citizen engagement in the overall project.
Communication activities will:
*      Emphasize general reconciliation and peace messages to prevent conflicts specifically with
regards to the reintegration of ex-combatants into local communities.
*      Inform ex-combatants, families and community members on the project overall, including
the overall objective and project benefits. This will be done, among other media, through radio
programs and sensitization meetings.
*      Inform and sensitize communities on: (i) the arrival of ex-combatants and the need to
facilitate their inclusion; (ii) the opportunity to participate in economic associations with returning
ex-combatants in their communities; and (iii) make referral to available community projects in the
area. To facilitate the social reintegration of ex-combatants in their new communities of settlement, it
will be necessary to prepare communities about the arrival of new members, and to sensitize them on
Page 5 of 10


﻿the special needs and challenges faced by ex-combatants, and specifically on vulnerable groups, and
their ability to participate in community life.
Project Management will include activities that would cover overall administration and management
O
U         of project activities. Activities that will be financed through this component would help ensure the
coordination, implementation, and management of the project.
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) and Management Information System (MIS). A strong M&E
system including a robust MIS will ensure that project progress is measured. It is essential that
information on all beneficiaries is captured during the initial demobilization process, securely stored,
and subsequently utilized to inform project implementation. In this context, beneficiaries and project
implementation progress and effectiveness will be monitored through a well-functioning MIS. The
MIS will provide monitoring data on beneficiaries and activities that would serve as an important
input into the planning of subsequent activities following demobilization. Apart from continuous
monitoring of project activities, the M&E would contain a baseline survey and community survey,
annual evaluation, mid-term review, sporadic evaluations if the need arises, and a final evaluation.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The areas earmarked for the establishment of small scale infrastructure for reintegration and training
of ex-combatants are located in Bacongo where UNOPS will build the MONUSCO-financed center
de preparation a la reintegration (CPR). The plot identified for project-financed activities lies in a
remote rangeland, vegetated with grass and low shrubbery, which is secondary growth and of low
ecological value. No protected areas or sensitive habitats are expected to be affected. The sites are
flat, with no particular risk of erosion, landslides or other geohazards. The sites are not inhabited and
there are no signs of localized livelihoods, such as fields, gardens or plantations.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (GSURR)
Wolfhart Pohl (GCFDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         In terms of environmental relevance, the project will
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               finance - per a small grants scheme - the development of
economic activities and livelihoods by ex- combatants.
While not financed by the project, small scale
construction activities for two centres de preparation la
reintegration (CPR) (financed by MONUSCO and
planned to be executed by UNOPS) are functionally
associated with the project. The foreseen instruments to
manage impacts are a negative list for activities,
equipment and goods not to be financed for livelihood
development under the project, as well as on the JNOPS-
executed activities, an environmental and social screening
assessment, gender assessment, and an environmental and
social management plan for the CPR construction. Further
details are in the ESAP in annex 5 of the PAD Given that
UNOPS is a signatory to the fiduciary principles accord
Page 6 of 10


﻿(FPA) UNOPS' safeguards management process and
instruments - - are considered equivalent to the Bank's.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           No protected areas or sensitive habitats will be affected by
S4.0the project-financed activities.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           No forests will be affected by the project-financed
activities, and no activities related to large scale
commercial forestry will be financed
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           The purchase or use of pesticides will not be financed by
the project.
Physical Cultural       No           There are no known physical cultural resources in the
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 project area.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           The CPRs will be constructed next to existing CTAs in
BP 4.10                              areas relatively close to main roads and towns. There are
no Indigenous Peoples present in the project area.
Involuntary Resettlement No          There is no land acquisition and/or resettlement, loss of
OP/BP 4.12                           assets, livelihoods or restrictions of access to resources
under the project financed activities, which do not have a
physical footprint. The small-scale civil works
(construction of pre-reintegration centers), which are
financed by MONUSCO and implemented by UNOPS but
associated with the overall project, will take place on
government owned land next to existing CTAs and will
thus not cause involuntary land acquisition and/or
resettlement. The proposed sites have no visible signs of
human settlements or structures, or any livelihood
activities; thus the anticipated negative social impacts are
negligible.
O
U         Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project will not finance the construction or
4.37                                 rehabilitation of large dams, and none of the project's
o                                              activities is depending on an existing or planned such
structure outside project financing.
*         Projects on International  No        No international waterways will be affected by the
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 project, including both surface and groundwater
resources.
Projects in Disputed    No           The project is not located in a disputed area.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project will finance - per a small grants scheme - the development of economic activities and
livelihoods by ex-combatants. While not financed by the project, small scale construction
activities for two centres de preparation a la reintegration (CPRs) (financed by MONUSCO and
planned to be executed by UTNOPS) are functionally associated with the project. Both activities
Page 7 of 10


﻿have the potential to cause limited, minor negative environmental impacts that will require some
form of environmental manage instrument. The foreseen instruments to manage impacts are a
negative list for activities, equipment and goods not to be financed for livelihood development. On
the UNOPS-executed activities, an environmental and social screening assessment, gender
O
assessment, and an environmental management plan for the CPR construction will be prepared
prior to the start of construction. Negative social impacts are expected to be negligible because
there will be no acquisition of privately owned land as the land for the centers is state owned, and
no involuntary resettlement, or negative impacts on livelihoods are anticipated. The plots
identified for project-financed activities are rangeland, vegetated with grass and low shrubbery,
which is secondary growth and of low ecological value. No protected areas or sensitive habitats
are expected to be affected. The sites are flat, with no particular risk of erosion, landslides or other
geohazards. There are no signs of human settlement, structures or livelihood activities at these
sites, which are in remote locations.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Due to the influx of people to the project area long term changes are anticipated. Rangeland will
likely be used more intensely for agriculture, and there will be new permanent settlements.
However, the overall impact of these changes will be negligible and entirely absorbed by the
ongoing environmental changes not connected to the project. These are resulting from a rapidly
expanding population, high demand for arable land, deforestation and land conversion.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
No alternatives are identifiable. Several options were considered for the sites for physical project
investments, and the ones with the lowest environmental and social impacts selected.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
As the project is prepared under the provisions of paragraph 12, OP 10, for projects in situations of
urgent need for assistance, or capacity constraints, the preparation of the safeguards instruments
has been deferred into the implementation period. During the implementation period, and before
the relevant project activities will be allowed to commence, the borrower will prepare and
implement an abbreviated environmental and social management plan (ESMP). This checklist-
format document will provide the necessary guidance and compliance for the small scale works
financed by the project. During the implementation period, and before the relevant project
activities will be allowed to commence, for the post reintegration activities (Component 2) the
Borrower will prepare a negative list of activities, equipment and goods that will not be financed
by the project due to their potential, negative environmental impacts. For the CPR construction
works UNOPS will implement its own safeguards management process and instruments, which -
given that UNOPS is a signatory to the fiduciary principles accord (FPA) - are considered
equivalent to the Bank's.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders include the implementing agencies, in the case of the CPRs, MONUSCO and
UNOPS, UEPNDDR and other relevant government agencies. Given the remote location of the
planned centers, there should not be any affected communities. The consultation on the planned
safeguards instruments as well as their public disclosure will take place during the implementation
period, once draft versions of the ESMP and negative list are available.
Page 8 of 10


﻿B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                               ///
Date of submission to InfoShop                            ///
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
During the project preparation phase no safeguards documents have been disclosed, as the project is
prepared under the provisions of paragraph 12, OP 10, for projects in situations of urgent need for
assistance, or capacity constraints. The preparation of the safeguards instruments has been deferred
into the implementation period, and in lieu an environmental and social action plan will be produced.
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Page 9 of 10


﻿Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No[   ]NA []
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
O
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Abderrahim Fraiji
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Markus Kostner (PMGR)                Date: 03-Apr-2015
Manager:
Page 10 of 10


