INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
SDate ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Feb-2016
9 Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Sep-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Indonesia                  Project ID:   P154947
Project Name:    Regional Infrastructure Development Fund (P154947)
Task Team        Taimur Samad
Leader(s):
Estimated        25-Jan-2016                Estimated     30-Sep-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSU08                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Other non-bank financial intermediaries (50%), General transportation sector
(20%), General water, sanitation and flood protection s ector (20%), Sub-
national government administration (10%)
Theme(s):        Other Financial Sector Development (40%), City-wide Infrastructure and
Service Delivery (40%), Other rural development (20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:    1015.00             Total Bank Financing:   500.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                        510.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development           500.00
SWITZERLAND, Govt. of (Except for FOFEA)                          5.00
Total                                                          1015.00
Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
29.    The project development objective (PDO) is to increase access to infrastructure finance at
the subnational level through a sustainable financial intermediary.


﻿C. Project Description
2.     Project Scope. The Project aims to support the structuring and operationalization of a
Regional Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) as a retail domestic financial intermediary located
within PT. SMI to increase access to finance for basic environmental, productive and social
infrastructure. The RIDF will focus on meeting an existing gap at the subnational level in access to
finance for economically-viable infrastructure that requires medium- to long-term tenor debt. The
RIDF will be accessible to creditworthy local and provincial governments across Indonesia.
o      However, it is expected that the RIDF business strategy will disproportionately target fast growing
medium and large urban local governments across all island groups where infrastructure
development is unable to keep pace with growing demand. The RIDF will be structured around
principles of financial sustainability with the view in the medium-term of being able to increasingly
leverage market-based sources of finance. The Project will also include the establishment of a Project
Development Facility (PDF) to support the development of a subproject pipeline as well as to
channel technical assistance to local governments in areas of project identification, design and
construction supervision, and related advisory services.
3.     Project Cost. The estimated Project cost at the concept stage is USD 1.015bn with a blend of
Bank financing, Borrower equity contribution and bilateral donor grant contributions as outlined
below.
Project Components
4.     The project will be structured with two components as described below.
5.     Component 1: Capital Support for Regional Infrastructure Development Fund (USD 1.Obn
with USD 500.Om of Bank financing and USD 500.Om of Borrower equity contribution). The
component will provide up to USD 1.Obn for the Regional Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF)
within PT. SMI to operate a financial intermediary lending business line providing senior debt to
local governments for economically viable infrastructure projects. Preliminary design principles for
the RIDF have been outlined by the MoF and PT. SMI as part of the ongoing World Bank advisory
support to Gol towards the detailed structuring and operationalization of RIDF scheduled to produce
a final deliverable by September 2015. Key proposed RIDF design characteristics are summarized
below.
6.     Institutional and Governance Arrangements. Gol and the Bank evaluated two institutional
options for RIDF at the pre-identification and identification stage including locating the entity within
either: (i) BLU (i.e. PIP or new entity); or (ii) a state-owned company (PT. SMI or new entity). The
abovementioned February 2015 MoF decision to locate RIDF within PT. SMI allows the fund to be
organized around three core design objectives. First, as a state owned company, PT. SMI has an
independent and autonomous management and operational structure. The structure will enable PT.
SMI to develop and maintain rigorous entity and project appraisal criteria and independent credit
decisions. Second, as an SOE, PT. SMI will benefit from its limited liability structure, subject to the
discipline of borrowing and repaying debts from a discrete balance sheet. Third, based on its location
with PT. SMI, RIDF will be possess the ability to build capital over time and leverage an increasing
net worth to mobilizing incremental funds.
7.     Gol and PT. SMI officials have decided to structure RIDF as a strategic business unit within
PT. SMI. The core benefits of a separate business unit model include independent management and


﻿operational systems, clear performance indicators and measurement and the use of a separate bank
account to allow for discrete RIDF profit and loss statements within the overall consolidated
accounts of PT. SMI. A range of alternatives had been considered at the pre-identification and
identification stage with respect to the appropriate structure for the RIDF within or linked to PT. SMI
O
including: (i) a trust managed by PT. SMI; (ii) a strategic business unit (SBU) with PT. SMI; (iii) a
separate bank account within PT. SMI; and (iv) as an integral part of PT. SMI. In preparation, the
Bank and Gol counterparts will develop a detailed governance and organizational structure for the
RIDF
8.     A series of additional institutional consideration and design aspects will be outlined during
preparation including, amongst others: (i) an independent operational structure for the RIDF business
line; (ii) required capacity enhancements in technical, financial, environmental and social safeguards
areas of expertise necessary for RIDF business line; (iii) a proposed two-level credit committee based
on size of loan (i.e. credit committee to be different from PT. SMI Board of Directors); (iv) system of
reporting to PT. SMI Board of Directors; and (v) system of third party due diligence after term sheet
on technical, legal, environmental and social safeguards aspects.
9.     Flow of Funds and Capital Structure. At this preliminary identification stage it is proposed
that the Project will channel funding to PT. SMI to capitalize the RIDF business line through a mix
of debt and equity. Bank financing under this component will be passed through the MoF in a two-
stage loan process by which Gol will borrow from the World Bank in foreign currency and on-lend
the proceeds to PT. SMI in IDR. Under this arrangement MoF will assume the exchange rate risk and
the sub-loan to PT. SMI will be priced to cover such risk as per Gol regulation for lending to SOEs.
Matching equity contributions from Gol will come in the form of both new capital injections and
asset transfer from PIP as outlined above. Further details on the capital structure will be elaborated
during preparation.
10.    Borrower Eligibility. The RIDF will focus on lending to creditworthy local and provincial
governments. It is expected that the initial five-year business plan to be developed during preparation
will focus on district or local governments initially, scaling up to more complex regional projects at
the provincial level as PT. SMI appraisal and financial capacity deepens. During preparation the
Bank and Gol will assess whether RIDF would lend directly to locally-owned enterprises (e.g.
PDAMs) and Perusahaan Daerah (PD), or whether debt obligations for such projects would rest with
a       LGs which would transfer assets and potentially liabilities to such enterprises.
11.    Sector Eligibility. The RIDF will focus on an open menu of viable environmental, social and
productive infrastructure that fall within the clear jurisdictional responsibility of local or provincial
governments under the Indonesian decentralization framework. Likely eligible sectors will include
water, sanitation, sewerage, solid waste, drainage, urban transport, roads, low-income housing, slum
upgrading and primary health and education facilities. The RIDF will focus on sectors - and specific
subprojects within sectors - that are economically viable and have clear development and poverty
reduction impacts. An exhaustive positive list of eligible sectors and subprojects will be developed
during preparation. Detailed SOPs covering sector eligibility and associated technical, economic,
financial, social and environmental appraisal criteria will also be developed during preparation.
12.    Lending Policies. The RIDF will provide medium to long-term financing for subnational
infrastructure. The Bank and Gol stakeholders have agreed at the identification stage on a set of
preliminary core lending policies around which the entity will be structured including:


﻿*      general obligation borrowing, appraisal of entity and project due to the economic rather than
financial viability
*      use of 'cost plus' pricing (i.e. lend at price that cover the cost of capital, operating expenses
and anticipated risk);
 *    provision of senior debt;
 *    medium- to long term tenor loans (e.g. minimum 10 years, maximum 20 years);
rigorous provisioning norms consistent with OJK regulations; and
*      a clear system of prudential norms.
13.    A preliminary set of recommended prudential norms discussed with Gol counterparts
include: (i) loan to total project cost capped at 90 percent; (ii) limit of 10-15 percent of RIDF net
worth lent to any single borrower; (iii) limit of 10 percent of RIDF net worth lent against a single
investment; and (iv) limit of 30-35 percent of RIDF net worth to be lent to a single sector. A
complete set of prudential norms for RIDF will be developed under preparation.
14.    Security Structure. At the identification stage the Bank and Gol stakeholders have outlined a
two-tier security structure including: (i) a debt service reserve fund; and (ii) a partial guarantee with
intercept mechanism. The debt service reserve fund would provide security to PT. SMI related to
local government repayment risk. The debt service fund would be capitalized by local governments
up to the value of two annuities as part of borrower obligations under the loan agreement with PT.
SMI. Payout from the reserve fund would be triggered in cases on missed or non-payment until
which point the debt fund has been exhausted at which point borrowers would enter into default
status.
15.    The second tier of the security structure - a partial guarantee and intercept mechanism -
would provide protection to PT. SMI in the case of borrower default. As per Gol regulations, only
the MoF can exercise an intercept of transfers to local governments. Under this proposed structure,
the MoF and PT. SMI would enter into an umbrella arrangement by which all RIDF lending will be
covered by a partial guarantee from MoF in the case of local government default. Upon the triggering
and payout of the partial guarantee, MoF would bilaterally intercept local government
intergovernmental transfers to cover the value of the executed partial guarantee. The exact value and
structure of the partial guarantee mechanism will be assessed and set during its preparation with a
concern for moral hazard risk and assurances that PT. SMI retains a strong incentive to maintain
a       rigorous appraisal and credit risk management practices.
16.    Component 2: RIDF Project Development Facility (USD 15.0m with USD 5.0m in bilateral
grant financing and USD 1 0.0m in USD in Borrower contribution). A Project Development Facility
(PDF) will be established as part of the operation with the objective of supporting local governments
in project identification, planning and preparation. The detailed design of the proposed PDF will be
developed as part of the RIDF business plan and operational framework development work.
17.    The PDF would primarily support the development of a project pipeline for RIDF through
the financing of feasibility studies, ensuring that projects are consistent with technical, financial,
economic, social and environmental appraisal standards established for RIDF lending. During
preparation the Bank and Gol stakeholders will explore additional services that might be provided
through the PDF including: (i) design supervision consultancy; (ii) project implementation third-
party technical supervision; (iii) preparation of procurement documents and procurement supervision
support; (iv) project-related public consultations and training support; and (v) upstream strategic
investment planning and prioritization. The Bank and Gol stakeholders have discussed alternatives


﻿for ensuring financial sustainability for the PDF including the use of: (i) a fee-for-service structure;
or (ii) including a small spread on all RIDF loans to local governments earmarked for recapitalization
of the PDF. The PDF structuring exercise will include an assessment of alternative mechanisms to
ensure financial sustainability of the PDF.
o
18.    The PDF structuring exercise will also define institutional and governance arrangements for
the facility. An initial set of three characteristics for the institutional arrangements for the PDF have
been discussed at the identification stage and will be subject to further analysis during preparation.
First, the PDF would be established as a separate business unit under PT. SMI, creating a 'firewall'
between the RIDF lending and PDF business units to avoid conflict of interest. Second, the PDF
would directly develop ToRs for feasibility studies and related advisory as well as directly contract
the same on behalf of local governments. Third, local governments would be responsible for project
identification under the PDF, review and approve ToRs, actively supervise contracted feasibility
studies and related advisory, and would provide final approval on completed feasibility studies and
related reports. All studies financed through Bank-supported project will need to comply with the
ESSF.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
19.    The Project would strengthen PT. SMI capacity in providing capital for lending to eligible
local governments (LGs). The on-lend funds under Component 1 would finance eligible projects
proposed by LGs, which are likely medium and large-scale infrastructure to increase local service
delivery under the mandates of the LGs in the context of decentralization. At this stage, LGs seeking
financing supports cannot be identified, however, it is likely that they would come from wide
geographical areas in the country. Examples of potential proposed projects eligible to be considered
for getting support from PT. SMI under RIDF scheme is specified in Table 4 and Annex 4 in the
Project Concept Note. Locations and scope of the environmental and social impacts of projects
seeking for financing from PT SMI will be determined during the screening and appraisal of the
proposals submitted by LGs.
0
20.    The proposed PDF intends to provide technical assistance (TA) and capacity building (CB)
for the LGs who would seek financing support from PT SMI for infrastructure development to be
financed under Component 1. The objectives of PDF are to meet the capacity gap of local
governments in planning and designing projects as well as generate project pipeline for RIDF and
ensure quality delivery of projects. The TA and CB would likely focus on assisting the LGs in
preparing projects, such as preparation of feasibility studies and associated environmental and social
safeguards assessments and management plans. The detailed and specific downstream activities as
results of the TA and CB will be identified during Project implementation when the PDF is
established and in operation. TA and CB activities will be covered by the ESSF which will provide
guidance on how to assess potential environmental and social impacts and the choice of the specific
instruments to manage risks of the future activities during Project implementation.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
21.    The Directorate General of State Assets (DJKN) of the Ministry of Finance (MOF) would be
the Executing Agency (EA) of this Project on behalf of the Borrower (MOF). With the assumption
that RIDF and PDF would be housed in the PT. SMI, PT. SMI would be the Implementing Agency
(IA). PT. SMI is an infrastructure financing company which was established on 26 February 2009 as
a state owned enterprise (SOE) with 100 percent shares owned by the Government of Indonesia
through the MoF. PT. SMI plays active role in facilitating infrastructure financing as well as


﻿preparing projects and serving advisory for infrastructure projects in Indonesia. Based on its original
mandate, PT. SMI aims to finance commercially-viable projects including investments in toll road &
bridges, transportation, oil and gas, telecommunication, waste management, electricity, irrigation and
waterway, and water supply sectors. By mandate, PT. SMI provides financing for public-private
O
partnership (PPPs) and private sector projects, however as of to date this mandate has not been fully
implemented due to rigidities in the pipeline for such projects. RIDF and PDF will be housed at PT
SMI as a new operation arm (unit or division), which will be developed exclusively to serve the LGs
and will operate under a separate management and independent from the ongoing PT SMI's
operations for PPPs and SOEs.
PT. SMI is one of the key shareholders (with shares of 33.88 percent) in the Indonesia Infrastructure
Financing Facility (IIFF), an independent business entity, which has been in full operations since
2011 and since then continued to have growing portfolio. PT. IIFF has an Operations Manual that
includes an ESSF and SEMS which was developed in reference to IFC, World Bank and ADB
Environmental and Social Safeguards Standards and Policies.
22.    PT. SMI has an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) developed based on
the Indonesia country system, i.e. Indonesian regulations. However, the ESMS also refers to the
World Bank and IFC Standards for health and safety. As of to date, PT SMI has financed mostly
public-private partnerships (PPPs) and private sector projects, and therefore the ESMS has been
applied for these clients. The Bank noted in a preliminary review that the ESMS is heavily focused
on environmental aspects. The social aspects including Indigenous Peoples and Involuntary
Resettlement needs to be strengthened. The ESMS, enacted as a Director Regulation issued in
January 2015, has been adopted to screen proposed projects for financing, determine environmental
and social risk level, and carry out due diligence assessment, all of which, will determine the gaps of
meeting the requirements specified in the ESMS. The project proponent seeking for financing is
required to prepare a corrective action plan (CAP) to address the gaps identified in the due diligence
assessment and meet the requirements specified in the ESMS.
23.    A detailed safeguards capacity and institutional assessment will be done which will include
the capacity building plan and institutional arrangements as deemed necessary for an FI loan of this
type. Presently, within the PT. SMI organizational structure, environmental and social management
is mainly managed by the Environmental and Social Unit under the Risk Management Division. An
o      environmental expert has been hired just recently and PT SMI is still in the process of hiring a social
safeguards expert. There is also pool of on-call consultants including environmental and social
experts under the Project Advisory Division. Currently, a consultant team (CT) is assisting the MoF
in designing the establishment of RIDF (including the PDF). This CT will provide advice to MoF on
the institutional set-up of RIDF, organizational structure and business plan and implementation,
including operational documents for the RIDF operations. The CT will carry out assessment in
various areas for PT. SMI including safeguards, both for its current operation, and for the future
RIDF and PDF activities in case both are housed in PT. SMI. The CT will, among others:
*      Assess PT. SMI's current ESMS and undertake gap analysis with the Bank's safeguards
policies as well as assess lessons learned and experiences from PT IIFF on the implementation of its
SEMS, as relevant (as PT IIFF is supporting private sectors instead of local governments).
* Based on this assessment, the CT will assist PT. SMI to develop an ESSF for the RIDF and
PDF operations which will be fully comply with the national and international standards as
envisioned in the current PT.SMI's master plan for environmental and social safeguards
management.


﻿*      Develop a plan for PT. SMI to adopt ESSF and international standards - determine a detailed
timeline and schedule of key milestones with responsible parties and resources needed. Start to use
and learn how to implement the ESMS for existing sub-projects with the supports from pool of
experts or external E&S experts familiar with WB policies and the international standards of other
FIs.
Develop an Operations Manual (OM) as an operational tool for the PT. SMI staff to
implement the ESSF for the RIDF and PDF operations in the overall mainstream of its business
operations.
 *    Assess the needs of the institutional arrangements to manage environmental and social
safeguards risks for RIDF and PDF operations. Start with the assessment and clarification of the
function and role of each division at PT. SMI in handling E&S aspects (Risk taking, Risk
Management and Internal Audit Division). For example, the function of Relationship Officer in the
Risk Taking Division to screen out the project with potential high E&S risk. Lessons learned on the
experiences and capacity assessment of the existing PT SMI's institutional arrangements in handling
E&S aspects should be considered in the development of institutional set-up for E&S management
for the RIDF and PDF operations. One of the important aspects that the OM has to include is clear
legal measures for PT. SMI LGs' clients to implement the agreed action plans to address the gaps, if
any.
*      Take into account the national laws and regulations pertaining Local Government related to
environmental and social management in the ESSF and OM, as the mandate of RIDF under PT. SMI
would serve sub-national governments.
*      Assess the capacity of PT. SMI in managing environmental and social safeguards, and based
on this develop a short and medium-term capacity building plan for strengthening PT.SMI's capacity
in environmental and social safeguards management, especially for the RIDF and PDF operations.
*      Assess and determine how capacity of LGs and borrowers will be screened and managed to
ensure adequate capacity through capacity building programs or otherwise.
24.    The results of these activities and their implementation will be assessed by the World Bank
safeguards team prior to appraisal and a more detail information on the PT. SMI's institutional
arrangements in its operations and capacity assessment and plan for managing environmental and
social safeguards under RIDF (including PDF) operation will be included in the ESSF and
summarized ISDS at Appraisal Stage.
25.    The environmental and social safeguards frameworks (ESSF) of RIDF will cover Bank
financed as well as government financed activities. It will be part of the PT. SMI's Operations
Manual (OM) for RIDF and PDF operations that covers Environmental Management Frameworks
including Pest Management and Dam Safety; PCR Management Plan as well as Social Safeguards
Management Frameworks including RPF and IPPF. The ESSF will also take into account the Bank's
Interim Guidelines on the Application of Bank Safeguards Policies for TA and TFs, as well as
Guidelines on Advisory Services, as relevant. PT. SMI will adopt its OM (of which ESSF is part of)
for all of its LGs clients for the RIDF and PDF operations regardless of financing/capital source
(RIDF, government budget, and/or other donors, etc.). The Draft ESSF for RIDF operations will
have to be completed and reviewed for Bank approval prior to Project appraisal. In the case that the
PDF will be also housed in PT. SMI, the TA and capacity building activities will also adopt the
revised ESSF. PT. SMI will have to strengthen environmental and social safeguards management in
its future operations, particularly for the RIDF and PDF operations.
Eligible Sectors/Eligible Subprojects


﻿Water Supply and Sanitation
Water Supply
 *    Source augmentation
 *    Water treatment plant, storage reservoirs, pumping machinery and system automation
 *    Trunk and distribution network (new and rehabilitation)
Sewerage
 *    Collection network and waste-water treatment facility
*      Pumping stations and machinery
*      Regional facilities and system automation
Environmental Infrastructure
*      Solid Waste Management
*      Vehicles and equipment/consumables for collection and transportation solid waste
*      Sanitary landfill
*      Waste processing facility
Drainage
*      Construction of new drainage network
*      Rehabilitation of existing drainage networks
*      De-silting an d/or strengthening of natural drains
Low-Income Housing and Slum Upgrading
*      Public or low-income housing projects
*      Public housing units in slum areas (in-situ and or relocation)
*      Integrated urban upgrading including water, sewerage, drainage, roads and street lighting,
etc.
Productive and Logistic Infrastructure
*      Road construction, rehabilitation, upgrading and widening
 *    Flyovers and grade separators
 *    Busways, bus procurement for public transportation, bus shelters and terminals and related
a      BRT investments
*      Multi-level car parking facilities
*      Small scale vehicular bridges and foot bridges.
Social Infrastructure
*      School construction and rehabilitation
*      Hospital and health clinic construction and rehabilitation
*      Public market facilities
26. The following main aspects are to be covered by the ESSF for the RIDF and PDF operations:
(i) Objectives, project components to be financed by the RIDF and PDF, institutional arrangements
and types of eligible subprojects, negative lists, safeguards policies triggered and instruments;
(ii) Screening of potential environment and social impacts, determination of specific safeguard plans/
instruments to be prepared for subproject (ESIA/AMDAL, EMP/UKL UPL, SOP), policies triggered
and subproject category;


﻿(iii) Screening and assessment of ancillary facilities and potentially linked activities;
(iv) Identifying whether the proposed subproject already has the required safeguards instruments;
identify the necessary safeguards instruments needed versus those that have been available; review
the gaps between the available instruments with the requirements in the ESSF; defining the scope
O
U       and activities in the Corrective Action Plan; In the case a proposed subproject does not have any
safeguards instruments, require the proponent to prepare the instruments in accordance with
requirements specified in the ESSF.
(v) Gap analysis and gap filling measures between Indonesia's AMDAL System and Bank's EA
policy; and between Indonesia's system related to Involuntary Resettlement and Indigenous Peoples
and Bank Policies.
(vi) Screening and assessment of cumulative impacts following established methodology such as
the IFC Good Practice Hand Book on Cumulative Impact Assessment;
(vii) WBG Environmental Health and Safety Guidelines (Environmental Health and Safety being a
pervasive issue in the Indonesia portfolio);
(viii) Dam safety requirements
(ix) Social impact assessment and social management plan; and
(x) RPF and IPPF.
(xi) Stakeholders Analysis, Consultations and Disclosures
(xii) Grievance Redress Mechanisms
(xiii) Capacity Building Assessment Plan, developed based on a safeguards institutional assessment
for PT SMI and subsequent capacity building of LG sub-borrowers. The institutional assessment of
PT SMI and LGs will include capacity building program, resources and budget estimates targeted for
the RIDF and PDF operations.
(xiv) Supervision and Monitoring of the implementation of safeguards instruments implemented by
the local governments
27. The ESSF will also clearly spell out the roles and responsibilities of the PT SMI, particularly the
operation arm (unit or division) where RIDF and PDF is located, and the local governments for
screening of subprojects, preparation of safeguards instruments, review and approval,
implementation, supervision, follow up and monitoring. The ESSF will also include the
arrangements to screen, identify and manage any potential gaps or inconsistency between TA policy
products and Bank safeguard policies. The ESSF should also refer to the Bank's Interim Guidelines
on the Application of Bank Safeguard Policies for TA and TFs for Component 2 activities.
28. ESSF will become part of PT SMI Operations Manual for RIDF operations (including PDF) that
must be fully adhered by all of its LG clients seeking support from RIDF and PDF, regardless of
financing/capital source for the investments (RIDF, Government budget, and/or other donors, etc.)
including future local government pipelines and its related feasibility study and safeguards
instruments. The draft ESSF will have to be completed and reviewed for Bank's approval prior to the
Project appraisal.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Indira Dharmapatni (GSUID)
Krisnan Pitradjaja Isomartana (GENO2)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)


﻿Environmental Assessment      Yes          The subprojects financed by the RIDF for
OP/BP 4.01                                 municipalities/districts will cover the following
sectors: (i) water supply and sanitation; (ii)
environmental infrastructure; (iii) low-income
housing and slum upgrading; (iv) productive and
logistics infrastructure; and (v) social infrastructure.
The ESSF will include an exclusion list of sectors
and subprojects that will not eligible for RIDF
financing and the rationales for ineligibility.
At this concept stage, the Project is proposed to be
Category FI because it involves investment of Bank
funds through a financial intermediary, in
subprojects that may result in adverse environmental
impacts. As an FI project, subprojects to be financed
could fall as Category A or B. The potential
environmental and social impacts from infrastructure
construction such as provincial or district roads,
water resources management system, landfills,
coastal and river redevelopment for urban
improvement project might be significant, diverse
and irreversible. The subprojects to be financed by
the project will likely be a combination of Category
A and Category B subprojects. The Project shall also
have likely social impacts other than land acquisition
and resettlement and also there is possibility of
cumulative impacts and other impacts related to
linked activities funded by government or other
donors and potential impacts of ancillary facilities.
However, the scale and location of impacts can only
be identified at the time that RIDF screens subproject
proposals. Impact assessment, minimization and
mitigation measures through the conduct of an ESIA
will have to be prepared by clients of RIDF and
approved and monitored by RIDF based on an
Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework
(ESSF), which will be an integral part of the
Operations Manual to be adopted by RIDF prior to
disbursement of the Bank's investments. Refer to
para. 25 for its content.
The ESSF should also refer to the Bank's Interim
Guidelines on the Application of Bank Safeguard
Policies for TA and TFs for Component 2 activities.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes          Some of the infrastructure subprojects may affect
natural habitats especially for municipalities or


﻿districts located in eastern part of Indonesia (e.g.
Papua, Maluku, Sulawesi, NTT, NTB). Potential
impacts on Natural Habitat will be screened and
addressed through the ESSF, which will spell out
that the project shall not finance any development on
protected areas nor the sub projects with potential
significant conversion or degradation to critical
natural habitats or natural habitats.
For sub-projects that is located adjacent to a
protected areas or that may change the purpose and/
or designation of a protected area or natural habitats
shall be required to prepare a full environmental
assessment (an ESIA or to conduct AMDAL study
acceptable to the Bank). This includes: forest
protection area; river edges; marine/freshwater
conservation areas; nature tourism park; peat areas;
areas, surrounding lakes and reservoirs, coastal
mangrove areas, water catchment areas; national
parks; coastal edges, forest parks; cultural reserves;
areas surrounding springs; scientific research areas;
nature conservation areas; and areas susceptible to
natural hazards.
UKL UPL or environmental management plan shall
be prepared for subprojects with less potential
environmental impacts to natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes          Project activities may take place in close proximity
to or within forest areas. However, the project,
through its ESSF, shall screen out any sub projects
with potential significant conversion or degradation
to critical natural forest or natural forest (protection
forest, conservation forest). For sub-projects that is
located in production forest area, the project shall
prepare an environmental assessment and shall fulfill
forestry regulation for land use permit as per Bank's
related previous investment project (Upper Cisokan
Pumped Storage etc).
Pest Management OP 4.09       TBD          Agricultural development or irrigation construction
is expected to be excluded from the project. The
policy is TBD and to be confirmed again during
preparation. If triggered, the pest management
framework will become part of the Environmental
Management Framework of the ESSF.
Physical Cultural Resources   Yes          Some of the sub-projects included under RIDF may
OP/BP 4.11                                 affect cultural property and trigger OP 4.11. The
environmental screening procedure in the ESSF to be


﻿included under the Project will ensure the Project
will not adversely affect sites having archeological,
paleontological, historical, religious or unique
natural values. Any contracts let under the Project
will include a provision covering procedures to be
followed in the event of chance fmds.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     Yes         The Project anticipates that the clients of PT. SMI
o       4.10                                     could be any LGs and projects eligible for financing
with a set of criteria for borrowing. It is likely that
LGs and projects seeking financing from PT. SMI
will be widely geographically distributed in the
country and therefore IPs communities which
includes Masyarakat Adat (MA) communities might
presence and affected. The presence and impacts on
IPs or MA communities can only be defined after the
RIDF is implemented. PT SMI needs to develop an
IPPF in accordance with OP/BP 4.10, which will be
part of the ESSF while also being a stand-alone
document.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        The Project anticipates that the clients of PT. SMI
BP 4.12                                  could be any LGs and projects eligible for financing
with a set of criteria for borrowing. Although at this
stage it is yet to be confirmed as to the definitive
menu of eligible sectors that PT. SMI will be
financing using the RIDF funds, the preliminary list
of potential eligible sectors include: (i) water supply
and sanitation; (ii) environmental infrastructure; (iii)
low-income housing and slum upgrading; (iv)
productive and logistics infrastructure; and (v) social
infrastructure. Locations, characteristics and scale of
projects and social impacts due to involuntary
resettlement as per OP/BP 4.12 policy are yet to be
defined during Project implementation. However, it
is very likely that projects involuntary resettlement
including land acquisition. PT. SMI will have to
prepare a RPF in accordance with OP/BP 4.12,
which will be part of the ESSF while also being a
stand-alone document.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   Yes          The project might finance the construction of a dam
as part of water supply system and water resource
management infrastructure in the region
For small dams (<15 m in height), policy
requirement is for the dam to be designed by a
qualified engineer. For large dams (15 m and higher),
the ESSF shall requires reviews by an independent
panel of experts, preparation and implementation of


﻿detail plans (construction, instrumentation, OM and
emergency preparedness), prequalification of bidders
and periodic safety inspections of the dam after
completion.
Projects on International     No            N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No           N/A
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Dec-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
December 2015
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Taimur Samad
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                          Date: 12-Feb-2016
Practice Manager/       Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)                      Date: 12-Feb-2016
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


