                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSR18802
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Jun-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Vietnam                                      Project ID:           P118979
                            Project Name:      Coastal Resources for Sustainable Development Project (P118979)
                            Task Team
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          18-Jan-2012                                  Estimated   10-May-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEN02                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector:            Ports, waterways and shipping (32%), Sub-national government administration
                                               (24%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and f orestry (23%), Animal
                                               production (18%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (3%)
                            Theme:             Rural non-farm income generation (46%), Biodiversity (25%), Rural services
                                               and infrastructure (15%), Water resource management (10%) , Other rural
                                               development (4%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                          No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       126.90           Total Bank Financing:                                      100.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                   14.20
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                         100.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                     6.50
                              Local Sources of Borrowing Country                                                                    6.20
                              Total                                                                                               126.90
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives


                                                                                 Page 1 of 7
                         The project development objective is to improve the sustainable management of coastal fisheries in
                         Project Provinces.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project development objective is to improve the sustainable management of coastal fisheries in
                         Project Provinces.
                          3. Project Description
                         The restructuring is to include the Ninh Thuan Province into the project. Investment activities
                         proposed by Ninh Thuan fit well into the current design of the project and thus there is no change to
                         the project design. The project comprises the following four components: (A) institutional capacity
                         strengthening for sustainable fisheries management; (B) good practices for sustainable aquaculture;
                         (C) sustainable management of near-shore capture fisheries; and (D) project management,
                         monitoring and evaluation.

                         Component A: Institutional capacity strengthening for sustainable fisheries management (est. US$5.3
                         million). This component would support three activities: (a) integrated spatial planning of coastal
                         areas; (b) upgrading of Vietnam fisheries database; and (c) selected policy research.

                         Component B: Good practices for sustainable aquaculture (est. US$48.1 million). This component
                         would support good aquaculture practices (GAP) through: (a) improved bio-security management;
                         (b) improved seed quality management; and (c) improved environmental management.

                         Component C: Sustainable management of near-shore capture fisheries (est. US$52.2 million). This
                         component would support: (a) co-management of near-shore capture fisheries; and (b) rehabilitation
                         of fishing ports, landing sites, and fish markets.

                         Component D: Project management, Monitoring and Evaluation (est. US$12.3 million). This
                         support: (a) project management; and (b) monitoring and evaluation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project has been implemented in 8 provinces: Ca Mau and Soc Trang (Mekong Delta Cluster);
                         Khanh Hoa, Phu Yen, and Binh Dinh (South Central Cluster); and Ha Tinh, Nghe An, and Thanh
                         Hoa (North Central Cluster). Ninh Thuan province will be added making the number of project
                         provinces to be nine. As the project activities take place in a very large area in a great variety of
                         locations, there are no salient physical characteristics of the project area as a whole that are relevant
                         to a safeguards analysis.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP      Yes
                          4.04
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36          No



                                                                        Page 2 of 7
                            Pest Management OP 4.09     No
                            Physical Cultural           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      Yes
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    Yes
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               No significant, large scale or irreversible environmental or social impacts are envisaged from the
                              activities proposed under the restructured project. Investment activities proposed by Ninh Thuan
                              province fit into the current project design. The key issues identified for the original project and
                              the management strategy/measures to mitigate the adverse impacts remain valid for this project
                              also. The environmental and social safeguard policies triggered for the parent project will continue
                              to apply to the restructured project.

                             Environmental Impacts:
Public Disclosure Copy




                             The project➢❨ s overall environmental impacts have been assessed to be positive. The project has
                             yielded positive impacts on the livelihoods of fishing communities and smallholder aquaculture
                             farmers (including ethnic minorities) in the project area and on the sector➢❨ s capacity for
                             sustainable management of coastal resources through co-management at local levels.
                             Environmental positive impacts have been clearly seen in the aquaculture areas supported under
                             the project and good practice on environmental management (eg. water waste management) has
                             been rolled out. Local beneficiaries have better access to information, training, sustainable
                             technologies, improved infrastructure and associated support services, and opportunities for
                             additional incomes. Local communities have been involving in the co-management activities
                             which help to improve sustainability of near-shore resources and catches.

                             Negative impacts are assessed to be limited, localized, manageable and reversible and can be
                             avoided or minimized through proper design and application of mitigation measures. The main
                             environmental issues associated with the project include: (1) improper use and management of
                             chemicals and antibiotics in aquaculture; (2) ineffective management and improper treatment of
                             solid wastes and wastewater resulting from aquaculture; and (3) civil works impacts (i.e. increased
                             localized level of dust, noise, disturbance to traffic and community, safety risks, water pollution
                             risks ) during construction of new infrastructure or rehabilitation of existing facilities (i.e.
                             upgrading of fishing ports, landing sites, fish markets, etc). These environmental issues have been


                                                                        Page 3 of 7
                          well screened at the proposal preparation stage and mitigated through the ESMF and other
                          instruments (details described under below paragraphs).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Social Issues/Impacts:
                           The restructuring does not involve any significant social safeguard issues. The proposed
                           components under restructuring are all existing in the main project, restructuring merely relates to
                           include Ninh Thuan Province and the redefinition of the Steering Committee and Provincial
                           Project Management Unit to include the Ninh Thuan province accordingly. Implementation, has
                           addressed the social needs of the different levels of interventions of the fishing communities
                           according to the policies triggered. The proposed implementation arrangements with the
                           Provincial Steering committees will be under the Project Management Unit➢❨ s overall
                           implementation management.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            There are no any indirect and/or long term impacts envisaged social issues such as loss of land,
                           loss of livelihoods, due to the small- scale infra-structure or any other impacts among Ethnic
                           Minorities (EM ) that will be financed by the project under the project restructuring. Overall
                           environmental impacts are considered positive.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            To minimize the potential adverse impacts, the project has considered alternatives to the
                           investment proposals prepared by the provinces, prioritized them based on the anticipated positive
                           and negative impacts, and developed screening checklists to exclude all investment proposals or
                           elements of proposals that may cause large-scale (or irreversible) social and environment impacts.
                           MARD has also prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF),
                           Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and Ethnic Minority Development Framework (EMDF) in
                           accordance with the Bank➢❨ s safeguard requirements to guide project staff on management of
                           environmental and social impacts during implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          The proposed restructuring will continue considering as for the parent project, all required social
                          and environmental analysis of alternatives for the investments that assure a sustainable fisheries
                          management. All social and environmental issues have been adequately addressed under the
                          original project through provision of bypass to avoid displacement, livelihood impacts such as
                          conversion of land with high productivity for construction or rehabilitation purposes.

                           The implementation of instruments prepared for addressing the OP4.01, OP 4.12 and OP 4.10
                           have been reported as satisfactory (ISRs and Aide Memoires). The livelihood support activities are
                           slightly behind other project activities and could pick up more robustly to deliver the desirable
                           impacts.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            Environmental Safeguards: The Project➢❨ s negative impacts on environment have been
                           addressed by the adoption of the ESMF during project implementation. The framework covers
                           guidelines for (1) safeguard screening; (2) impact assessment and development of mitigation
                           measures; (3) safeguard documentation preparation and clearance, (4) safeguard implementation,
                           supervision, monitoring, and reporting, (5) institutional strengthening and capacity building
                           programs; and (6) institutional arrangements and budget. Regarding safeguard screening, a


                                                                      Page 4 of 7
                           negative list has been used and will continue to be used throughout the project to exclude all
                           subprojects that would have negative impacts on (or have plans to convert land from) natural
                           parks, natural reserves, biosphere conservation sites, or mangroves. Also, in the ESMF, a set of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ECOPs for construction and dredging management has been prepared and included. The ESMF
                           also includes budget, implementation and monitoring arrangements to ensure effective
                           implementation of the ECOP and a training plan for relevant provincial Department of Natural
                           Resources and Environment (DONRE) and safeguards staff.

                           For each type of infrastructure activities, the implementing agencies are required to prepare
                           standard mitigation measures in the form of Environmental Code of Practices (ECOP) to mitigate
                           construction and operation related impacts in accordance with the ESMF. The ECOP is part of the
                           subproject➢❨ Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and is included in the bidding and
                           contract documents and closely monitored by supervision engineers.

                           Social Safeguards: The implementation of the OP 4.12 and OP 4.10 have been satisfactory. Land
                           donation and acquisition of small land pieces, as well as EMs training as per the EMPs, were
                           assessed and the compliance with Bank's policies confirmed by on-going implementation support
                           missions.

                           The project has implemented the co-management of near shore capture fisheries for the
                           rehabilitation of fishing ports and landing sites, and it has addressed potential social livelihood
                           impacts, ensuring support for communities➢❨ participation and collective action towards the
                           intermediate indicators' achievements.

                           Borrower is capable to plan and implement the safeguards measures and implementation so far has
                           been rated as Satisfactory.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             A strong participatory approach in the project interventions through direct participation of
                           beneficiary communities was adopted in the original project. The RPF provides guidance on the
                           over-all consultation strategy and mechanisms to ensure community awareness and involvement in
                           the project. The EMPF defines the procedures for EMs engagement. The RPF and EMPF were
                           accessible at local levelsand received comments before finalization. The instruments prepared for
                           the parent project will continue to apply for the restructured project.

                           To ensure the co-management implementation results, a guideline was prepared incorporating the
                           results of the SA ensuring to avoid impacts and assist communities based on stakeholder analysis.
                           The SA preparation involved key participants and included fishing communities, small
                           aquaculture farmers and local authorities. An independent monitoring assessed and report
                           throughout the project implementation, will also be used for the restructured project.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                           15-Dec-2011
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                        28-Dec-2011
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


                                                                       Page 5 of 7
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                          04-Jan-2012
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      07-Dec-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   28-Dec-2011
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                          04-Jan-2012
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08-Dec-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   28-Dec-2011
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                          04-Jan-2012
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?




                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Practice Manager?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name:
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Iain G. Shuker (PMGR)                            Date: 25-Jun-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                         Page 7 of 7
