INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC15446
Country:         Vietnam                    Project ID:   P154387
Project Name:    VIETNAM: IMPROVED LAND GOVERNANCE AND RESOURCES
INFORMATION MANGEMENT PROJECT (VILG) (P154387)
Task Team        Dzung The Nguyen
Leader(s):
Estimated        04-Jan-2016                Estimated     24-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSULN                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       General information and communications sector (50%), General public
administration sector (30%), General agriculture, fishing and fo restry sector
(20%)
Theme(s):        Land administration and management (40%), e-Government (40%),
Administrative and civil service reform (20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
U
Total Project Cost:     180.00             Total Bank Financing:   150.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               30.00
International Development Association (IDA)                     150.00
Total                                                           180.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
15.    The project development objective is to support improved efficiency and transparency of
land management to meet the needs of government, business and citizens.
16.    This will be achieved through the development and implementation of: (i) an improved


﻿policy and institutional environment for the land sector; (ii) the multi-purpose national LIS in order
to support key functions of land management; and (iii) a national system to monitor the
implementation and effectiveness of the 2013 Land Law. The key functions to be supported in the
LIS include land registration, land use planning, land valuation (pricing) and taxation and these will
O
U       be developed to ensure they meet FFP requirements. The provinces will be selected on the basis of
their development potential, commitment and implementation capacity, representativeness, and
readiness. These will ensure the project will provide model for future national mainstreaming with
relevant experience and, importantly, lessons for their replication nation-wide. The project's strategy
is to improve the availability of information on all aspects of land administration and management in
order to provide a transparent and accountability basis for more evidence-based decision making
over the land-based sectors.
C. Project Description
Component 1: Supporting the consistent implementation of the Land Law 2013 (US$ 22.8 million)
aims to improve land regulatory and institutional environment to ensure Land Law 2013is
implemented consistently at both national and sub-national levels. This will be done by improving
land services delivery through establishing unified regulatory framework and working infrastructure
of Land Registration Offices at provincial and district levels to reflects progressively respond to
economic and social needs, as well as technological advances. In addition, this Component will also
enhance public participation through communication and awareness raising and establish regular
monitoring the implementation of Land Law 2013 - high priorities in the Government's agenda.
This component comprises three subcomponents:
a.     Improving land services delivery;
b.     Raising public awareness and engagement; and
c.     Monitoring the implementation of the Land Law 2013.
Subcomponent 1.1: Improving land services delivery (US$ 18.8 million). This sub-component would
support the improvement of land service delivery by developing the nationally consistent LROs
procedures, guidelines, standards and establishing unified LROs service infrastructure that are
necessary for the consistent implementation of the Land Law 2013. At the national level support
would include piloting regulatory reform measures for land administration and land management. At
the provincial level, local regulatory tools will be regularly reviewed and updated and LROs would
be strengthened in line with nationally established service standards. This subcomponent would fund
consultant services, training, goods and incremental operating costs.
Subcomponent 1.2: Raising public awareness and engagement (US$ 2.3 million). The objective of
this subcomponent is to ensure that both the public and private sectors have the improved awareness
and confidence in the land administration system which enables their increasing adoption of the
registration of their land use rights and transactions. There is a need to ensure good communications
and understanding of land users rights and obligations under the land administration system and the
availability of and access to services and products. Furthermore, the private sector needs to be
especially aware of how to access and utilize land information in order to deliver professional
services, including financial services for land and property, land surveying, valuation, notarization,
real estate brokerage, housing and development.
For many stakeholders, especially the general public, what is important in the first instance is
knowing where to go to access specific information and advice on land information and only when
their specific needs arise do they need the more detailed information. Public awareness raising efforts
would focus at informing and encouraging wider public engagement on improving service delivery
and good land governance, and changing the existing public behaviors in registering their land use
and transactions. Attention will be given to vulnerable groups such as ethnic minorities groups and
women in the project provinces to ensure their access to land information. This subcomponent would


﻿support the development of the strategy and communication plan and its implementation in all
project provinces at provincial, district and commune levels. Accordingly, this sub-component would
develop and implement an appropriate mix of communications, their delivery plan and its
implementation to meet the diversified stakeholder requirements throughout the country, including
O
Q)      necessary associate training, based on the Communication and Awareness Raising Strategy
developed under VLAP. To ensure that such communications are effective and relevant, the
subcomponent would support a monitoring system to measure the impact of awareness-raising and
enable appropriate course corrections as may be assessed throughout implementation. Based on the
assessment of monitoring feedback, adjustments to the systems and tools for public awareness and
communications would be made.
This sub-component would support the preparation and finalization of communications and
awareness-raising programs, training as well as the preparation of development of information,
education and communication (IEC) materials, tools, dissemination, and the implementation of the
programs as well as the monitoring of the effectiveness of communications and awareness-raising
programs, including for ethnic minorities and women. Specifically, this subcomponent will finance
consultant services, the provision of hardware and software and training and incremental operating
costs.
Subcomponent 1.3: Strengthening the monitoring of the implementation of Land Law 2013 (US$ 1.7
million). This sub-component would establish a regular and sustainable monitoring system for the
Land Law's implementation. This would entail developing the monitoring instrument which would
cover the specific elements of the law to be monitored and the criteria to rate implementation.
Piloting would be undertaken in at least one province of each of the three regions under the project,
followed with the system's rolling out to all provinces under the project. The monitoring instrument
would also confirm then frequency of monitoring, which could be annually. The sub-component
would also support a broader comprehensive assessment of land governance in the country that
would draw upon international best practice instruments including the "Voluntary Guidelines on the
Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries and Forests in the Context of National Food
Security" (VGGT) endorsed in 2012 by the United Nations, the World Bank-funded "Land
Governance Assessment Framework" (LGAF) study of 2012-2014 and "Land Transparency" study
of 2013-14. A further detailed land governance assessment would be undertaken in the final year of
project implementation. This subcomponent would finance consultant services, hardware, software,
training and incremental operating costs.
Component 2: Establishment of the Multi-Purpose Land Information System (US$ 151.5 million).
o      The purpose of this component would be to support the development and implementation of the
national Multipurpose Land Information System (MPLIS) - the foundation for more efficient and
transparent land registration and land management, and good land governance in the country.
MPLIS is a further development of the experiences under VLAP with the current Vietnam Land
Information System (ViLIS). Consistent with good international practices, a nationally unified
MPLIS would be developed in accordance with fit-for-purpose principles for land administration and
management. The MPLIS would be implemented at national and sub-national levels in project
provinces comprising three provincial clusters in the Northern, Central and Southern regions.
The major project investment under this component is concerned with land registration and the
related development of then land registration module of MPLIS. Land registration would be
expected to be undertaken with due-regard to the fit-for-purpose principles for land administration,
which gives due regards to the government priority, appropriately engineered surveying accuracy,
local capacity, budget, sustainability and future upgrading. Also under this component, support
would also be provided for an expanded scope of the MPLIS to support the new functions of land
administration required by Land Law 2013 in the areas of gathering, integration, and dissemination
of information concerning land valuation/pricing, land use planning and land resources but not their


﻿generation. The MPLIS will be developed and established the central level, utilizing a modem
system and software architecture and current technology trends that are capable of: supporting land
registration and other land-related public functions at central, province, district and commune levels;
providing improved access to land information; and providing a platform and key applications to
O
enable the public to interact with MPLIS. MPLIS will be designed to cope with. Furthermore, the
implementation and operation of the MPLIS in provincial DONRE and other government agencies
will facilitate significant institutional reforms involving efficiency and service delivery gains, an
improved environment for business in Vietnam and provide a solid foundation for the further
development of the a National Spatial Data Infrastructure in Vietnam. MPLIS would provide the
core land-relation foundation databases of the NSDI.
The government intends that all line ministries and agencies would have access to and use a national
land database and this would be through the MPLIS. Furthermore private sector and the general
public would also have online access to MPLIS through a land geoportal. In addition to the
requirements for public access mandated under then Land Law 2013, access to land information
through then geoportal is consistent with the government's IT and e-governance strategies.
This component comprises the following three sub-components:
a.     Improving land registration
b.     Integrating other land information
c.     Enabling public engagement in land information
Subcomponent 2.1: Improving Land Registration (US$ 137.1 million).This subcomponent will
support: (a) the system development of MPLIS, (b) land parcel and land use right registration,
including data capturing and mapping, if necessary; (c) data integration; and (d) training and capacity
building of central and provincial staff with MPLIS.
At the central level, this subcomponent will support the development of unified MPLIS architecture,
software and national cadastral database which upgrade and extend the functionality provided by the
existing ViLIS software that implements "One-Door, One Level" LRO functions. In addition, the
software would support the migration of land registration and parcel data from legacy (superseded)
databases associated with other land registration software applications currently used in district and
province LROs, and efficient data exchanges and synchronization between levels and among land-
related agencies and land information provision to stakeholders.
At local levels, this subcomponent would support improved registration of land parcels and use rights
as required by Land Law 2013 in selected project provinces. Land registration activities would cover
a variety of circumstances depending on the coverage and quality of existing land registration
o       information in each district including: (a) first time surveying, mapping, land registration, and
issuance of land use right certificates (LURC) to land users; (b) updating and improving land
registration information in areas where the existing coverages doesn't meet current technical
requirements; (c) re-issuance of LURCs in cases where land was previously not surveyed and
mapped:(d) computerization of existing land records; (e) updating land parcel mapping that is based
on superseded datums to the current standard geographic coordinate system (datum) VN2000 ; and
(e) integration of geospatial (mapping) of land parcels with their textual information in MPLIS.
Land registration would be by far the major investment of subcomponent and would build on the
lessons and experiences of VLAP. It will be prioritized and adopt more affordable, cost-effective
approaches to surveying in accordance with agreed fit-for-purpose principles. One such method of
"fit-for-purpose" approach would involve the development of prioritized plan of land dada capturing
and registration and application of modem data capturing technologies, e.g. computer tablets and
open source mapping software that allows the use of downloaded satellite or orthophoto imagery as a
reference map layer and the mapping of general parcel boundaries relative to features visible on the
imagery or using the built-in satellite positioning. Parcel and right holder details (including photos)
and supporting documents would also be captured on the tablet in the field, subject to publication and


﻿verification by the community, and then the whole package for each parcel loaded into MPLIS when
field work is complete. The completion of the land registration database is a high priority for the
Government. Reportedly, LURCs have been granted to some 90 percent of the "eligible" land
parcels, i.e. those used by individuals, households and organizations and meet LURC issuance
O
conditions. However, the completion of this land registration work remains incomplete primarily
because 30% of land parcels are either mapped on old maps without coordinates ("299 Map Sheets")
or are not mapped. It is estimated that there may be as many as 20 million land parcels without a land
registration record or with an incomplete land registration record across the country .
This subcomponent will finance consultant services, the provision of hardware and software, and
training and incremental operating costs.
Subcomponent 2.2: Integrating Other Land Information (US$ 13.9 million).
Under the Land Law 2013, a broader and more comprehensive approach to land administration and
management has been mandated. This mandate extends beyond the core requirements of land
registration, surveying and land parcel mapping including land records management. Accordingly,
the MPLIS would be designed to accommodate a broader range of land information requirements
including land pricing and valuation, land use planning and a range of land resources data. Further,
this sub-component will include the establishment within the MPLIS of a land information geoportal
as the platform to integrate land parcel and registration details with these other fundamental land
data.
This subcomponent would support, the following thematic databases as further modules of MPLIS.
a.     Land Valuation and Pricing. Price Details including the land price value from the current
land price table, the advertised land price, the reported land sales price, successful bid for land in a
land use rights auction, other land valuation characteristics (relevant to future mass valuation), and
the land price map.
b.     Land Use Plans including the approved District Land Use plan and the approved Provincial
Land Use plan
c.     Land Resource Information including (where available) soil type and quality, vegetation,
land degradation, disaster risk assessments, and climate change factors.
This subcomponent will finance consultant services, the provision of hardware and software and
training and incremental operating costs.
Subcomponent 2.3: Enabling Public Engagement in Land Information (US$ 0.5 million).
The objective of this subcomponent is to ensure that both the public and private sectors have
improved access to land information, to ensure greater confidence and transparency in land
o       administration. The general public's access to land information would be expected to be at a less
intensive level than the professional and business users in the public sector (e.g. taxation offices,
notary offices, and courts) or in the private sectors (e.g. commercial banks and property agents)
which would be expected to require more intensive and frequent requirements. Thus, tools and
systems to be developed to support the access to land information by these different users would
require different approaches. In accordance with the government's information technology (IT) and
e-governance strategies, access to and use of land information and the undertaking of land-related
business transactions online would become increasingly important and a key to economic
development.
Under this component a land geoportal would be established to access the key areas of land
information that would be made available publicly from the MPLIS. Data security and consideration
to land information personal privacy would be given consideration in developing the public and
business interfaces for the land geoportal. The land geoportal would build on the developments and
experiences under VLAP and would be piloted in selected provinces under the project. Due
consideration would need to be given to the proposed Law for Information Access and governments
strategies for ICT, e-governance and information security. Fees and charges for access to the


﻿proposed portal would require consideration and possibly there would be two levels: (a) general
public access which could either free-of-charge or set at a low level; and (b) professional and
business access level which would be a at higher rate and accordingly provide access to a great range
and level of information. Development of the land geoportal should be driven by needs of the market
O
U       to ensure demands are best met, especially for the expected wider range of business and professional
users and then specific needs of each user group. The requirements of the banking and financial
sector involving checking of collateral, registering and discharging mortgages varies markedly from
the needs of land taxation offices which need information on land parcels' actual uses, size, soil
quality, users and so forth. Under this subcomponent, there would also be some development and
piloting of online lodgement and transaction services in support of the gove rnment's e-governance
strategies.
Specifically, this subcomponent will finance consultant services, the provision of hardware and
software, and training and incremental operating costs.
Component 3: Project Management (US$ 5.7 million). The aim of this component is to support the
overall supervision and coordination of project activities.
This component comprises the following three sub-components:
a.     Support to Project Management
b.     Support to Project M&E
c.     Innovation Fund for policy studies and innovative pilots.
Subcomponent 3.1: Support to Project Management provides technical assistance to support project
management and improve the in-house capacity of GDLA/provinces. Training will also be provided
in project management, planning, financial management and procurement. The costs of bi-annual
meetings of provincial and district advisory groups would also be covered. It will be important to
maximize project staff retention throughout the entire project implementation period.
Subcomponent 3.2: Support to project M&E assists the MONRE/GDLA in the early establishment
and implementation of an M&E system for regular monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of project
activities and their achievements and compliance with safeguards and fiduciary requirements at all
levels (central, province and district). The M&E system will be developed based on the project M&E
system established under VLAP and modified to reflect the requirements of the new project,
particularly the new project's PRFM. The detailed project M&E plan will be developed within six
months of project effectiveness, based on the M&E framework in the PIM. M&E will be
implemented at national, province and district levels. This subcomponent would also fund TA to
conduct impact assessments and client satisfactory surveys in PY3 and PY5.
o      Subcomponent 3.3: Innovative fund finances priority policy studies and innovative pilots in support
of initiatives for improved land governance at both the central and local levels on a competitive
basis. Initially, two priority policy studies identified and agreed during the project preparation,
namely those on sustainable financing the maintenance and operation of the MPLIS and LROs in
general, and on the formulation of a national land database and MPLIS development program. On
completion of these two studies, the requirements for other policy studies and pilots will be
considered for financing as emerged. VLAP experience shows government priority and facing issues
often change quite quickly and a flexible funding mechanism is needed to provide timely support.
This Component would finance consultant services for the CPMU and PPMUs, contract staff,
hardware and software for project management, travel and workshops, and incremental operating
costs.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project component 1 and 3 will have a national coverage to improve policy and institutional
environment and monitoring of the implementation of the Land Law. All the activities are in the


﻿form of technical assistance and capacity building. The TAs will include studies to inform the
development of implementation guidelines to implement the Land Law. Component 2 on
establishment of land information system will be implemented in a number of provinces to be
selected based on selection criteria, including (i) provincial potential socio-economic development;
O
)       (ii) provincial commitment and implementation capacity; and (iii) representativeness. No specific
location has been identified at this stage.
The interventions proposed under the project will include technical assistances, capacity building and
training, information systems and awareness raising.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The main counterpart of the project will be GDLA under MONRE and respective provincial
DONRE. GDLA will be responsible for social and environmental safeguard issues. The proposed
project is similar in nature with VLAP, so the client has experiences in dealing with the same type of
safeguards policies to be applied for the project.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Hoa Thi Mong Pham (GSURR)
Khang Van Pham (GENO2)
Roxanne Hakim (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project is classified as Category B. This policy is
OP/BP 4.01                              triggered due to the potential downstream
environmental and social impacts linked with project
activities. As described, activities to be financed by
the project will include mainly technical assistances
andgoods to support the implementation of Land
Law 2013. Project activities aim to support the
strengthening of policy and institutional environment
for land management, including improving the legal
framework for access to land information, and
strengthening land information system and land
governance. Thus, the project will have positive
environmental and social impacts by improving the
quality, quantity and access to social and
environment-related information in the land
information system.
Regarding safeguard instruments, given the nature of
the project, safeguard issues will be mainstreamed in
the project activities. The need and process to
address environmental and social issues associated
with the project activities would require MONRE,
during preparing a TOR, to incorporate
environmental and social objectives into the project
TA activities and the expected reports will need to
describe how potential environmental and social


﻿issues are identified and addressed through
provisions in proposed policies and institutional
design. In addition, training activities, where
applicable, will include issues related to safeguards.
A social assessment (SA) has been carried out during
project preparation to inform project design,
especially for component 1 on strengthening policy
and institutional environment, including
communication and awareness-raising as well as land
law implementation monitoring. Ethnic minority
people and women will be paid special attention
during social assessment to ensure they will benefit
from the project equally. The SA will also assess
project implications (if any) on natural habitats,
forests and Physical Cultural Resources (more
specifically on land use planning and mapping
processes). Applicability of OP4.12 will also be
clarified in the SA.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No           Activities of surveying and mapping are to serve
development and implementation of the multi-
purpose national LIS in order to support key
functions of land management, including land
registration, land use planning, land valuation
(pricing) and taxation. These activities will not
modify the status quo of natural habitats. As such,
the project activities will not lead to conversion or
degradation of natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           No           The activities of surveying and mapping will also not
affect the status quo of forests. As such, the project
will not result in (i) negative impacts on the health
and quality of forests, (ii) affecting the rights and
welfare of people and their level of dependence upon
or interaction with forests, and (iii) changes in the
management, protection, or utilization of natural
forests or plantations, whether they are publicly,
privately, or communally owned.
Pest Management OP 4.09      No           The project does not finance procurement of any
pesticides or cause an increase in use of pesticides as
results of the project.
Physical Cultural Resources  No           The activities of surveying and mapping will not
OP/BP 4.11                                affect the status quo of PCRs. As such, the project
will not cause adverse impacts on PCRs.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     Yes          The project with improved land information and land
4.10                                      related service provisions would potentially benefit
all those with an interest in land, including ethnic
minorities as potential beneficiaries. Since the


﻿project will be phasing, an ethnic minority planning
framework (EMPF) will be prepared before project
appraisal. In addition, ethnic minority development
plans (EMDPs) will be developed for the project
provinces having ethnic minority people. The
number of EMDPs to be prepared before project
appraisal will be identified once the project areas are
known.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes          There are no civil works proposed for this project so
BP 4.12                                    no land acquisition will be occurred. There are also
not any impacts on restriction of access to natural
resources or land use planning activities since the
established information system only record the
available information on land use plans. The OP 4.12
is triggered as a preventive measure in case if land
acquisition will be occurred as a result of land re-
mapping leading to discover the public land which is
under use by individuals or households. There will
be no instruments for the project, except for SA,
where potential applicability of OP4.12 will be
clarified.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No            The project does not finance construction or
rehabilitation of any dams.
Projects on International     No           The project does not include activities that take place
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       on international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No          The project is not located in any disputed areas.
BP 7.60
O
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Nov-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Social Assessment: 30 November, 2015
Ethnic Minority Planning Framework (EMPF) 30 November, 2015
Ethnic Minority Development Plans (EMDPs): 10 December, 2015
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Dzung The Nguyen
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Svend Jensby (SA)                         Date: 10-Nov-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Jorge A. Munoz (PMGR)                     Date: 10-Nov-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


