INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC13247
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Apr-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Apr-2015, 28-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         South Asia                 Project ID:   P154580
Project Name:    Bangladesh Regional Connectivity Project 1 (P 154580)
Task Team        Diep Nguyen-Van Houtte
Leader(s):
Estimated        11-May-2015                Estimated      15-Dec-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       General transportation sector (50%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and
Highways (20%), Other domestic and international trade (15%), I nformation
technology (15%)
Theme(s):        Regional integration (25%), Trade facilitation and market access (25%),
Infrastructure services for private sector development (25%) , Rural services and
infrastructure (25%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     135.00             Total Bank Financing:   120.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               15.00
International Development Association (IDA)                     120.00
Total                                                           135.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The development objective is to decrease border crossing time at selected border crossing points and
to enhance connectivity for trade along strategic regional transport corridors.
C. Project Description


﻿The proposed investment project aims to facilitate connectivity, trade and transport for national and
regional trade. The multi-sector project is expected to provide an estimated US$120 million to
finance the following components. Components 1, 2 and 4 (US$90 million) are proposed to be
financed by regional and national IDA (2/3 and 1/3, respectively), whereas Component 3 will be
financed by national IDA.
Component 1 a: Investments in infrastructure, systems and procedures to modernize key selected land
ports essential for trade with India and Bhutan (US$57 million). Two greenfield land ports will be
*       developed and at least two existing land ports will be improved/modernized. Designs will consider
and incorporate the needs of women traders such as female-only waiting rooms and lines for
clearances, female toilets, and other infrastructure areas specifically allocated for female traders. A
simplified clearance regime will be implemented for small traders, many of which are female. The
selection of border posts was guided by several factors including: a) client request; b) volume of
current or potential traffic; c) location on SAARC or other sub-regional strategic corridors; d)
potential to enhance regional connectivity; e) gaps in financing after considing Government and
other development partner support; and, f) availability of technical assessments. The implementation
agency for this component would be Bangladesh Land Port Authority. Cost estimates are as follows:
(a)    Thegamukh Land Port Development (US$10 million): Thegamukh is currently a dormant
border crossing on Bangladesh's eastern border with the state of Mizoram, NE India, although it was
once an important passageway with large numbers of goods traded and a thriving commercial center.
It is on the road (and river) from Chittagong to southern Mizoram in India, about 150-160km from
Chittagong Port. The opening of new trade routes between Bangladesh and the north-eastern states of
India, including Mizoram and Tripura, through the Thegamukh-Kawrpucchuah border point is
considered a high priority for both the Government of India and Government of Bangladesh.
Thegamukh could also serve as a transit point between West Bengal and Mizoram, and, potentially,
Myanmar.
(b)    Ramgarh Land Port Development (US$10 million): Ramgarh is located on the border with
Sabroom in Tripura state, Northeast India, less than 100km from Chittagong Port. The Land port is
expected to create important trade linkages from Bangladesh and mainland India to Tripura and the
O
C.      rest of Northeast India as well as to East Asia.
(c)    Bhomra Land Port Expansion (US$22 million): Bhomra land port is located approximately
75km from both Kolkata in India and Khulna in Bangladesh, two major economic centers, and
250km from Dhaka. Once the Padma Bridge is completed, it will be on the shortest route from
Kolkata to Dhaka. The land port was built in anticipation of the expected significant increase in trade
traffic.
(d)    Improvements/Modernization of 1-2 Other Land Ports: US$15 million
Component lb: Develop (pilot) programs to support female traders at selected land ports (US$8
million). Building on the recommendation included in the Ministry of Finance's gender budget
2013/2014, the Ministry of Commerce (MoC) committed to "Encourage trade bodies to provide
awareness raising trainings on workplace related violence and harassment against women". Activities
could include: (i) sensitization programs for Customs officers and other staff working at land ports;
(ii) public information campaigns on safety issues for women traders; (iii) educational,
communication, and sensitization programs to educate female traders on the law, their rights and
obligations; (iv) in partnership with Bangladesh Women Chamber of Commerce and Industry
(BWCCI), providing support for training and knowledge programs for women traders to learn skills
related to better production, preservation, transport and marketing of their products; (v) establishing
an institutional mechanism for women traders to communicate their needs and issues linked to


﻿national and cross-border trade to relevant Government officials; and, (vi) developing improved
facilities along the supply chain between production centers and border points to address the needs
of women traders, such as border haats and cold storage structures (separate from land port
infrastructure). WB-financed studies currently underway in some border areas will help inform the
O
design of these programs. BLPA would lead the implementation of this activity in close coordination
with Ministry of Commerce and Department of Customs. Discussions are currently underway
between the World Bank Group and AUSAid to fund among other trade facilitation measures, a
program to increase the number of women-owned/operated enterprises along the key trade corridors
of the Eastern Corridor of South Asia (through improving existing enterprises and creation of new
enterprises), including along the corridors and land ports discussed in this project. This trust-funded
program will be complementary to and implemented in parallel with the proposed Project.
Component 2: Studies for Connecting Roads/Last Mile Links to Key Land Ports (US$10 million).
Many of the existing and greenfield land ports have missing or poor quality connecting roads. This
component will prepare feasibility and design studies as well as bidding documents to address these
missing links. Studies will include detailed feasibility, design and bidding documents, and
environmental and social studies for the connecting roads to Thegamukh Land Port, Hili Land Port,
and Ramgarh Land Port among others. It is expected that a follow-on World Bank project (Regional
Connectivity Project 2) would finance the missing road links once the studies are completed. The
implementation agency for this component would be LGED.
Component 3: Customs Modernization and National Single Window Development (US$30 million).
The implementation agency for this component would be the Customs Department in National
Bureau of Revenue.
(a)    Bangladesh National Single Window (NSW) Implementation including back-office
automation in 6 Licensing and Permit issuing agencies. This activity will include Business Process
simplification, software development and ICT infrastructure to support NSW implementation (US
$20 million).
(b)    Strengthening Customs Modernization through (i) Implementation of a sophisticated Risk
Management Module as well as providing resident technical assistance and Capacity Building for
Risk Management generally across an 18-24 month period followed by peripatetic visits during the
life of the project; (ii) Implementation of a Valuation database as well as providing resident TA and
Capacity Building for the valuation processes across a 12-18 month period followed by peripatetic
o      visits during the life of the project; and, (iii) Customs business process harmonization and
simplification through business process re-engineering and implementing the new processes in
ASYCUDA World (US$5 million). The TA and Capacity Building activities proposed here will
build upon and further strengthen initiatives currently underway supported by WBG's Trade and
Competitiveness Practice (formerly IFC Advisory Services).
(c)    ICT Infrastructure for selected Land Ports/Border Crossings including Hardware,
Communications Infrastructure including last-mile connectivity between crossing points and
Government Network backbone (US$5 million).
Component 4: Institutional Development to enhance cross-sector collaboration for border
management, trade and transport facilitation (US$7 million). Fund technical assistance, secretariat
and project management support to establish and operate a National Trade and Transport Facilitation
Committee, a Border Management (Sub)-Committee, and a National Single Window (Sub)-
Committee, and to fund the two Project Management Units in Ministry of Shipping and Ministry of
Commerce, and the project management cells in the implementation agencies.


﻿(a)    Fund PMU in Ministry of Commerce and sub-PMU in Customs/NBR), and technical
assistance, secretariat and project management support to establish and operate a National Trade and
Transport Facilitation Committee, a Border Management (Sub)-Committee, and a National Single
Window (Sub)-Committee (US$5 million). These committees will also coordinate with their Indian,
O
)       Bhutanese and Nepalese counterparts to coordinate and harmonize issues related to cross-border
trade.
(b)    Fund PMU in Ministry of Shipping (US$2 million, approximately US$400,000 per year for 5
years)
Contingency (US$8 million)
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Bhomra is an existing land port on the border with the town of Ghojadanga in West Bengal, India.
The existing land port is approximately 15.73 acres in size. Government would like to expand the
land port and estimates that another 46.3 acres will be required which will impact approximately 100
households.
Thegamukh is a greenfield land port on the border with the State of Mizoram in Northeast India,
along the Karnafuli River. The 10 acres required has been identified and approximately 15
households will be affected. The Government of India plans to build a bridge across the river to link
the land ports of the two countries.
Ramgarh is a greenfield land port on the border with the State of Tripura in Northeast India, along
the Feni River. The 10 acres required has been identified and approximately 5 households will be
affected. The Government of India plans to build a bridge across the river to link the land ports of the
two countries.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
While the Government of Bangladesh has implemented many World Bank projects, the Ministry of
Shipping has not implemented a World Bank project in the last decade and its agency Bangladesh
Land Port Authority (BLPA) has never implemented a World Bank project. BLPA implements land
ports and border post infrastructure regularly on behalf of the Government of Bangladesh and is
required to follow GoB environmental and social regulations. Nonetheless, the Project
Implementation Unit in Ministry of Shipping will certainly need to hire additional staff with
expertise in environmental and social safeguards through the project, to boost its capacity in these
areas. Training for the PMU will be arranged through the project to ensure that all team members
with a role in safeguards aspects of the project fully understand the concepts of environmental and
social management as well as specific requirements applicable to the project. In addition,
construction activities will be overseen by an independent Construction Supervision Consultant with
environmental and social team members to provide oversight on compliance with all required
management plans and measures.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Leanne Farrell (GENDR)
Mridula Singh (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY


﻿Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment     Yes          This policy will be triggered due to anticipated
OP/BP 4.01                                impacts to be caused by the construction or
rehabilitation of an estimated 5-6 land ports. Project
activities will include both "greenfield" construction,
as well as rehabilitation/extension of existing
facilities.
To mitigate and manage environmental and social
impacts, an Environmental Management Framework
(EMF) will be prepared, including environmental
screening and preliminary identification of
mitigation and management measures for the three
identified ports (Bhomra, Thegamukh, Ramgarh), as
well as procedures and requirements for completing
detailed EAs/EMPs once detailed design studies are
underway for these and other future land ports yet to
be identified.
The EMF will also specify that, for all future
connecting roads and "last mile links" to key land
ports to be prepared under Component 2, the
necessary safeguards studies will also be carried out
in parallel, including environmental assessments and
EMPs in accordance with this policy.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  TBD           Based on preliminary screening, the three identified
land port locations are all in modified terrain, mostly
under current agricultural use. Therefore, this policy
is not considered likely to be triggered. Nonetheless,
its applicability will be assessed, and avoidance or
mitigation measures recommended as needed, during
the environmental screening of identified land ports
as part of the EMF. For the land ports which are not
yet identified, as well as for preparation studies of
future "last mile links" and connecting roads under
Component 2, the EMF will include appropriate
criteria to screen for the presence of natural habitats,
ensure avoidance of any areas of critical habitat, and
provide for adequate mitigation measures as required
in accordance with the policy.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           TBD          Based on preliminary desk-based screening, the three
identified land port locations do not appear to impact
forests. Nonetheless, this will be verified through the
environmental screening process for identified land
ports. If needed, the EMF will indicate appropriate
management measures to be fully developed during


﻿the detailed design / EIA and EMP phase of
investment preparation. For unidentified future land
ports under Component 1 as well as all future
connecting / 'last mile' infrastructure investments to
be prepared under Component 2, the EMF will
include appropriate criteria to screen for any
potential impacts to forests, and ensure management
measures are developed as required in accordance
with the policy.
Pest Management OP 4.09      TBD         This policy is not expected to be triggered; however,
the EMF will include criteria to screen project
activities to determine applicability (such as with any
potential use of rodenticides or other pest control
products at the land port facilities) and ensure
appropriate management of pest issues in accordance
with the policy.
Physical Cultural Resources  TBD         The applicability of this policy to the identified land
OP/BP 4.11                               ports, and any required compliance measures, will be
determined through environmental screening. For
future land ports to be developed or expanded
through the project, as well as future connecting /
"last mile" infrastructure to be prepared under
Component 2, appropriate screening criteria and
assessment/management procedures, including
consultations with stakeholders, will be specified in
the EMF.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     Yes         The policy is applicable as some of these regions are
4.10                                     inhabited by tribal communities and they may be
adversely affected. An Indigenous Peoples Planning
Framework (IPPF) will be prepared, outlining the
process and requirements for social impact
assessment to determine the scale and to prepare
appropriate site specific Indigenous Development
plans as applicable.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        Based on the preliminary information available, land
BP 4.12                                  will be acquired for land port development. There
may also be a need to upgrade existing infrastructure
facilities for easy flow of traffic movement. A
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be
prepared, including requirements for Social Impact
Assessments to be carried out to prepare
Resettlement Action Plans for specific land ports and
any other activities requiring land acquisition that
trigger the policy.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No           This will not be triggered as the project does not
contain any dam related activities.


﻿Projects on International     No            This policy is not expected to be triggered. While
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                        Ramgarh, Tamabil, and Thegamukh are close to
rivers that run along international borders, the actual
lands identified for the land ports are not on the river
itself, and the nature and scale of project works is
very site-specific and should not affect the quantity
or quality of water in international waterways in any
way.
If any construction works associated with future
unidentified land ports affect international
waterways, this policy's applicability will be re-
assessed and riparian notification will be carried out
in accordance with the policy if necessary.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No           This policy is not expected to be triggered, as none
BP 7.60                                     of the known project sites are in disputed areas.
Nonetheless, all future proposed land port locations,
as well as locations of connectivity infrastructure to
be prepared under Component 2, will be screened to
determine whether any of these activities could
trigger this policy, and notifications made as required
before the project would proceed to support any
infrastructure in any disputed area.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 11-May-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The draft environmental and social impact studies for the three land ports to be financed, as well
as the EMF for future land ports, will be completed prior to Appraisal.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Diep Nguyen-Van Houtte
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Zia Al Jalaly (SA)                          Date: 28-Apr-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Karla Gonzalez Carvajal (PMGR)              Date: 28-Apr-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


