                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                           RESTRUCTURING STAGE
            Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon       approval of the project restructuring
.




                                                                                          Report No.:ISDSR23354
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated: 27-Nov-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                           Egypt, Arab Republic of         Project ID:               P101103
    Project Name:                      Egypt National Railways Restructuring Project (P101103)
    Task Team Leader(s):               Diep Nguyen-Van Houtte,Sami Ali
    Estimated Appraisal                09-Nov-2008                     Estimated Board           17-Mar-2009
    Date:                                                              Date:
    Managing Unit:                     GTI05                           Financing                 Investment Project
                                                                       Instrument:               Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency                      Recovery) or OP               No
    8.00(Rapid Response to Crises and         Emergencies)?
                                               Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           305.00                             Total Bank Financing: 270.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                           Amount
    Borrower                                                                                                          35.00
    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                         270.00
    Total                                                                                                         305.00
    Environmental Category:            B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?        No

2. Current Project Development Objectives
The proposed additional financing will contribute to achieving the objective of the Egypt National Railways
Restructuring Project (ENRRP) which is to assist the                                  Government to
improve Egypt National Railways' (ENR's) responsiveness to econom                                     ic and
social needs through more reliable, efficient and safer services, and to
strengthen the company's financial viability. The project will therefore contrib
ute to the successful implementation of ENR's ongoing transformation plan, which
aims at enhancing safety of services, improve customer service, develop the rai
l freight business, and achieve financial sustainability of railways operations.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
The proposed additional financing will contribute to achieving the objective of the Egypt National Railways
Restructuring Project (ENRRP) which is to assist the                                  Government to

                                                      Page 1 of 9
improve Egypt National Railways' (ENR's) responsiveness to econom                                       ic and
social needs through more reliable, efficient and safer services, and to
strengthen the company's financial viability. The project will therefore contrib
ute to the successful implementation of ENR's ongoing transformation plan, which
aims at enhancing safety of services, improve customer service, develop the rai
l freight business, and achieve financial sustainability of railways operations.
3. Project Description
The ENRRP finances key elements of ENR's transformation plan with particular emphasis on investments
that are critical to improving operational efficiency and safety for passengers, and increasing revenue, as well
as promoting initiatives to modernize management practices.

Component 1: Signaling Modernization (US$190 million - IBRD financing US$185 million for goods and
works, counterpart financing US$5 million for supervision). This component will finance needed investments
in signaling systems from Arab el-Raml to Alexandria and centralized traffic control (CTC) for that section
and Cairo-Banha (on the Cairo-Alexandria line). The section was selected on the basis of a multi-criteria
assessment of the network giving special attention to congestion levels and safety situation. When completed,
this section will be the most modern part of the Egyptian railway network in terms of signaling and safety
standards. The total investment cost for goods and some works of this component is estimated to be US$185
million, financed by the IBRD loan. The signaling system will be implemented on the existing right of way
and will comprise an automatic block signaling system (on an open line), electronic interlocking systems (in
stations), and a level-crossing protection system. In addition, the Project will finance under this component a
computerized Central Traffic Control (CTC), offering sophisticated information to railway staff, including:
(i) command and monitoring of train circulation, (ii) a presentation-of-train graph, (iii) event recording, and
(iv) dispatcher communications.

Component 2: Renewal of 200 km of track (US$80 million - IBRD financing US$60 million, counterpart
financing US$20 million). This component will finance priority track-renewal works for 200 km of track
along the Cairo-Aswan line (149 km on four sections of track) and the Benha - Port Said line (51 km on two
sections of track), and supervision of those works. Track sections to be renewed have been identified based
on current conditions, traffic levels, and contiguity with track in similar condition. The identified sections
will be fully renewed, including installation of long-welded rail, concrete sleepers, elastic fastenings, and
ballast without any land acquisition. The renewal will significantly decrease the risk of derailments and
decrease track maintenance cost, while increasing train speed.

Component 3: Modernization of Management and Operating Practices (US$10 million-financed by grants
and counterparts). Activities under this component are directed toward developing and cementing changes in
managerial and staff practices that reflect the operational and financial restructuring of ENR. They are,
therefore, designed to complement changes and new structures elsewhere in the institution, as well as
develop longer-term and continuous training programs in managerial and operating practices. The activities
are grouped under four sub-components as follows:

Sub-component 3.1: Support to the Development of a Railway Academy
Sub-component 3.2: Support the Reengagement of ENR with International Railways Bodies.
Sub-component 3.3: Support to Modernize Managerial Practices
Sub-component 3.4: Business Development Activities

Additional Financing: Signaling Modernization on Beni Suef - Asyut (US$338 million - IBRD financing
US$330 million for goods and works, counterpart financing US$8 million for supervision). The additional
financing will finance the modernization of signaling along the Beni Suef - Asyut line and a computerized


                                                  Page 2 of 9
Central Traffic Control system (CTC) for that section in Minia station.

Additional contract: Signaling Modernization on Asyut-Sohag-Naga-Hamady. The additional scope will
include the modernization of signaling along the Asyut-Sohag-Naga-Hamady line and a computerized
Central Traffic Control system (CTC) for that section in Sohag station.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The Project will affect part of the 5,085 km of railway network, in addition to the to the 176 km of
modernizing the signaling system of the Beni Suef-Asyut section. both in the Nile Delta and along the Nile
Valley. The project components will be undertaken in the intensively cultivated, densely populated Nile
Valley. The area has been settled since prehistoric times and its natural ecology has been almost totally
obliterated by thousands of years of human activities. Agriculture and its associated irrigation and drainage
infrastructure, as well as a vast and highly diverse multitude of life support systems and facilities for its
multi-million inhabitants have created man-made ecosystems that have been in place for thousands of years.
The wildlife consists of species that are able to tolerate human activities and manage to survive the changes
introduced on their habitat. There is no indication that the construction works and subsequent operation of the
lines will have any irreversible or significant additional adverse impacts on wildlife and habitats in areas
adjacent to these lines.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Amal Nabil Faltas Bastorous, Social Safeguards Specialist

 Amer Abdulwahab Ali Al-Ghorbany, Environmental Safeguards Specialist

 Cathie Philippe Youhanna Wissa, Social Safeguards Specialist

 Chaogang Wang, Social Safeguards Specialist

6. Safeguard Policies                         Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01           Y               This project is classified as Category ‘B’ and
                                                              this policy has been triggered for the project
                                                              since its start and will continue to apply for the
                                                              for the proposed activities of modernization of
                                                              the Asyut-Sohag-Naga- Hamady section which
                                                              extends over 170 km. The proposed works will
                                                              include building the Central Traffic Control
                                                              (CTC) in Sohag, and 16 Main technical
                                                              buildings (MTB) along the railway line, with
                                                              an area of 400 m2 each, communication and
                                                              power cables. Such activities will have physical
                                                              footprint and potential environmental impacts
                                                              which are expected to be limited, site-specific
                                                              and reversible. To ensure proper management
                                                              of the environmental impacts that might result
                                                              from the implementation of the Project’s
                                                              activities, the original ESIA has been updated
                                                              and covered the potential impacts on health and


                                                  Page 3 of 9
                                                        safety and labor influx aspects. A public
                                                        consultation meeting was conducted in Sohag
                                                        in Oct 11, 2017.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              N              The activities are confined to existing
                                                        footprints and are not and no sensitive or
                                                        protected habitats will be affected and OP 4.04
                                                        is not triggered.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       N              The Project is confined to existing footprints
                                                        and no forests are existing within the project
                                                        boundaries. OP 4.36 is not triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  N              No activities will be financed that will require
                                                        the purchase, storage, handling, or use of
                                                        pesticides or herbicides. OP 4.09 is not
                                                        triggered.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   N              The Project is mainly confined to existing
                                                        footprints and no activities will be implemented
                                                        in areas of known physical cultural importance.
                                                        OP 4.11 is not triggered.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            N              The Project area has no IPs.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Y              ENR previously stated that it owns all of the
                                                        land required for works. However, recent due
                                                        diligence activities by the safeguards task team
                                                        revealed that some of the land owned by ENR
                                                        has different forms of illegal and legal (tenants)
                                                        users. In some cases, the tenancy agreement
                                                        with the users of the land of ENR returns to
                                                        over forty years ago. Incomplete or lost
                                                        documentation in the encountered cases,
                                                        combined with ENR’s relatively weak capacity
                                                        to deal with them and the possibility of facing
                                                        more cases in the new activities and the new
                                                        geographic zone, entailed triggering this policy
                                                        as a precautionary measure. ENR was
                                                        requested to prepare a RPF and will be
                                                        requested to prepare the related safeguards
                                                        instruments when needed to address the various
                                                        cases found on the ground. ENR was also
                                                        requested to ensure that competent human
                                                        resources are assigned to fulfill the
                                                        requirements, which they fulfilled by hiring 2
                                                        social specialists. The Bank team will offer the
                                                        needed capacity building support and
                                                        implementation support.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                N              No activities involving dams are included in
                                                        the project. OP 4.37 is not triggered.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP N             No water abstraction or works on
7.50                                                    transboundary water bodies are within the

                                              Page 4 of 9
                                                              scope of the project. OP 7.50 is not triggered.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          N              The Project is not located in disputed areas. OP
                                                              7.60 is not triggered.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
According to the World Bank's Operational Policy 4.01 on Environmental Assessment, the proposed project
is classified as category B, requiring partial assessment in the form of preparation of an Environmental and
Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) report. The original ESIA which was prepared in 2008 is updated to
include the modernization of the signaling system on the Asyut-Sohag-Naga Hamady Line. According to the
Bank's safeguard policies, the activities proposed under this section retains the same category B of the
parent/original project. The additional Asyut-Sohag-Naga-Hamady and the central traffic management
facility in Sohag is being financed by savings from the Project. To satisfy the Bank's requirements regarding
environmental and social assessment, this ESIA has been updated, reviewed and will also be disclosed in-
country and in the Bank website in both English and Arabic in November 2017 after the Bank’s approval.
The ESIA stipulated all the measures that should be taken by the contractor and ENR to protect the
environment, health and safety of workers and health and safety of the surrounding communities. The ESIA
also stipulated the necessity of having a functioning grievance redress mechanism (GRM) to help in flagging
and addressing any complaints that may arise during the construction period. Currently, ENR has a
department for complaints at their headquarters in Cairo, to which any person can file a complaint. ENR has
2 dedicated phone lines and a hotline for complaints related to ENR in general. However, there is no specific
channel dedicated to the project. The Bank is supporting ENR to strengthen their GRM system. The Bank is
planning to organize working groups with the contractors and ENR to put in place a project-level GRM
accessible to community members. The costs associated with the ESMP implementation and the monitoring
of this component were included in the ESMP.

OP 4.12 was not triggered for the parent project since all the land plots that were going to be acquired were
mentioned to be owned by ENR. However, since some of the land plots have illegal users and/or tenants and
in some cases avoiding those used plots of lands was not/will not be a technically feasible option, OP 4.12
was triggered for the restructuring of the project due to the fact that a new geographic zone is added to the
scope of work (Asyut-Naga-Hamady) and the possibility of the need for acquiring land cannot be excluded.
A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared as part of the restructuring package and was approved
by the Bank and disclosed in Arabic and in English on the website of ENR and the World Bank. Hard copies
of the RPF report in English and Executive summaries in Arabic will be made available at the Local
Government Units located within the geographic zone of the project locations. When the exact locations that
will be needed are known, further resettlement instruments (e.g. Resettlement Action Plan or an Abbreviated
Resettlement Action Plan) should be prepared, disclosed and implemented by ENR on an as-needed case-by-
case basis.

The ESIA carried out by the Consultant indicated that no adverse impacts on the Nile River water course, its
Rosetta branch, and four major canals that will be crossed by the works of the Project. The study showed no
indication of adverse contamination to the water course, nor adverse impacts on the natural habitat of the Nile
Delta, triggering no additional safeguard policies on natural habitat (OP/BP 4.04).

Since excavation depths required for cables are shallow and the probability of findings artifacts is very small,
the policy on Cultural Property (OP 4.11) is not triggered.

                                                   Page 5 of 9
The main potential project impacts are believed to be site-specific, limited, reversible and short-term (i.e.,
during construction) socio-economic impacts on three groups: train users, local residents of communities
adjacent to the train corridor, and frequent users of level crossings. Potential socioeconomic impacts on train
users include expected delays due to construction work and the potential need to use other modes of
transportation during the construction period. Potential impacts on level crossing users include the need to
identify and use alternative crossing pathways during construction.

It is expected that noise generated during certain construction activities will exceed permissible levels.
Similarly, certain construction activities (e.g., welding, excavation of foundations and cable trenches, etc) are
expected to generate some air pollutants. These impacts will also affect people in communities adjacent to
the railway corridor as well as construction crews.
Underwater cables are expected to cross some irrigation canals. The insulated cables will be placed in water-
tight PVC pipes before laying on the bottom. The pipes will be anchored to the river bottom using precast
cement blocks. The process is, therefore, unlikely to result in any water contamination and does not impact
any elements of the aquatic ecosystem of the water courses.
Habitats along the railway corridor in this project are all man-made and none is considered threatened.
Wildlife of the Nile Valley is among the most diverse of any terrestrial habitat in Egypt. The wildlife consists
of species that are able to tolerate human activities and manage to survive the changes introduced on their
habitat. There is no indication that the construction works and subsequent operation of the lines will have any
irreversible or significant additional adverse impacts on wildlife and habitats in areas adjacent to these lines.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
The Project will not by itself affect the nature of traffic on lines where signaling equipment will be
modernized. Increased capacity may result in higher traffic. The operation of system after project
implementation will result in a net positive environmental impact as stipulated by the more efficient use of
the system, less passenger travel time, less energy consumption and gaseous emissions per passenger unit,
and reduction of noise levels and disturbance to passengers, inhabitants near the railway corridor, and the
wildlife of the nearby habitat.

Overall, the Project is expected to have positive social impacts through improved services and safety on core
routes resulting from project investments in track renewal and signaling. Financial compensations by line
Ministries and the Ministry of Finance of Public Service Obligations imposed on ENR, under the broader
ENR transformation plan which the Project supports, will ensure that ENR can continue offering reduced
tariffs to several categories of users and operate unprofitable local services used by rural residents. Where
local services will be discontinued, the decision will be taken after Governors have made sure that alternative
transport modes are available to passengers. Under the plan, third class services have also been folded into
second class services and tariffs on the later trains used among others by low income passengers will remain
stable.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
Possible alternatives for project elements and activities were considered in terms of construction scheduling,
materials, methods, land plots and transportation modes with the goal of selecting the appropriate alternative
to minimize possible adverse impacts on the environment and the communities. The selected alternatives
were deemed to be the most appropriate. For the land alternatives, ENR adopts an avoidance strategy
whereby they give priority to the vacant land that is owned by ENR as a first and preferred option. For the
new section of Asyut Naga Hamady, they are committed as per the prepared RPF to avoid, minimize and
mitigate as per the principles of OP 4.12.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment

                                                   Page 6 of 9
of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An Environmental Social Management Plan (ESMP) was developed as part of the ESIA. The ESMP includes
a detailed mitigation plan, an environmental and social monitoring plan, and an institutional strengthening
and training plan. The mitigation plan includes detailed guidelines regarding the management of construction
dust and debris and safety, work scheduling in order to minimize delays and blockage of level crossings,
besides a public awareness campaign.

The ESMP includes the implementation schedule for various activities. Specifically, the mitigation measures
during the construction phase will be included in the contractor's bidding documents. The formation of the
EAD Directorate as part of the ENR structure and the inclusion of an environmental specialists in the
Environmental Affairs Department will take place before project implementation. The monitoring activities
will take place during project implementation, and include daily, weekly, and bi-monthly monitoring
activities.

During the course of the project, ENR has been preforming on satisfactory basis particularly on environment
front, with adequate institutional arrangements and implementation and monitoring of environmental
mitigation measures and requirement including health and safety aspects. The project is being implemented
by international contractors who are performing against high standards and good practices. On the social
front, ENR’s performance has been relatively less satisfactory particularly with the institutional challenges
and not having a social officer on board. In particular, ENR performance could be strengthened in how they
reach out to the communities and affected persons and how they deal with complaints.

In the meantime and as part of the restructuring, an RPF was prepared as indicated above to deal with any
potential land and livelihoods related impacts in light of the principles of OP 4.12. The capacity of ENR, to
deal with social issues in general and resettlement issues in particular, needs significant strengthening. Two
social specialists were recently hired by ENR to be in charge of implementing and/or monitoring all the
social mitigation measures indicted in the ESMP and the RPF. The level of capacity of ENR for dealing with
social issues including operating a functioning GRM and conducting consultations is relatively limited. The
Bank has initiated a series of training workshops on environmental and social safeguards. The first one took
place in March 2017. A training workshop is also planned in November 2017 to build the capacity of ENR,
including the newly assigned social officers and the contractors on the implications of triggering OP 4.12, the
application of the Bank involuntary Resettlement Policies including the client commitments, community
consultations and dealing with affected persons’ grievances.

Monthly reports will be submitted from the environmental and social specialists in the PMU to ENR's senior
management on the implementation of the ESMP. A section on the status of the implementation of the
environmental and social management plan will be included in the quarterly project progress reports to be
submitted from the PMU to the World Bank, and will include details on institutional measures, training and
capacity building activities, mitigation measures, and monitoring activities.

The Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency (EEAA) has reviewed and cleared the revised ESIA for Beni
Suef - Asyut on May 17th 2010. English and Arabic versions of the ESIA report were disclosed on ENR's
web site on June 1, 2008 and December 14, 2008, respectively. English and Arabic versions of the additional
financing ESIA were disclosed on ENR's web site May 4, 2010. English and Arabic versions of the updated
ESIA of Beni Suef-Asyut line were disclosed on ENR’s website on November 15, 2017. Hard copies of the
ESIA report in English and Executive summaries in Arabic will be made available at the Local Government
Units included in the scope of the Project.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                                                  Page 7 of 9
    Two public consultation meetings were held; one in Minya and one in Cairo to discuss the ENRRP and its
    expected impacts. The first public consultation meeting was held in Minya on April 2, 2008 and was attended
    by 112 participants and the Cairo public consultation meeting was held on April 3, 2008 and was attended by
    72 individuals. Later, as part of the ESIA update, one public consultation meeting was carried out in Sohag in
    October 11, 2017, which was well advertised in a daily newspaper, and was attended by a total of 63
    participants. Information on the Project as well as a summary of the findings of the ESIA and the RPF were
    presented during the public consultation session. Arabic executive summary was distributed to the
    participants of the public consultation. Participants emphasized on the importance of sharing a project-level
    grievance channels with the community members, specifically during the construction period. Participants
    also underlined the need for managing environment related issues that could potentially result from the
    construction phase, including waste management noise and air pollution. Finally, the participants discussed
    compensation in case of any potential damages. The full ESIA and an Arabic executive summary was
    published on ENR's website. Hard copies of the ESIA report in English and Executive summaries in Arabic
    will be made available at the at the Local Government Units located within the geographic zone of the project
    locations.
    .




B. Disclosure Requirements
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                         22-Nov-2017
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                      23-Nov-2017
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary
of the EA to the Executive Directors
 "In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




     Egypt, Arab Republic of                                                     22-Nov-2017
 Comments: PHENVCOMM
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                       20-Nov-2017
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                    21-Nov-2017
 "In country" Disclosure
PHRESCTRY




 Egypt, Arab Republic of                                                  11-Oct-2017
 Comments: A public consultation meeting was conducted in Sohag on October 11, 2017 and the final RPF
approved by the Bank was disclosed in country on November 20, 2017. The Arabic version was disclosed on
November 23, 2017.
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including       Yes [X]             No []          NA          []
 EMP) report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [X]             No []          NA          []
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP          Yes [X]             No []          NA          []
 incorporated in the credit/loan?



                                                     Page 8 of 9
PHCompliance




          OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy              Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
          prepared?
          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for           Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan?
          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                Yes []      No []       TBD   [X]
          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or        Yes []      No []       TBD   [X]
          access to assets that leads to loss of income sources or
          other means of livelihoods)
PHCompliance




          The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          the World Bank's Infoshop?
          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a       Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          public place in a form and language that are
          understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
          and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




          All Safeguard Policies
          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
          measures related to safeguard policies?
          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been         Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          included in the project cost?
          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project     Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
          related to safeguard policies?
          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been           Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
          reflected in the project legal documents?

    III. APPROVALS

    Task Team Leader(s):                Name: Diep Nguyen-Van Houtte,Sami Ali
    Approved By:
    Safeguards Advisor:                 Name: Nina Chee (SA)                     Date: 28-Nov-2017
    Practice Manager/Manager:           Name:                                    Date:




                                                          Page 9 of 9
