                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC13055

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jun-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Jul-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Macedonia, former Yugoslav                    P154464
                                                                              Project ID:
                                                Republic of
                            Project Name:       Second Municipal Services Improvement Project (P154464)
                            Task Team       Toshiaki Keicho
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       20-Oct-2015                           Estimated         04-Feb-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GSU09                                  Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Water supply (30%), Wastewater Collection and Transportation (15%), Solid
                                                waste management (15%), Energy efficiency in Heat and Powe r (20%), Sub-
                                                national government administration (20%)
                            Theme(s):           City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (60%), Municipal finance (25%),
                                                Municipal governance and institution building (15%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     28.97                       Total Bank Financing:          28.97
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              Borrower                                                                         0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                           28.97
                              Total                                                                           28.97
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Development Objective of MSIP2 Project (PDO) is to improve transparency, financial
                           sustainability and inclusive delivery of targeted municipal services in the participating municipalities.
                           C. Project Description
                         The proposed Second Municipal Services Improvement Project (MSIP2) of EUR25 million presents
                         the second phase of the on-going Municipal Services Improvement Project (MSIP, P096481) with an
                         aim to respond to the strong demand by the municipalities for the local infrastructure financing. It
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will be built on the experience of MSIP and its lessons learned to enhance the impact of a well-
                         performing project.

                         MSIP aims at improving the transparency, financial sustainability, and delivery of targeted municipal
                         services. Its implementation is progressing well, and the sub-project results so far demonstrate good
                         progress towards achieving its PDO. To date, a total of 51 sub-loan agreements have been signed
                         with eligible municipalities under the MSIP component of Municipal Investments (loan component),
                         out of which 33 sub-projects were completed and 11 are under implementation, while others are
                         either at the tendering stage or about to start the tendering process. Furthermore, 22 sub-projects are
                         currently under preparation by the respective municipalities with support from the Project
                         Management Unit (PMU). In addition, 19 municipalities submitted applications to access funds
                         under the MSIP component of Performance-based Investment Grants, with six performance grants
                         agreements signed, and four grant activities already successfully completed. Some of the MSIP
                         accomplishments to date include: more than 11,000 households with new water connections; about
                         240,000 people with access to regular solid waste collection; and all participating municipalities/
                         utilities publish their budget information on their websites.

                         The original IBRD Loan for MSIP (approved on March 26, 2009) was in the amount of US$25
                         million equivalent. It was followed by Additional Financing loan of US$50 million equivalent
                         approved by the Board on May 10, 2012. More recently, a new Component introducing the EU IPA-
                         financed Rural Investment Window of EUR15.5 million, Recipient Executed Trust Fund (RETF),
                         was added on December 22, 2014 to provide grants for priority rural infrastructure investments in
                         eligible municipalities through the existing MSIP implementation mechanism.

                         To date, more than 40 percent of MSIP total loan amount (including both original loan and AF funds)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         has been disbursed. In addition, about EUR47.2 million have already been committed for municipal
                         investments under the existing sub-projects pipeline. This represents 98 percent of all available MSIP
                         investment funds, excluding the IPA-financed window. Thus, the MSIP funds are now fully
                         committed and the project cannot respond to new applications from the municipalities. At the same
                         time, municipalities continue to express growing interest and demand in using MSIP financing.

                         Given a persisting needs for improving municipal infrastructure and based on the positive experience
                         in implementation of MSIP, the Government of FYR Macedonia requested the Bank for a new
                         project or additional financing to MSIP in the amount of EUR25 million. Since the on-going MSIP
                         already has two additional financings, including the recently approved IPA window, it was decided
                         to proceed with preparation of a new operation that would present the second phase of MSIP. This is
                         also a good opportunity to take stock of implementation experience under MSIP and bring in the
                         needed adjustments if any.

                         MSIP2 will continue to focus on improving the transparency, financial sustainability, and delivery of
                         targeted services under the responsibility of participating municipalities and their CSEs, such as
                         water supply, sanitation, and solid waste management, as well as energy efficiency, urban transport,
                         and other services delivered by municipalities. It will adopt the implementation arrangements and
                         mechanisms that proved to be effective under the MSIP with some adjustments introduced based on
                         the MSIP experience and lessons learned. In addition, MSIP2 aims to enhance inclusive service
                         delivery by targeting poorer and marginalized communities for infrastructure improvements through
                         the grant component. The positive aspects of MSIP experience, which the new project will adopt,
                         include the access to loans affordable to municipalities (sub-loans), demand-driven process with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         participating municipalities selecting priority investments out of the wide variety of municipal
                         investments, support for municipalities throughout sub-project cycle contributing to capacity
                         building, and increased transparency and disclosure of information by participating municipalities as
                         an eligibility condition. The lessons learned include the need to improve construction supervision and
                         quality of technical documentation prepared by the municipalities.

                         While MSIP2 is expected to largely employ the institutional arrangements and implementation
                         mechanism developed under the existing MSIP operation, an idea to establish a more sustainable and
                         institutionalized financing mechanism for municipal infrastructure development, going beyond the
                         current project-based Project Management Unit (PMU) approach, has been discussed with the
                         Borrower. The MoF has informed the Bank of its plans to transfer the municipal infrastructure
                         financing mechanism to the government-owned Macedonian Bank for Development Promotion
                         (MBDP) in the future, whose current roles are to provide finances to small and medium-sized
                         enterprises and export oriented companies. An option of creating a new institution such as a
                         municipal development fund has been referred as too excessive for a relatively small country.
                         Through its TA component, MSIP2 could support a transition to MBDP or identify alternative
                         options to ensure sustainability of the municipal financing instrument.

                         MSIP2 will likely have a composition of the components similar to MSIP, with the several
                         adjustments, as follows:

                         Component A - Municipal Investments (tentative allocation – Euro 18.5 million): will provide sub-
                         loans to municipalities for investments in (i) revenue-generating public services, and (ii) other
                         projects of high priority for the municipalities and with cost-saving potential.

                         Component B - Poverty/Social Inclusion Investment Grants (tentative allocation – Euro 5 million):
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will provide investment grants to municipalities as an incentive for them to invest in infrastructure
                         improvements in poorer and marginalized communities within their jurisdictions. A set of new
                         performance criteria including the poverty/social inclusion criteria will be designed and agreed upon
                         with the MoF during the project preparation.

                         Component C - Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Capacity Building TA
                         (tentative allocation – Euro 1.5 million): supports operational costs of the PMU and assists with
                         project implementation and monitoring, as well as finance consultancy services and technical
                         assistance for (i) sub-project preparation/implementation and local capacity building for
                         municipalities and CSEs to improve service delivery, and (ii) national level institutional
                         strengthening.

                         Distribution of funds between the components will be confirmed during the project preparation.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project activities will be located throughout the country. Location of sub-projects are not known
                         at present, as it will be determined on eligibility basis based on multiple criteria analysis. The sub-
                         projects are likely to be located in all regions of the country. Until now, sub-projects prepared for
                         First Municipal Services Project were located in municipalities of Vinica, Berovo, Bosilovo. Kriva
                         PAlanka, Rankovce, Petrovec, Cashka, Shuto Orizari etc, about 40 rural and urban municipalities and
                         have included activities such as: improvement of public street lightning; rehabilitation and energy
                         efficiency measures in public buildings (schools, kindergartens, municipal administration buildings);
Public Disclosure Copy




                         reconstruction of municipal roads; rehabilitation of water supply networks; construction and/or
                         rehabilitation of storm water drainage systems; provision of basic equipment and vehicles for
                         communal waste management.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Borrower is implementing on going Municipal Services Improvement Project. The EAMF The
                         EAMF and POM of the ongoing project detail the implementation roles of the Borrower and the
                         Bank in preparation, approval and execution of EMPs for each sub-project.

                         As part of sub-project identification, the Project Management Unit (PMU) undertakes environmental
                         screening for each proposed sub-project and develops respective environmental management and
                         mitigation plans (EMPs), which are subsequently included in bidding documents. Environmentally-
                         related activities and procedures are carried out by the Borrower as designed, with due diligence and
                         sufficient attention to details. Compliance with measures prescribed in sub-project specific EMPs is
                         reviewed by PMU staff at regular intervals and written reports on findings prepared and filed in the
                         PMU.

                         Contracts for civil works under the project are subject to screening for environmental impacts by the
                         Ministry of Environment in the Borrower country. All studies and bidding documents related to civil
                         engineering works include measures to minimize and/or mitigate potential environmental damage.
                         Separate EMPs alone or site-specific EA/EIAs and EMPs are prepared for each sub-project; even if
                         EA/EIA studies are not required by the national legislation, the Borrower observes requirements set
                         in the EAMF Report and respective EMPs prepared for this project. Those EMPs/EAs/EIAs are
                         reviewed and endorsed by both the responsible environmental entity in the Borrower country and the
                         World Bank.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Monitoring compliance in accordance with the findings of the Environmental Assessment Report and
                         requirements of relevant EMPs, including progress monitoring on EMP implementation, is
                         undertaken by the Ministry of Finance and reported to the World Bank twice per year in the semi-
                         annual progress reports.

                         In addition to the environmental safeguard above, the ongoing project triggered involuntary
                         resettlement safeguard policy (OP 4.12). The PMU checks potential for this trigger in all investments
                         and ensures: (i) whether land acquisition or access to land is required; (ii) if private land acquisition
                         can be avoided; and (iii) where land acquisition/resettlement is required, that it is done in accordance
                         with agreed procedures. The procedures will continue to be the same also for the new project, given
                         to the same nature of the sub-projects

                         As a conclusion the borrower has knowledge and capacity to comply with the World Bank
                         requirements for Environment and Social Safeguards.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         Bekim Imeri (GSURR)
                         Cesar Niculescu (GENDR)
                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies            Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment      Yes        The design of this project follows that of the first
                           OP/BP 4.01                               except the grant component is not conditional; grants
                                                                    will now go to the poorest neighborhoods without
                                                                    condition of having achieved certain goals with loan
                                                                    support. Physical works are expected to be small
                                                                    scale rehabilitation (of water supply networks,
                                                                    schools, heating pumps, streets and sewerage (with
                                                                    support from IPA additional financing), for which
                                                                    EMP Checklist will likely be sufficient. The
                                                                    Environmental Assessment and Management
                                                                    Framework (EAMF) for the first project will be
                                                                    updated as needed; it includes screening criteria and
                                                                    processes for land acquisition and environmental
                                                                    aspects.
                                                                    The EAMF will present overview of the legal
                                                                    framework of environmental and local-self
                                                                    government sectors in Macedonia; procedures for
                                                                    environmental assessment for the project
                                                                    development required under national legislation;
                                                                    procedures for environmental assessment for project
                                                                    development under World Bank procedures, and
                                                                    analysis of potential environmental impacts caused
                                                                    by sub-projects during implementation of different
                                                                    types of activities. The EAMF will list potential
                                                                    negative environmental impacts for each type of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    project activities and will provide list of
                                                                    environmental mitigation and monitoring activities in
                                                                    order to mitigate and neutralize the relevant impacts.
                                                                    This will provide a framework outlining how
                                                                    Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) will be
                                                                    developed for each type of sub-project, , and when
                                                                    site-specific EA/EIA are needed.
                                                                    Sub-projects which would qualify for Category A
                                                                    rating according to OP 4.01 will be
                                                                    ineligible for financing under the project.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36            No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09       No

                           Physical Cultural Resources   No
                           OP/BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.10
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                Yes                        The project has programmatic nature of design, it
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                will finance sub-projects proposed by municipalities.
                                                                                                                        Implementing agency will prepare Resettlement
                                                                                                                        Policy Framework because the project will finance
                                                                                                                        demand driven municipal infrastructure available to
                                                                                                                        any municipality and some sub-projects may require
                                                                                                                        temporary access to land, possibly land acquisition.
                                                                                                                        However, subprojects are not likely to require
                                                                                                                        resettlement. The PMU will check potential for this
                                                                                                                        trigger in all investments and ensure: (i) whether land
                                                                                                                        acquisition or access to land is required; (ii) if private
                                                                                                                        land acquisition can be avoided; and (iii) where land
                                                                                                                        acquisition or resettlement is required, that it is done
                                                                                                                        in accordance with agreed procedures in RPF
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No

                                 Projects on International                                   Yes                        The project will support activities that could take
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   place on trans-boundary waterways as defined in OP
                                                                                                                        7.50. – Macedonia is a small country and has several
                                                                                                                        rivers that flow trans-boundary. Nevertheless, it is
                                                                                                                        anticipated that investments supported under MSIP2
                                                                                                                        will not (i) adversely change the quality or quantity
                                                                                                                        of water flows to the other riparians; and (ii) will not
                                                                                                                        be adversely affected by the other riparians' possible
                                                                                                                        water use. Project investments are expected to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        support the rehabilitation, improvement or minor
                                                                                                                        additions or minor expansions of existing schemes.

                                                                                                                        However, as the initial project, the MSIP2 consists
                                                                                                                        only of rehabilitation and improving efficiency of
                                                                                                                        water use, and it aims to contribute substantially for
                                                                                                                        reducing extremely high water consumption rates.
                                                                                                                        Based on this, the exemption from the notification
                                                                                                                        requirement under OP 7.50, Para 7a, will be
                                                                                                                        requested to be applied for this project.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 04-Sep-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             Environment and Social Management Framework to be completed at draft stage acceptable to the
                             Bank and disclosed by last week of August 2015. Same applies for site specific Environment and
                             Social Management Plans for identified sub-projects. A Draft Resettlement Policy Framework to
Public Disclosure Copy




                             be completed at a stage acceptable to the Bank by last week of October.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader(s): Name: Toshiaki Keicho
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor: Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                               Date: 08-Jul-2015
                           Practice Manager/    Name: Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst (PMGR)                Date: 09-Jul-2015
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
