INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC 15024
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Sep-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Sep-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         India                      Project ID:   P150576
Project Name:    Tejaswini: Socioeconomic Empowerment of Adolescent Girls & Young Women
(P150576)
Task Team        Pravesh Kumar,Matthew H. Morton
Leader(s):
Estimated        23-Nov-2015                Estimated     28-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSPO6                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Other social services (100%)
Theme(s):       Improving labor markets (50%), Gender (30%), Education for the knowledge
economy (20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      88.52             Total Bank Financing:    61.97
U       Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               26.56
o          International Development Association (IDA)                      61.97
Total                                                            88.52
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to improve completion of secondary education and access to
market-driven skills training for adolescent girls and young women in select districts of Jharkhand.
C. Project Description
The Tejaswini project focuses on the socio-economic empowerment of adolescent girls and young


﻿women in the state of Jharkhand. It will support the Department of Social Welfare Women & Child
Development (DoSWWCD) in both developing new service infrastructure and programs that
facilitate this empowerment where there are critical gaps and leveraging existing systems and
services through girl-friendly enhancements and improving girls' access. In particular, the project
O
will improve access to appropriate social networks, educational and employment opportunities,
facilitate innovation in intensive service delivery for enhanced local programming and coverage, and
support state-wide system strengthening and implementation. The proposed project consists of three
main components:
Component 1: Expanding social, educational and economic opportunities (Indicative allocation: US$
60 million, IDA Credit: US$ 42 million). This component aims to support the adolescent girls and
young women of 17 districts in Jharkhand to achieve greater social, educational and economic
empowerment. This will be achieved through two, complementary streams. The first stream,
involving direct intervention with adolescent girls, includes: (i) supporting formation and capacity
building of community level young women's groups (2-3 village cluster) led by project financed and
trained youth facilitators. Operated from existing Anganwadi facilities, the focus of these groups will
be on community mobilization, basic case management and life skills development for enhancing
participation of adolescent girls and young women in household decision making, community life
and social networks; (ii) financing of bridge and non-formal education through, performance-based
contracts with qualified providers, on the basis of number of out-of-school adolescent girls enrolled
and obtaining a class 10 certificate; and (iii) financing market - driven vocational and
entrepreneurship training, job placement and related services through performance-based contracts
with qualified providers.
The second stream, involving sub-state systems and activities to support the success of the first
stream, includes: (i) financing operating cost of district and block implementation support units in all
17 districts for facilitating community level activities of young women's groups and related training
under the overall management of the Jharkhand Women Development Society (JWDS); (ii)
supporting designing and implementation of an information education and communication (IEC)
strategy and public education campaign with a particular focus on engaging men and boys in support
of girls' opportunities and empowerment; and (iii) financing market assessment surveys in all project
districts to determine the skills and ventures in demand as well as identify job placement
opportunities within public and private sector institutions.
Component 2: Intensive service delivery interventions (Indicative allocation: US$ 20 million, IDA
Credit: US$ 14 million). This component aims to support designing, piloting and evaluation of
enhanced institutional structures and gender-informed outreach services at grassroots level. While the
core interventions and delivery channels outlined in component 1 will be implemented in all districts,
this component will experiment with an enhanced institutional delivery model and additional
innovative services in two pilot districts. Two main activities will be supported under this
component: (i) financing service contracts to qualified providers for establishment and operation of
cluster resource centres (Tejaswini Kendras) as safe spaces at the community level for adolescent
girls and young women in two districts. Operated on public-private partnership model, these centres
will provide enhanced service delivery through dedicated physical infrastructure at the local level,
with a strong focus on youth-led activities, peer support, coaching and counseling, life skills and
livelihoods activities tailored to young women and adolescent girls; and (ii) supporting an innovation
window to finance design and testing of other innovative mechanisms for increasing community
level outreach of core services, as we 11 as promoting young women friendly enhancements of
existing training providers (e.g., through gender-friendly enhancements of recruitment processes,


﻿curricula, training facilities, faculty, and placement services).
Component 3: Strengthening state-wide systems, implementation and convergence (Indicative
allocation: US$ 8.5 million, IDA Credit: US$ 5.95 million). This component aims to support
U       strengthening of institutional capacity and outreach of the DoSWWCD and JWDS to ensure efficient
delivery of services for adolescent girls and young women in the state. This will be achieved by
financing: (i) operating cost of a state level resource centre for empowerment of adolescent girls and
young women that will provide ongoing support to DoSWWCD in evidence-based policy and
program development, process and impact evaluations, knowledge management and need-based
program augmentation; (ii) formulation of a state strategy and plan of action for convergent action on
the empowerment of adolescent girls and young women; (iii) design, development and operation of
program management information system (MIS) for improved monitoring, evaluation and financial
management; (iv) development of relevant manuals and guidelines for project implementation,
partnerships and human resource management led by JWDS; (v) project implementation including
day-to-day operational support, development of capacity building strategy, training of service
providers and stakeholders along with monitoring and impact evaluations.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented in several districts of Jharkhand, which lie on the Chota Nagpur
plateau and are rich in mineral resources with good forest cover, including biodiversity. While there
are a few large steel and other mineral-based industrial townships in the State, several villages and
smaller towns are remotely located. Several of the districts in the State are dominated by tribal
communities, which would require careful identification to benefit from the project.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Implementing Agency (IA) has no prior experience of implementing a Bank financed project
and has limited capacity to comply adequately with the safeguards requirements of the project. Even
though, no adverse environmental and social impacts are envisaged, the IA should develop capacities
to identify and ensure inclusion of poor and landless as beneficiaries; extend outreach to the most
vulnerable and tribal groups; and mainstream good environmental practices in skills and
employability enhancement programs. These will add value to the project. Given the nature of soft
investments made by the project, especially training and capacity building and facilitation of and
access to existing educational, skills and credit resources, only limited mitigation measures may be
required. However, an inclusion strategy would be required for ensuring coverage of vulnerable
population in project districts. It is clearly understood that project will not acquire any land and/or
construct buildings, including refurbishing and retrofitting of existing ones; nor procure vehicles and
not make investments in health care facilities. The proposed environment and social assessment will
suggest interventions and measures to strengthen state's capacity for ensuring inclusion as well as
addressing any adverse environmental impacts. During implementation, an experienced social
development and/or community mobilization expert and environmental trainer will be part of the
Projects Management Unit to help comply with inclusion and safeguards measures.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Anupam Joshi (GENDR)
Sangeeta Kumari (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY


﻿Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment     Yes          This policy is triggered to assess whether there are
OP/BP 4.01                                possibilities for any significant adverse
environmental and/or social impact. An
environmental assessment will be undertaken
covering a sample of project districts to identify good
environment practices and confirm that no adverse
impacts are anticipated. Stakeholder consultations
with deemed beneficiaries will be undertaken as part
of this assessment for ensuring that the project
responds to beneficiary needs. Based on the findings
of the assessment, simple mitigation measures would
be suggested.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No           No natural habitat would be impacted.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           No           Forest management will not be impacted.
Pest Management OP 4.09      No           No support for procuring pesticides or spraying
equipment etc.
Physical Cultural Resources  No           No physical and cultural properties/resources will be
OP/BP 4.11                                impacted.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     Yes          Project will be implemented in areas with significant
4.10                                      tribal populations so this policy is triggered. A Social
assessment shall be carried out to identify the key
challenges and opportunities for including tribals and
other socially vulnerable groups as beneficiaries. A
Tribal Plan based on findings of the social
assessment will be prepared and free prior and
informed consultations in a culturally appropriate
way shall be organized to ensure their inclusion in
the project benefits.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  No          No land acquisition and displacement of people is
BP 4.12                                   involved.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           No dams are involved.
Projects on International    No           Not on any international waterway.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         No disputed areas are involved.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 20-Nov-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿All safeguards related studies and plans will be completed and agreed to by November 20, 2015.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Pravesh Kumar,Matthew H. Morton
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                Date: 23-Sep-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Pablo Gottret (PMGR)                    Date: 23-Sep-2015
Manager:


