INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA14479
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Nov-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Nov-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Liberia                     Project ID:  P149683
Project Name: Liberia Renewable Energy Access Project (P 149683)
Task Team       Clemencia Torres De Mastle,David Vilar Ferrenbach
Leader(s):
Estimated       06-Nov-2015                 Estimated    28-Jan-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEE07                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Hydropower (70%), Other Renewable Energy (10%), Transmission and
Distribution of Electricity (20%)
Theme(s):       Infrastructure services for private sector development (40%), City-wide
Infrastructure and Service Delivery (50%), Rural services an d infrastructure
(10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
O
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      27.00             Total Bank Financing:     2.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                   2.00
Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                 25.00
Total                                                                        27.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase access to electricity and to foster the use of
Page 1 of 9


﻿renewable energy sources.
3. Project Description
The proposed Project would support a mini-grid powered mainly by renewable energy in small towns
and rural areas, strengthen institutions for decentralized electricity services, and support the scale-up
of the Government's initiative to foster a market in Liberia for off grid solar energy devices. The
Project is comprised of three components. The first component would finance decentralized
electrification through a mini-grid in Lofa County, an economic and agricultural hub on the border
a        with Guinea and Sierra Leone. The second component would finance the development of regulations
for decentralized electricity services and capacity strengthening of RREA. The third component
would continue support to RREA to foster the growth of a market for solar energy lighting devices.
Component 1. Decentralized electrification in Lofa County (estimated cost US$22 million, of which
US$20 million SREP and US$2 million IDA). This Component would expand access to affordable,
reliable, year round electricity services to at least 8,000 new users in North Lofa County, an
economic and agricultural hub in North-West of Liberia close to the border with Guinea and Sierra
Leone. The county was one of the hardest hit during the Ebola outbreak. It is more than 200 km from
the national grid. There are no prospects in the medium term to provide service to this area from the
national grid that serves Greater Monrovia. The Component would focus on the towns of Vonjaima,
Foya, Kolahun and Massambolahun/Bolahun and surrounding areas, providing electricity services to
households, business and public institutions. Financing would be provided for installation of
facilities, and technical assistance to define the most suitable arrangements for operation and
maintenance services, and selection of the operator. Since the mini-grid would supply productive and
commercial users as well as households, it would be important to provide a reliable and continuous
supply of electricity. Electricity generation would utilize hydropower and back up thermal generation
based on diesel. A study is ongoing to optimize the hydropower plant design and thus minimize the
use of diesel during the dry season.
Component 2. Technical assistance to strengthen rural electrification institutions (estimated cost US
$2 million-SREP Financing). This Component would provide technical assistance to support the
implementation of the Government's program to expand decentralized electrification and foster the
use of renewable energy. To this end, it would support the development of regulations and standards
for isolated mini-grids, to complement the September 2015 Law for the Electricity Sector and the
Rural and Renewable Energy Act. It would also finance capacity building of RREA, document the
lessons learned in establishing decentralized hybrid renewable energy mini-grids, as well as support
Project implementation, other preparation studies and the project audits.
Component 3. Market development of stand-alone solar systems (estimated cost US$3 million-SREP
financing). This component would finance the development of a local market for pico-PV products.
It would help provide access to modern energy services for over 100,000 people. It would aim to
support the development of the market by increasing the sustainability of the supply chain through
strengthening of the retail network and facilitating the transfer of procurement and import
responsibilities from RREA to the private sector and by addressing demand side constrains. The
component aims to expand and increase the sustainability of the retail network based on the
experience and achievements of the ongoing LLL Program.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The identified rural area is in the North of Lofa County, a rural economic and agricultural hub in the
Page 2 of 9


﻿border with Guinea and Sierra Leone. The capital of this county is Voinjama, a highly populated
center in the area. This area is located more than 200 km from the national grid and there are no
prospects in the mid-term to reach this area with the national grid, nowadays only serving Greater
Monrovia. The area is mostly an agricultural area.
o
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (GSURR)
Robert A. Robelus (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          Because the location and exact scope of the works is not
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                known, an ESMF has been prepared, consulted upon, and
disclosed in country and Infoshop on 12 November, 2015.
One or more ESIAs will be prepared, once feasibility
studies confirm the physical footprint, to manage and
mitigate the construction and operational environmental
and social impacts of the small hydropower facility, diesel
plants and/or PV facilities as well the impacts of the
access road, substations, distribution lines and distribution
network. A World Bank environment mission visited that
Kaiha 1 site on November 4, 2015. The sites of Kaiha 1
and 2 are very similar with regard to the expected
environmental and social impacts. The approximate sites
of the two proposed mini-hydropower facilities of
approximately 5 meter high are known. The mission
assessed that the environmental and social impacts of the
mini-hydropower plant and associated facilities will be
small since the weir and the reservoir will be very small.
The size of an obligatory environmental flow has to be
determined as well as downstream uses of the water. The
environmental and social impacts of the entire project are
assessed as small. The ESIA will determine these impacts
during construction and operation and establish
operational rules with regard to environmental
management.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           The project areas of the two proposed mini-hydropower
4.04                                 sites are farm-bush areas. There is a strip of
approximately 100 meters on both sides of the river were
disturbed natural forest is still present. The impacts on
this disturbed natural forest strips will be local in the area
of the weir and the reservoir. According to information no
important wildlife exists in the area. There are no
chimpanzees in the wider project area and no endemic or
endangered species are present. For these reasons the
Natural Habitat Policy is not triggered.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           Local people use the remaining forest areas for their own
daily use. There are no logging activities near the two
Page 3 of 9


﻿proposed mini-hydropower facility locations. For these
reasons the forest policy is not triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           The Project does not involve the use of pesticides and will
not apply any pest management practices. The Pest
Management policy will not be triggered.
Physical Cultural      Yes          The ESMF includes a screening mechanism to screen for
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 the presence of Physical Cultural Resources, which could
be graves or sacred forests. During the preparation of the
ESIA for the proposed mini-hydropower site and the
reservoir area a rapid survey will be carried out to
determine the presence of the physical cultural resources
such as sacred forests and/or graves. A Chance Find
Procedure will be included in every Contractor Contract.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           There are no indigenous peoples in the project area.
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         Component 1 may have some limited land acquisition or
OP/BP 4.12                           subsequent losses of assets related to the construction of
the mini-hydropower plant, mini-grids, diesel plants and
PV plants, and therefore OP 4.12 is triggered to address
any adverse impacts. Since the exact location of the works
is not known, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
has been prepared, consulted and disclosed prior to
appraisal in the Bank's Infoshop and in country on 12,
November 2015. It addresses potential land acquisition/
resettlement and/or losses of assets or access to resources.
In case land acquisition and/or resettlement is required in
relation to the construction of the mini-hydropower plant
and PV-diesel facilities, the RPF will guide the
preparation of a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or an
Abbreviated RAP (ARAP).
A World Bank environment mission visited the site of
Kaiha I on November 4, 2015. Both the Kaiha l and 2
sites are very similar with regard to land acquisition. At
the Kaiha 1 site according to information from local
farmers only 3 farms are present of which only a small
part could potentially be inundated. According to the
Prefeasibility Studies a similar situation exists at the
Kaiha 2 site.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The policy on Safety of Dams is not triggered. The design
4.37                                 of the 5 meter high weir will be done taking sound
engineering practices into account to address dam safety
issues as reflected in the ESMF. Dam safety issues with
regard to the routing of a high flood will be part of the
engineering design.
Projects on International  Yes       The Safeguard Policy OP 7.50 Projects on International
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 Waterways is triggered since the Kaiha River is a
Page 4 of 9


﻿tributary of the Mano River, which is an international
river waterway that runs along the boundary between
Sierra Leone and Liberia.
Paragraph 2 of OP 7.50 states that the policy applies to
projects that involve the use or potential pollution of
international waterways. When the policy is applicable to
a project, the borrower is required to notify all other
riparian states of the shared international waterway.
Paragraph 7 of OP 7.50 recognizes three exceptions to the
requirement that other riparian states be notified of a
project involving international waterways. One of these,
under paragraph 7(c) is applicable to "Any project that
relates to a tributary of an international waterway where
the tributary runs exclusively in one state and the state is
the lowest downstream riparian, unless there is concern
that the project could cause appreciable harm to other
states."
Rationale for the Exception: In accordance with paragraph
7(c) of OP 7.50, the team is seeking to rely on the
exception set forth in that paragraph on the basis that
Kaiha River is a tributary of the Mano River that runs
exclusively within Liberia; Liberia and Sierra Leone are
both the lowest downstream riparians of the Mano River
since the river runs along their respective border before
emptying into the Atlantic Ocean; and the proposed
Project would not cause appreciable harm to other
riparian states.
Under component 1 of the proposed Project, investments
in a small hydropower development will be supported to
supply energy to a mini-grid serving several towns in the
Lofa County in North West Liberia. The Project will fund
a 2 Megawatt hydropower development, and among the
generation sites for hydroelectricity currently under study,
a site known as 'Kaiha 2' appears to be the most likely
site to be selected to supply electricity to the mini-grid.
The Kaiha 2 site consists of small rapids and a waterfall
over approximately 100 meters. The expected layout
consists of a small dam and intake structure upstream of
the waterfall, a short penstock, and a power station
downstream. It has an approximate total head of 13
meters (five meter high weir and eight meter head
difference); the design discharge of the power plant would
be 7.5 m3/s. The run of the river plant would generate
electricity for eight months of the year, complemented by
diesel generation during the dry season. Given its
Page 5 of 9


﻿expected size and design, the hydropower plant is not
expected to adversely impact the quality or quantity of
water flows to other riparians nor other riparians' possible
water use.
The exception has been approved by World Bank
management.
 Projects in Disputed  No          This project will not take place in any disputed areas as
Areas OP/BP 7.60                    defined under OP 7.60, and will not support any activities
that will impact disputed areas.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is rated as environmental category B, partial assessment, as no adverse environmental
impacts are expected that are sensitive, diverse or unprecedented. A World Bank mission who
visited the Kaiha 1 project area assessed the environmental and social impacts of all project
components as small. The project triggers 4 safeguard policies; Environmental Assessment (OP
4.01), Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11), Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) and Projects on
International Waterways (OP 7.50).
OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement is triggered in the context of component 1 to cover
construction of a mini-hydro, access road, distribution lines, distribution lines and diesel and PV
plants, which might require some land acquisition leading to compensation, and/or relocation and
displacement of some households and/or assets. In case any land acquisition or compensation
becomes necessary, the cost will be covered by the borrower.
The implementation of component 1 may also induce other environmental and social impacts
which include tree cutting, soil erosion and degradation, nuisance due to dust and noises from
construction activities, and risks of increased prevalence of HIV/AIDS and other STDs due to
foreign workers on construction sites. The Contractor will be responsible for minimizing the risks
of HIV/AIDS infections from his workforce through health education of his workforce and local
communities and the supply of free condoms.
The ESIA will need to determine the management of construction and operational impacts, among
other the determination of an environmental flow, and downstream impacts of the storage of
water. During construction health and safety issues will have to be managed by the Contractor,
supervised by the Owner's Engineer and the Environmental/ Social Specialist of RREA.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The project is not expected to cause long-term impacts, as the environmental and social impacts
associated with component 1 are localized, small and can be easily mitigated.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
n/a
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Page 6 of 9


﻿assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Rural Renewable Energy Agency (RREA) has prepared, consulted on and disclosed an ESMF
and a RPF, since the exact location of the project facilities are not yet known. The ESMF and RPF
have been disclosed in-country and in the Bank's Infoshop on 12 November, 2015.
During project implementation RREA will finance the preparation of safeguard documents: one or
O
more ESIAs and a RAP or Abbreviated RAP (ARAP). These ESIA and RAP/ARAP will be
prepared, consulted upon and disclosed in-country and at InfoShop.
The ESIA will be carried out when the preliminary results of the technical studies provide an exact
indication of the project footprint. The ESIA will identify potential project location specific
environmental and social impacts and devise mitigation and monitoring measures and will be
guided by the ESMF.
In order to address potential land acquisition and/or resettlement and/or losses of assets or access
to resources, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or an Abbreviated RAP (ARAP) will need to be
prepared an implemented once the physical footprint of the project facilities are known. The RPF
will guide the preparation of a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP).
The Terms of Reference (TORs) for the ESIAs and RAPs will include a strong gender component.
RREA has weak social and environmental management capacity and to strengthen the E&S
department, it will hire a qualified Environmental and Social Specialist. RREA will also be
provided with adequate Technical Assistance through the Owner's Engineer to improve the
capacity to supervise the adequate preparation and implementation of the ESIA/ESMPs and RAPs/
ARAPs.
During construction the Contractor will prepare and implement his own Construction ESMP
(CESMP) and hire qualified staff to supervise the implementation of this CESMP. The Owner's
Engineer will supervise the adequate implementation of the CESMP and hire qualified staff for
O
this purpose.. The RREA Environmental/Social Specialist will be responsible for the overall
supervision of the CESMP and the environmental and social aspects outside the scope of the
CESMP, including the adequate implementation of the RAP/ARAPs and monitoring of the
grievances.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
All safeguards instruments will be consulted upon with PAPs and relevant local, regional and
national level authorities.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              10-Nov-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           12-Nov-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  12-Nov-2015
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Page 7 of 9


﻿Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                05-Nov-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop
"In country" Disclosure
12-Nov-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [   ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?            Yes [  ] No [X]     TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [ ] No [ ] TBD [ X]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?   Yes [  ]  No [  ]   NA [ X]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [ X] No [    ]  NA [    ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Page 8 of 9


﻿Has the RVP approved such an exception?                Yes [ X] No [   ]   NA [   ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes[X]  No[  ]  NA[
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes[X]  No[  NA[
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [ ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Clemencia Torres De Mastle,David Vilar Ferrenbach
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)           Date: 16-Nov-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Meike van Ginneken (PMGR)          Date: 17-Nov-2015
Manager:
Page 9 of 9


