                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC14349

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Nov-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Kenya                          Project ID:       P156466
                            Project Name:        Digital Entrepreneurship Kenya
                            Team Leader(s):      Toni Kristian Eliasz,Markus Njehiah Kimani
                            Estimated Date       04-Jan-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GTCID                          Lending           Lending Instrument
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           General information and communications sector (70%), General industry and
                                                 trade sector (30%)
                            Theme(s):            Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (90%), Technology diffusion
                                                 (10%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.45                           Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              InfoDev                                                                                     0.45
                            Environment       C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective: To support Kenya’s leading ICT focused business enabler (m:
                           lab East Africa) to improve and scale-up its service models and better foster the growth of digital
                           entrepreneurs.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project is to extend capacity and service portfolio of m:lab East Africa to launch globally
                           competitive, growth-oriented, mobile and digital technology businesses and further position it as a
                           regional hub for the advancement of digital entrepreneurship.

                           The project activities build upon earlier projects of T&C’s Digital Entrepreneurship Program
                           (formerly Mobile Innovation Program), which has designed, tested and derived lessons from 13
                           mobile business enablers (mLabs and mHubs) in Asia, Africa, ECA and the Caribbean.

                           While the mLabs and mHubs initiated by T&C through infoDev (a global trust funded program)
                         were first of their kind at the time, there has since been a proliferation of activities aimed to assist
                         tech entrepreneurs in Africa, signaling an enormous demand for entrepreneurship support.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         There are however still critical gaps in the service offering available to digital enterprises. Start-up is
                         no longer the issue. There are lots of business plan competitions, technology bootcamps, etc that
                         provides an opportunity for individuals and teams to get started. The key gap relates to the ability of
                         business enablers to identify and to meet the needs of digital entrepreneurs with the growth potential,
                         to help them build links to wider value chains, enter new markets, secure finance and build a team to
                         reach scale.

                         To address this gap, the program will strengthen the institutional capacity of m:lab East Africa to
                         provide quality services to growth-oriented digital entrepreneurs. Based on best practices around the
                         world, the program aims also to test an innovative business advisory approach known as
                         “acceleration” that takes growth oriented enterprises and start-ups through a rapid-cycle competitive
                         curriculum, and matches them quickly to appropriate capital and business mentors. Similar projects
                         will be implemented in Senegal and South Africa targeting the West African and Southern African
                         markets.

                         A key challenge for digital entrepreneurs in Kenya and other African markets is the lack of
                         agglomeration – investors and industry know to look to European and US technology hubs for
                         prospective “deals”, and there are economies of scale to them of investing time and money in these
                         geographic areas. Digital entrepreneurs who truly have growth potential in Kenya or other African
                         markets may however be few and far between. A critical contribution of this project is to aggregate
                         high growth potential entrepreneurs and raise their visibility vis-à-vis larger industry and financial
                         actors to bring the promising enterprises to scale.


                         The following key activities will be implemented within the project scope:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1. Strengthening of m:lab East Africa’s institutional capacity to support growth-oriented digital
                         entrepreneurs

                         Expected Deliverables: (1) improved business and sustainability models (including strategy on
                         engagement with early-stage investors and enhanced services portfolio); (2) improved M&E
                         framework and tools critical for tracking the progress of entrepreneurs and other business analytics.

                         2. Improving m:lab East Africa’s capacity to increase investability of digital entrepreneurs

                         Expected Deliverables: (1) staff trained via participation in "Master training" on increasing
                         entrepreneurs investability; (2) up to 10 Access to Finance workshops for select group of at least 50
                         investment-ready entrepreneurs organized; (3) links with early-stage financiers strengthened to
                         ensure that GO entrepreneurs have an improved access to early stage financiers as entrepreneurs
                         become investment ready.

                         3. Implementation of regional acceleration program

                         The core grant funding will be allocated to the design and delivery of a regional acceleration program
                         aimed to identify prominent digital entrepreneurs in East Africa and provide them with intensive
                         face-to-face and virtual support in order to link them with expertise, capital and markets they need to
                           grow.
                           m:lab East Africa will run regionalacceleration program for East Africa, where it will be responsible
                           for reaching out to the large network of technology innovation hubs and incubators (including
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Nailab, and hubs in Mombasa and Kisumu) and act as regional hub, facilitating a sub-regional
                           program and addressing the issue with limited local deal flow individual business enablers typically
                           face. With the aim to building awareness around innovative digital technology solutions for the
                           manufacturing sector, specific outreach campaign will also be implemented to encourage digital
                           entrepreneurs with solutions for the manufacturing sector to apply to the program.

                           During each round of regional acceleration program, 20 of the most talented entrepreneurs will be
                           nominated by the participating business enablers (based on rigorous selection criteria) and cultivated
                           by m:lab East Africa over a limited period of time combining both virtual and residential acceleration
                           methods.
                           The program will introduce an advanced acceleration curriculum for the participating entrepreneurs.
                           The curriculum will include topics such as investment readiness and investor engagement, diaspora
                           networks, and internationalization of digital enterprises, and will seek to create the capacity and
                           networks necessary to take most potential entrepreneurs “up the ladder.”

                           Two rounds of acceleration programs should be implemented within the grant scope. It is expected
                           that the outcomes of the first round will inform on potential adjustments to the program design to
                           ensure the most efficient approach. The overall objective is that the business enablers may adapt and
                           replicate the program in future years.

                           It is also expected that m:lab East Africa will work closely with the task team and nominate
                           entrepreneurs from regional acceleration program for a Pan-African Acceleration Program that will
                           be implemented through bank-executed activities and aimed to bring around 20 star performers
                           across Africa to scale through a rapid process of exposure to global capital and industry connections.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis (if known)


                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Edward Felix Dwumfour (GEN01)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No              The project will support neither physical
                           BP 4.01                                              investment nor technical assistance activity
                                                                                which could indirectly trigger environmental
                                                                                and social risks/impacts.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09                      No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/              No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
                           Projects on International                    No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP             No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Toni Kristian Eliasz,Markus Njehiah Kimani
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                                     Date: 08-Nov-2015
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Ganesh Rasagam (PMGR)                                        Date: 11-Nov-2015
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
