                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                             ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                       Report No.: ISDSA12662

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-May-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:           Bolivia                            Project ID:    P154854
                                                         Parent         P107137
                                                         Project ID:
   Project Name:      BO Community Investment in Rural Areas Project Additional Financing
                      (P154854)
   Parent Project     BO PICAR Community Investment in Rural Areas (P107137)
   Name:
   Task Team       Norman Bentley Piccioni
   Leader(s):
   Estimated       20-May-2015                           Estimated   30-Jul-2015
   Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
   Managing Unit: GFADR                                  Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                         Instrument:
   Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%), General transportation
                     sector (20%), General water, sanitation and flood pro tection sector (20%)
   Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Participation and civic engagement
                     (30%), Other rural development (20%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      64.10           Total Bank Financing:                  60.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                         Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                                60.00
     Local Communities                                                                           4.10
     Total                                                                                      64.10
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:




                                              Page 1 of 13
Is this a           No
Repeater
project?

2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   To improve access to sustainable basic infrastructure and services for the most disadvantaged
   rural communities selected in some ofthe poorest municipalities of Bolivia.
   B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


3. Project Description
In the last several years Bolivia has made substantial gains in reducing poverty and in improving
shared prosperity; however, it still faces significant challenges in eradicating extreme poverty in rural
areas. Using national poverty lines and the latest information available, overall poverty decreased
from 63 percent of the population in 2002 to 39 in 2013 and extreme poverty from 37 percent to 19
percent in 2013. Similarly, the Gini coefficient measuring inequality has decreased from 0.60 in 2002
to 0.49 in 2013. The average income of the bottom 40 percent of the population has also improved by
increasing 15 percent per year over the same period. Despite all those major achievements, rural
Bolivia, comprising approximately 3.3 million inhabitants (30 percent of the total population), still
faces chronic development challenges: 6 out of 10 rural inhabitant still are under the poverty line and
4 are classified as extreme poor. The rural poor are highly vulnerable to food insecurity, dispose of
limited economic opportunities and lack access to basic services and infrastructure. This particularly
affects indigenous groups and the rural women, who on average have two fewer years of education
than their male counterparts and face a series of constraints derived from socio cultural biases.

The proposed AF, with its scale-up in outreach to most vulnerable communities, is consistent with
the current CPS and the development agenda of the Government of Bolivia (GoB), which pursues
extreme poverty eradication. The current CPS (2012-2015) defines sustainable productive
development as one of the four pillars for the World Bank Group (WBG) investments in Bolivia.
Within that pillar, the WBG has committed to support sustainable agricultural productivity and to
improve productive infrastructure in rural areas. This will directly contribute to addressing the
country’s high rates of poverty in rural and peri-urban areas. The CPS progress report of January
2014 states that Bank’s efforts have been particularly successful in rural areas where investments
such as PICAR have yielded significant results in improving the living conditions of poor rural
households and their exit from poverty or extreme poverty. In 2013, GoB launched the 2025 Patriotic
Agenda with the overall goal of eradicating extreme poverty and translating prosperity into local
principles of well-being. To this end, the GoB seeks to expand development projects and programs
such as PICAR, which have reached proof of concept and need now to reach scale in the poorest
rural communities of the most vulnerable municipalities of the country.

The original credit finances approximately 800 subprojects and benefits 130.000 rural inhabitants in
35,000 rural households from the poorest 642 communities, improving basic and productive, non-
commercial infrastructure; with an outstanding performance, the project is likely to achieve or
surpass all targets. Through April 2015, PICAR has financed 612 sub-projects in 551 communities
from 48 of the most vulnerable municipalities in the Departments of La Paz, Oruro (highlands),


                                              Page 2 of 13
Cochabamba, and Chuquisaca (valleys). The project has benefited 132,219 rural inhabitants in
25,871 households. 75 percent of sub-projects are completed and fully operational. Sub-projects
include water and sanitation (37 percent), livestock protection and other productive infrastructure (30
percent), small irrigation schemes (13 percent), and rural roads and bridges (9 percent). During
implementation, the project improved women’s participation in sub-project identification and
implementation. As a result, 40 percent of sub-projects were prioritized and implemented by women
only, developing about 660 female leaders at community level. The project has complied with all
credit covenants. Procurement has been consistently rated Satisfactory for the past three years, while
finance management has been recently upgraded to Satisfactory signaling a positive fiduciary
performance. All audits and financial reports have been submitted timely with no qualifications.
Safeguard compliance has also been satisfactory.

The proposed additional financing will scale up a well-tested poverty reduction, rural development
model in about 750 new communities in five Departments, including Pando. It will also consolidate
development impact by providing a second round of grants to about 120 communities. Based on the
project’s positive track record, the GoB has requested an additional credit to cover approximately
600 new communities in both the current 48 municipalities and further 21 new municipalities within
the Oruro, La Paz, Cochabamba and Chuquisaca Departments. In addition, the funds will allow the
project to include around 195 subprojects in 150 communities of the 14 vulnerable municipalities in
the Pando Department (according to the latest study on Vulnerability to Food Insecurity, VAM
2012). Located in the Amazon basin, Pando has a fragile eco-system, and as a result of GoB’s
policies aimed at balancing access to new lands, communities in Pando are a mix of indigenous and
migrant populations. This situation poses new environmental and social risks for the operation that
are being addressed by revising the project negative list in the operational manual, and ensuring
inclusive consultations. Besides subprojects in new communities, PICAR will support a new round
of financing to communities, which already received grants, in order to consolidate access to
infrastructure and services, enhance participatory decision making, and strengthen their capacity in
project management and operation and maintenance (O&M). Evidence from CDD operations around
the world suggests that one cycle of sub-project financing is not sufficient to achieve long term social
or economic results. Hence, under the AF, about 120 communities with positive performance in
O&M and provision of, at least, 20 percent counterpart contribution will profit of a new subproject.
The AF would maintain the following three project components:

Component 1: Community Capacity Building. This component would finance technical assistance,
training and capacity building for target communities to identify, implement, operate, and maintain
community investment subprojects.

Component 2: Community-Driven Development Investment. This component would finance the
provision of community investment grants to selected communities in order to carry out community
investment subprojects. Subprojects would be presented by rural communities to respond to their
self-identified priorities. Given the demand-driven nature of the Project, communities would have an
open menu of social and economic investments, including rural infrastructure, basic services,
vulnerability reduction and food security activities, nutrition, and management of natural resources.
In AF, approximately 120 selected communities that have successfully implemented and maintained
subprojects would receive second round of financing.

Component 3: Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation. This component would support
establishment of a new regional operation unit in Pando, operation costs at national and regional
operation units, monitoring and evaluation, and third party impact evaluation.

                                             Page 3 of 13
The proposed AF will be implemented under the same arrangements of the current project. The
Ministry of Rural Development and Lands will continue to retain the overall responsibility for the
AF implementation through the Unidad Desconcentrada EMPODERAR, which is the project
implementation unit. EMPODERAR, has a demonstrated capacity in project implementation. The
financing under the original project is fully committed for the remaining months of 2015, and it is
projected to disburse fully by 2016, which is a year earlier than originally planned. Under the AF,
EMPODERAR will maintain its existing central and two regional units (ROU), and in addition it will
establish a new ROU in Pando.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The AF would support 870 targeted communities in five Departments in highlands (La Paz and
Oruro), valleys (Chuquisaca and Cochabamba), and Amazonia basin (Pando). About 750
communities would be new to the project, 600 of which would be located in highlands and valleys,
where the project has already been implemented. The remaining 150 communities would be located
in 14 municipalities in Pando. Both environment and social assessments focused on the Pando
Department for being a new Project area.

Pando Department is located north of Bolivia in Amazonia basin, bordering with Brazil and Peru.
The Department has mostly a flat terrain with an average altitude of 280 meters over sea level. It has
a fragile eco-system. Pando has a tropical climate and is covered with jungle of the Amazon and
crossed by many rivers. The Madre de Dios and Tahuamanu rivers, both tributaries of the Beni
River, which belong to the great Amazon basin course, are the main sources of surface water. The
lower floors are characterized by frequent floods during several months a year. Pando is a region
with a high level of precipitation with the average of 1,865 mm (between 143 and 1,990) with a
maximum of 2,423 mm (1972) and a minimum of 1,298 mm (1963). The rainy season runs from
October to April and the dry season has its minimum of rain in July. Surface waters abound
throughout the year, but are of variable quality.

Pando’s sources of income are mainly from timber, gold mining and other minerals, rubber
extraction, and Brazil nuts. There also is some income from ecotourism. Other economic activities,
such as agriculture and cattle ranching, are done mostly at the subsistence level. It has very little
tourism infrastructure as it continues to be a thick jungle riddled with rivers, has very few roads, and
suffers from continuous flooding. The humid tropical forest of the Pando Amazon forms an
ecosystem that is home to a rich biodiversity and containing species of high economic value such as
Brazil nut (Bertollethia excelsa), rubber (Hevea brasiliensis), mahogany (Swietenia macrophylla),
cedar (Cedrela odorata) as well as many palm trees and non-timber products for medicinal use.

Pando has a population of 109,173. According to Vulnerability to Food Insecurity study (VAM
2012), 11 municipalities (out of total of 15) are classified as highly vulnerable to food insecurity, and
3 are classified as moderately vulnerable. Pando has the highest share of highly vulnerable
municipalities (about 11 percent) in Bolivia. There are indigenous groups, including Tacanas,
Cavineño, Esse Ejja, Machineri and Yaminahua. Over the last 10 years, the population in Pando
grew by 108 percent, due to migration of 56,648 people from highlands and valleys. AF target
communities, therefore, would have mixture of ethnically and culturally different populations of
indigenous groups, Aymara, Quechua, and mestizo migrants. Livelihoods of indigenous groups are
dependent on fishery and forestry (such as Brazil nuts), while migrants are on agriculture, bringing
exogenous productive practices, which could boost deforestation. These ethnic and socio-cultural


                                              Page 4 of 13
differences are also at the root of unresolved issues stemming from overlapping rights of use of forest
land, a major source of conflict in Pando. This is most acute in northwestern Pando, where forest
areas that were traditionally occupied by indigenous populations have been declared as concessions.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Juan Carlos Enriquez Uria (GENDR)
Miki Terasawa (GSURR)
Rodrigo Victor Hernan Munoz Reyes Pantoj (GSURR)

6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental               Yes            The policy was triggered for the original project. An
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      ESMF was prepared to address potential negative impacts
                                           on air quality, soil and vegetation from subprojects that
                                           focused mainly on water and sanitation (37 percent),
                                           livestock protection and other productive infrastructure
                                           (30 percent), small irrigation schemes (13 percent), and
                                           rural roads and bridges (9 percent).

                                           In the AF, subprojects in Pando would likely include
                                           fisheries from artificial ponds, forestry, river
                                           transportation (financing small boats or rehabilitation of
                                           small wooden docks), micro-hydroelectric initiatives, and
                                           post-flood rehabilitation. Potential negative impact could
                                           include water pollution. No substantial negative impact,
                                           such as over exploitation of forest products or fish is
                                           foreseen, as sub-grants are small. EIA was undertaken to
                                           analyze potential impacts given the fragile ecosystem of
                                           Pando. ESMF has been updated to ensure that sub-
                                           projects are implemented in an environmentally
                                           sustainable manner. It also builds on lessons learned from
                                           past EA experiences, such as using a negative list to guide
                                           sub-project prioritization, identifying potential climate
                                           risks for sub-projects (extreme events), and making some
                                           funding available for technical assistance related to
                                           environmental issues in operation and maintenance.
Natural Habitats OP/BP      Yes            PICAR does not finance any subproject that would
4.04                                       require change of forest land use or change of natural
                                           landscape. Even though subprojects could be located in
                                           areas close to critical natural habitats or protected areas,
                                           PICAR will not finance any subproject that implies
                                           significant degradation or conversion of natural habitats.

                                           Given the limited scale of the investments to be financed,
                                           PICAR expects no significant negative impacts on critical
                                           natural habitats. Minor impacts could derive from a more
                                           intensive use of non-timber forest products by the
                                           benefiting communities. To prevent and minimize any



                                             Page 5 of 13
                              damage, productive subprojects will include training in
                              sustainable agriculture, agroforestry and forest
                              management, as indicated in the revised ESMF.

                              In Pando, there are two protected areas: Manuripi Heath
                              Reserve Protected Area at national level and Forest
                              Reserve Bruno Racua as a protected area at department
                              level. PICAR subprojects are likely to boost sustainability
                              in these areas.
Forests OP/BP 4.36     Yes    The project screening mechanism identifies subprojects
                              with potential impacts on forests, such as deforestation.

                              In Pando, key selection criteria for forestry sub-projects
                              would include promotion of sustainable agricultural /
                              agro-forestry practices, no deforestation, or no damage to
                              fragile ecosystems. . Subprojects could involve collection
                              of nuts or other vegetation. There is no foreseen impact of
                              overexploitation, as sub-project investments would be
                              small. Screening process has been enhanced and included
                              in the ESMF.
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes   Under the original financing, 13 percent of subprojects
                              established small irrigation scheme. In addition, some
                              home gardens were financed by productive infrastructure
                              support. The policy is triggered because investments in
                              agriculture (small irrigation schemes, improvement of
                              food-security production, etc.) might lead to increased use
                              of pesticides. Integrated pest management would be a part
                              of subproject activities under Component 2. Any
                              procurement of pesticides would comply with the
                              requirements of OP 4.09 which lists pesticides ineligible
                              for Bank financing. The Integrated Pest Management Plan
                              (IPM) from the parent project was updated, which
                              includes a positive list of pesticides.

                              The environmental conditions of Pando with high
                              temperatures and levels of humidity increase the threat of
                              pest attack to agriculture, agro-forestry and forest
                              management initiatives, thus increasing the risk of
                              pesticide misuse and/or water and soil contamination. To
                              address this issue a specific crop mapping of Pando was
                              prepared and IPM was updated, including a revised
                              positive list of pesticides.
Physical Cultural      Yes    PICAR does not finance any subproject with known
Resources OP/BP 4.11          potential negative impacts on physical cultural resources,
                              sacred and/or religious sites. For example, Pando has an
                              important archaeological site (Las Piedras) in Gonzalo
                              Moreno.


                               Page 6 of 13
                               It is possible that excavations could unearth cultural
                               artifacts. The ESMF includes measures to ensure that
                               chance finds are timely determined and respected before
                               proceeding with approval of subproject financing.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   The original project triggered OP/BP 4.10 Indigenous
BP 4.10                        Peoples, and the whole operation was designed as an
                               Indigenous Peoples Project. Approximately 95 percent of
                               sub-project beneficiaries were indigenous populations. At
                               consultations, these groups requested equal attention to all
                               communities and expressed support for the project as an
                               opportunity to build capacity of communities in
                               consultation, planning, implementation and operation of
                               projects to facilitate access to basic infrastructure services
                               (detailed in Section 5). Based on these dialogues, the
                               original project prepared a community participation plan,
                               which ensured consultations with indigenous groups. The
                               project worked with indigenous organization leaders to
                               facilitate consultations with indigenous groups at various
                               stages of sub-project planning and implementation. These
                               leaders also participated in sub-project implementation
                               committees. Moreover, the project hired field operators to
                               facilitate capacity building workshops in indigenous
                               languages and support skills development in sub-project
                               implementation committees. Based on these lessons
                               learned and the cultural, ethnic and productive diversity
                               showcased in the Pando's social assessment, the
                               guidelines for participatory planning have been updated
                               by including, for instance, an assessment of potential land
                               conflicts linked to overlapping of use rights or unclear
                               borders.
                               In Pando, there are two indigenous groups living in
                               voluntary isolation (Machineri and Yaminahua). The
                               revised ESMF will ensure that no subprojects are
                               implemented in the area inhabited by these indigenous
                               groups.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes   As the Project involves small-scale community
OP/BP 4.12                     investments, no significant involuntary resettlement or
                               land acquisition is anticipated. The project prepared
                               Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). In the original
                               project, there was no involuntary resettlement but a few
                               voluntary land donations, which were not well
                               documented. RPF has been revised to improve
                               documentation and reporting of such donations. RPF has a
                               grievance redress mechanism, around which the project
                               would build on the project-wide mechanism.
Safety of Dams OP/BP     Yes   PICAR does not finance building of any large dam.


                                Page 7 of 13
   4.37                                      Irrigation and water supply subprojects could depend on
                                             storage and operation of an existing dam for their supply
                                             of water and may not function if the dam failed. The
                                             ESMF stipulates that financing of any such subproject
                                             requires a preliminary specialized dam safety assessment.

                                             The original project financed two subprojects that
                                             triggered this policy, which constructed mini dams for
                                             irrigation with a capacity of 6,000 and 1,600 m3 of water.
                                             Based on this experience the OM considers the provision
                                             of technical assistance for the operation and maintenance
                                             in order to guarantee sustainability and safety.
   Projects on International   Yes           This policy has been triggered under AF, because of the
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      expansion of the project reach to the Pando Department.
                                             The exception to riparian notification was approved by
                                             the Regional Vice President, because (a) drinking water
                                             and irrigation sector micro-projects would be of limited
                                             local scale and focused on the rehabilitation of existing
                                             village systems for drinking water sector and
                                             rehabilitation and cleaning of village canals in the
                                             irrigation sector; and (b) rehabilitation and improvement
                                             of small wooden docks and fishing facilities would also
                                             be limited local scale and focused around enhancement of
                                             the existing facilities. The proposed project activities are
                                             not likely to adverse the quality or quantity of the water
                                             flowing to downstream riparians and the project will not
                                             be affected by other riparians’ possible water use.
   Projects in Disputed        No            No project activities are involved in disputed areas as
   Areas OP/BP 7.60                          defined in OP/BP 7.60. Thus the Disputed areas safeguard
                                             policy is not triggered.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     It is not anticipated that AF would generate direct negative impacts, based on the experiences from
     the original project. Most of the subproject investments are small scale and have full support and
     ownership of target communities in implementation, operation, and maintenance. Subprojects
     under the AF would be the same scale, implementing similar activities.

    In AF, key safeguard issues and impacts are related to operation in Pando that has fragile eco-
    system of Amazonia and mixture of indigenous and migrant populations in communities with
    different ethnic and cultural backgrounds. Because livelihoods are dependent on fishery, forestry,
    and agriculture in Pando, potential sub-projects in Pando could include collection of forest
    products (such as Brazil nuts), river transportation, and artificial fish pond, and micro
    hydroelectric initiatives. The micro-hydroelectric plants that can be implemented in Pando will be
    river run-of type, using a maximum volume of water of 40 lt/sg, and reaching a maximum power

                                               Page 8 of 13
 of 100 kW. The environmental impacts are marginal in terms of water use and landscape. Given
 the large volumes of water flow in rivers of Pando, the cumulative impact of up to 50 micro-
 hidroelectric plants (2m3/sg) is negligible.

  ESMF, including subproject screening, has been updated to mitigate potential risks. Annex 7 of
  the Environmental Management Framework includes a detail on micro-hydroelectric plants.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  AF is expected to benefit approximately 750 new communities in 84 municipalities in five
  Departments. The ongoing project experience shows that PICAR has the ability to significantly
  increase capital and capacity building in the community, with a strong focus on gender. In the
  original financing, women’s participation in subproject identification and implementation was
  strengthened. As a result, 16 percent of sub-projects were prioritized and implemented by women
  only, developing about 660 female leaders at community level. PICAR has also shown that it can
  improve the social and productive infrastructure with its focus on community empowerment.

  According to the experience and results obtained in the original credit implementation, PICAR
  would have the following social impacts on participating communities: improving the level of
  social capital and increasing the participation of women in community subprojects.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  It is expected that the social impact of the project in general is positive. Mitigation measures
  incorporated into the project design and / or reflected in the operations manual project include
  mechanisms for: a) improving information and transparency, and adopt participatory monitoring at
  the community level; b) integration of vulnerable groups within communities to the processes of
  decision-making on priority needs, as well as the implementation, maintenance and equal access to
  benefits of community projects, and c) promote the inclusion of women.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  AF will continue to be implemented by the Ministry of Rural Development and Land (MDRyT)
  and Decentralized Unit, EMPODERAR. EMPODERAR developed capacity in environment and
  social safeguards during the original project implementation. EMPODERAR prepared ESMF,
  including subproject screening, and other safeguards instruments, such as IPM, community
  participation plan, gender action plan, and RPF. During the original project implementation,
  EMPODERAR revised community participation plan to enhance women’s participation.
  Communities had women only consultations and incorporated women’s priorities in sub-project
  decision making. In supporting women’s sub-project implementation, EMPODERAR increased
  female technical facilitators to 37 percent of all facilitators. In AF, these tools are updated to
  expand the project in Pando in Amazonia Basin, based on the environmental and social
  assessments carried out in Pando. New Regional Operational Unit will be set up in Pando, which
  will be staffed with Environment and Social Development Specialists to ensure safeguard
  compliance. These specialists will be trained and given hand-holding support from the central or
  other regional operational units. EMPODERAR will also have a workshop to train safeguards and
  key program staff on the updated ESMF and tools prior to the AF implementation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The key stakeholders of the project are community members, including indigenous populations,


                                           Page 9 of 13
  migrants from highlands and valleys (in case of Pando), and women, civil society organizations,
  NGOs, government agencies, and private sector.

  In the original project, consultations were conducted with indigenous groups with the following
  feedback: (a) communities demanded equal attention to all communities; (b) communities have
  developed an organizational structure based on their traditional uses and customs, dedicated to the
  defense of their land rights, skills in organizational management is limited; (c) livelihoods are
  mainly subsistence agriculture (barley, bean, wheat, alfalfa, quinoa, and potato cañahua), and in
  central highlands, livestock (camels, cattle and sheep); (f) individual land ownership and rights of
  use coexists intended for agricultural production, and communal property where the land is used
  for grazing. Irrigation is done communally under a traditional rotation organizational system; (g)
  main social organization is an agricultural union; and (h) the project is considered as an
  opportunity to increase community capacity and improve livelihoods. In addition, on gender, the
  main barriers to the participation of women in activities within communities are: (i) role of work
  that limit the free time, (ii) the perception that men are responsible for the communities and
  therefore make decisions, (iii) the stigma that knowledge is limited women associated with self-
  esteem of women, (iv) poor communication and information received by women, (v) lack of
  training possibilities for women.

  In Pando, two public consultations were held in Cobija and Puerto Gonzalo Moreno, participated
  by both indigenous groups and migrants. There were 377 participants in total, 30 percent of whom
  were women. The overall feedback was positive, as the AF would provide economic,
  environmental and productive enhancement. During the AF implementation, community members,
  including indigenous groups and women, would be consulted and continuously engaged in project
  activities, including sub-project identification, prioritization, design, implementation, and
  operation and maintenance.

  Other stakeholders are mostly civil society organizations (CSOs) and public sector institutions.
  CSOs include indigenous organizations at community and regional level (affiliated to national
  level organizations such as the CIPOAP, CARABO and CIDOB), organizations or unions of
  migrant producers (with male and female representations), and organizations of skilled workers,
  such as “Brazilian Nut Harvesters” and “Federation of Industrial Workers”. There also are a few
  NGOs in Pando, such as CIPCA, CARITAS, IPHAE and FAUTAPO. Private sector is limited to
  Brazilian nut and rubber processing companies. Because the project contracts private sector and
  NGOs as facilitating partners, limited availability of development services and support poses a
  significant difference in relation to other regions.

  The public sector stakeholders include local level public institutions, such as the Municipal
  Secretariats of Sustainable Economic Development from the different municipalities. Regional
  level institutions are represented by the MAMUNAB Commonwealth of Municipalities. National
  level public institutions include SENASAG, ACCESO, ADEMAF, the Ministry of Productive
  Development and Plural Economy (MDPyEP), the Ministry of Rural Development and Land
  (MDRyT) and EMPODERAR.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                          06-May-2015
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                       15-May-2015


                                            Page 10 of 13
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive          ////
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Bolivia                                                              15-May-2015
  Comments: Documents are available at http://www.empoderar.gob.bo/estudio-de-evaluacion-de-
                impacto-ambiental-pando-picar
                Hard copies are available in the regional offices of the Ministry for Rural
                Development and Lands
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                          06-May-2015
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                       15-May-2015
"In country" Disclosure
  Bolivia                                                              15-May-2015
  Comments: http://www.empoderar.gob.bo/estudio-de-evaluacion-de-impacto-ambiental-pando-
                picar
                Hard copies are available in the regional offices of the Ministry for Rural
                Development and Lands
 Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                          05-May-2015
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                       15-May-2015
"In country" Disclosure
  Bolivia                                                              15-May-2015
  Comments: Because about 95 percent of beneficiaries are indigenous populations, the original
                project as well as AF were designed as an IP project. Therefore, no independent IP
                was prepared by the project and the full elements of an Indigenous Peoples Plan were
                embedded in the project design. The date indicated is the date of social assessment
                disclosure.
 Pest Management Plan
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                       Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                          05-May-2015
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                       15-May-2015
"In country" Disclosure
  Bolivia                                                              15-May-2015
  Comments: http://www.empoderar.gob.bo/estudio-de-evaluacion-de-impacto-ambiental-pando-
                picar
                Hard copies are available in the regional offices of the Ministry for Rural
                Development and Lands
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




                                           Page 11 of 13
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
 project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
 in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
 Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 property?
 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
 Indigenous Peoples?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Practice Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
 Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 and constraints been carried out?
 Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 overcome these constraints?
 Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 does it include provisions for certification system?



                                            Page 12 of 13
   OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
    Have dam safety plans been prepared?                             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
    Bank?
    Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
   OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
    Have the other riparians been notified of the project?           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
    Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
    Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader(s): Name: Norman Bentley Piccioni
   Approved By
   Practice Manager/    Name: Laurent Msellati (PMGR)                        Date: 29-May-2015
   Manager:




                                             Page 13 of 13
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
