The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Northern Gaza Emergency Sewage Treatment (NGEST) Project (P074595)




                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


        Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Dec-2016| Report No: ISDSR7402




                       Regional Vice President:    Hafez M. H. Ghanem
                              Country Director:    Marina Wes
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Guang Zhe Chen
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Steven N. Schonberger
                            Task Team Leader:      Pieter David Meerbach
        The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Northern Gaza Emergency Sewage Treatment (NGEST) Project (P074595)



I. BASIC INFORMATION

1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

Project ID                                                   Project Name
                                                             Northern Gaza Emergency Sewage Treatment (NGEST)
P074595
                                                             Project
Task Team Leader(s)                                          Country
Pieter David Meerbach                                        West Bank and Gaza
Approval Date                                                Environmental Category
07-Sep-2004                                                  Full Assessment (A)
Managing Unit                                                Is this a Repeater project?
GWA05


PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

Total Project Cost                                           Total Bank Financing
74390000.00                                                  74390000.00
Financing Gap
0

Financing Source                                                                                       Amount
Counterpart Funding                                                                                  500000.00
Trust Funds                                                                                       26800000.00
Parallel Financing                                                                                47090000.00
Total                                                                                            74,390,000.00


2. PROJECT INFORMATION

 Current Project Development Objective
 The project objectives are to: (i) mitigate the immediate gathering health and environmental safety threats to the
 communities surrounding the effluent lake at BLWTP; and (ii) Provide a satisfactory long-term solution to the treatment
 of wastewater for the Northern Government in Gaza.
        The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Northern Gaza Emergency Sewage Treatment (NGEST) Project (P074595)



3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

General background and financing: NGEST was originally prepared as an emergency response to health and flood risks
associated with a 1.5 million cubic meter (MCM) lake of untreated wastewater, which had formed over an area of 300
dunum (30 ha) north of Beit Lahia in northern Gaza as a result of lack of natural drainage and prohibitions to discharge
the wastewater to the sea, combined with the lack of an adequately functioning wastewater treatment plant (WWTP).
The body of untreated wastewater seeped into the groundwater and served as a breeding ground for water-borne
diseases. Tragically, breach of sand embankments containing the lake had occurred on three occasions in the period
1989-2007, flooding houses in areas of Beit Lahia and causing multiple casualties through drowning in the raw sewage.
NGEST addresses these health and flood problems through the construction of an integrated wastewater treatment
plant and effluent recovery and reuse scheme.

The NGEST project, prepared as an emergency project and approved in 2004 for an initial amount of US$ 7.8 million, has
the objectives to: (i) mitigate the immediate gathering health and environmental safety threats to the communities
surrounding the effluent lake at Beit Lahia; and (ii) provide a satisfactory long-term solution to the treatment of
wastewater for the Northern Government in Gaza. NGEST consists of four components: (1) Effluent transfer to the
Proposed North Gaza Wastewater Treatment Site (from Beit Lahiya); (2) Technical assistance to Effluent Transfer
(Component 1 activities); (3) Construction of the North Gaza Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP); and (4) Technical
assistance to Construction of the WWTP (Component 3 activities). The objectives were to be met through sequentially
implementing two parts: Part A (Component 1 and 2) in order to alleviate the immediate environmental and health
threats associated with the old and overburdened wastewater treatment plant at Beit Lahiya, through construction of a
transfer pipeline and new infiltration basins at a new site, and related environmental risk mitigation activities that were
to be identified further; and Part B (Component 3 and 4) in order to provide a long-term, sustainable solution for
wastewater management through the construction of a new WWTP at the new site. At the time of Board approval,
financing for Part B was tentative, based on pledges from the Belgian Government (Euro 4.0 million), the Swedish
International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA, US$ 6.85 million equivalent), and the European Commission
(Euro 5.88 million as co-financing, and from the Agence Francaise de Developpement (AFD, US$ 13.0 million equivalent)
as parallel financing, in addition to supplementary financing from the World Bank. The parallel- and co-financing
arrangements were confirmed and approved by the respective donors in 2005.

The political and security situation in Gaza deteriorated after Israel’s disengagement from Gaza in September 2005.
Frequent border closures and restrictions on the movement of people and materials resulted in significant cost
overruns, as well as delays in the completion of contracts under Part A and the construction of the WWTP under Part B.
In addition, there were two major outbreaks of severe hostilities, the latest in 2014, leading to thousands of casualties
and massive damage to infrastructure. Project cost overruns were exacerbated by the exchange rate fluctuations and
global increases in energy prices. Additional financing to cover financing gaps, cost overruns, environmental risk
mitigation measures and financing for 3 years of Operation and Maintenance (O&M) of the WWTP were approved by
the Bank in 2008 for US$ 12.0 million (P091314), in 2010 for US$ 7.0 million (P117446) and in 2014 for US$ 10.5 million
(P146065). The additional financing also allocated financing additional activities identified for utilization of the water
returned to the aquifer and for mitigation of potential, future risks, which were identified in the full Environmental
Assessment (Category A) which was completed in 2006. These additional activities include the use of monitoring and
recovery wells to manage any potential risks of the treated wastewater impacting the overall aquifer water supply.

4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
   KNOWN)
        The World Bank                                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Northern Gaza Emergency Sewage Treatment (NGEST) Project (P074595)



The project area comprises the towns of Beit Lahia, Jabalia, Beit Hanoum, and Um Nasser located in the
northern part of the Gaza Strip. The proposed project restructuring will affect neither the project location
and salient physical characteristics, nor the environmental and social risk profile of the project.



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


 Name                                                       Unit
 Tracy Hart                                                 GEN05
 Helen Z. Shahriari                                         GSU05
 Zeyad Abu-Hassanein                                        GEN05


6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED

Safeguard Policies                     Triggered            Explanation

                                                            The project is classified as Category "A" due to the
                                                            potential environmental impacts associated with the
                                                            Wastewater Treatment Plant construction and effluent
                                                            discharge. Potential negative impacts are associated
                                                            with construction (disruption of traffic patterns,
                                                            disrupted access to residences and other buildings,
                                                            change in the landscape (loss of vegetation), noise
                                                            nuisance, air pollution due to dust formation,
                                                            construction-site safety hazards, and disposal of
                                                            excavated materials and construction debris) as well as
Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP
                                       Yes                  the potential for poor operational performance of the
4.01)
                                                            WWTP. However, with construction phase close to
                                                            complete, the former set of negative impacts have
                                                            been demonstrated to be satisfactorily addressed.
                                                            Operational performance of the WWTP will be
                                                            supported by detailed implementation support to be
                                                            found in NGEST technical documents. The project
                                                            (WWTP and recovery wells) is expected to have a
                                                            strong net positive impact on public health conditions
                                                            as well as on the protection of groundwater resources
                                                            from contamination and aquifer recharge.
                                                            The physical sites impacted by NGEST financing have
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)        No                   been extensively studied; they do not include and are
                                                            not adjacent to critical natural habitats.
        The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Northern Gaza Emergency Sewage Treatment (NGEST) Project (P074595)



                                                                The physical sites impacted by NGEST financing have
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                    No                    been extensively studied; they do not include and are
                                                                not adjacent to forests.

                                                                NGEST component construction does not involve the
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                 No
                                                                purchase of any pesticides or rodenticides.

                                                                Physical sites impacted by NGEST financing have been
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP                            extensively surveyed; the Ministry of Antiquities and
                                          No
4.11)                                                           Fatwa has confirmed that the sites are not among
                                                                those classified as archeologically relevant.

Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)         No                    This policy is not applicable.


                                                                This policy is not applicable. The NGEST physical sites
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)   No                    are dedicated sites for water infrastructure as overseen
                                                                by the Palestinian Water Authority (PWA).


Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)             No                    This policy is not applicable.


Projects on International Waterways
                                          No                    This policy is not applicable.
(OP) (BP 7.50)


Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60) No                    This policy is not applicable.




 II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A. SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES

 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
   potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
   Per the requirement of OP 4.01 for Category A projects, a full Environmental Assessment (EA) was prepared for the
   original project by an independent third party consultant. The restructuring does not require a separate EA, as the
   original EA is still relevant.

    Major issues included in the original EA included: (i) construction impacts; (ii ) performance of the treatment plant
   based on actual wastewater analyses and in accordance with the guidelines set forth in the Bank™s Pollution
   Prevention and Abatement Handbook; (iii) potential re-use of treated effluent and sludge for irr igation and soil
   conditioning; (iv) adverse environmental effects from non-performing wastewater system; (v) existing industrial
       The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Northern Gaza Emergency Sewage Treatment (NGEST) Project (P074595)



  facilities, type of generated e ffluents and potential impacts on the performance of the treatment plant; (vi) Quality of
  the aquifer and possible changes as a result of its recharge with treated effluent; (vii) monitoring and control of the
  operation of the treatment plant; (viii) adequate guidelines for the re-use of treated effluent and sludge; and (ix)
  remediation measures to restore the area of the effluent lake to its original state. These issues have been properly
  captured in the environmental management plan (EMP) developed for the original project, and a set of mitigation
  measures were developed accordingly.

  Under the proposed restructuring, remediation of the effluent lake will be completed partially by project closing. A
  follow-on project will complete the financing of the effluent lake remediation as well as the initial three years of
  WWTP O&M. Financing of the effluent reuse scheme is likely to be financed by a bilateral donor in parallel to the
  follow-on project. The proposed restructuring will not change the environmental and social risk profile of this project.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  Due to the long duration for completion of the WWTP, the infiltration basins at the NGEST project site have been
  receiving partially treated waste water from the old Beit Lahia WWTP. Around 56 million cubic meters of wastewater
  have infiltrated in the groundwater aquifer. Simulation results shows the pollution plume with nitrate levels
  significantly exceeding potable water standards, from the project site is moving towards the west and is within 3-4
  years distance from reaching the closest municipal water wells. The application of untreated wastewater at the basins
  have resulted in clogging the basins and significantly reducing their current receiving capacity of infiltrating the
  effluent. The reduction in the receiving capacity in the infiltration basins had resulted in reverting to random dumping
  of effluent at Beit Lahia sand dunes and the site of the old wastewater lagoon.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  Based on modeling of groundwater and pollution flows, a system of 14 recovery wells and reuse scheme have been
  designed and financed to arrest the movement of the pollution plume and contain it within the confines of the
  perimeter of the wells. Recent modeling results indicated that the location of 3 wells will need to be moved some 100
  meters eastwards to fully capture the plume, and an amendment to that effect is currently being discussed with the
  contractor. The recovery wells will make the recovered effluent available for future reuse in agriculture, through a
  system of pumping stations, water tanks, and a distribution network. Financing for the reuse scheme is being
  considered as part of the overall discussion for future support of the Bank and other donors to the water sector.

  Based on the results of an on-going geotechnical investigation, two pilots are being commissioned to restore the
  infiltration capacity of the infiltration basins, and based on these pilots, a comprehensive rehabilitation will be
  undertaken.

  As remediation of the site of the old Beit Lahia Lake is part of the project EM, priority remediation measures will be
  undertaken under the current project restructuring before project closure by end of 2017, focusing on the
  characterization and removal of sludge residues not compliant with environmental standards.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was developed as an integral part of the EA study, which included
  mitigation measures, monitoring plan and capacity building activities. A qualified environmental specialist was hired
  with the Project Management Unit (PMU) and is responsible for supervising the mitigation and monitoring program,
  and for discussing any issue in coordination with the relevant local governmental entities. NGEST implementation
          The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          Northern Gaza Emergency Sewage Treatment (NGEST) Project (P074595)



    performance have consistently been rated as satisfactory; the on-site construction contractor had an effective full-
    time safety engineer; an independent safety consultant was also employed to provide external supervisory expertise
    specific to environmental safeguards. An emergency operation plan was developed to optimize the operation of all
    existing and emergency infrastructure ensued, in cooperation with the CMWU.

  5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
    an emphasis on potentially affected people.
    Key stakeholders of the project include the Palestinian Authority, the Palestinian Water Authority (PWA), the
    Environmental Quality Authority, the Ministry of Local Government, the municipalities and village councils, health
    centers, farmers, and the communities living in the areas to be served by the project. A comprehensive public
    participation program was conducted during the process of EA preparation. Governmental agencies, NGOs,
    community representatives, neighboring land owners, and other stakeholders were involved in the process. The
    consultation process was performed by direct interviews, questionnaires, and public meetings. The relevant
    environmental issues, including wastewater reuse, sludge reuse, soc ioeconomics, aquifer water quality, were
    discussed in great details. The results and findings of the EA study were presented through a public hearing workshop
    that involves the different stakeholders. All relevant comments and concerns were considered during the preparation
    of the final report.

    The EA was disclosed in-country on March 30, 2006 and in the World Bank€™Infoshop on April 10, 2006.


 B. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS


Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                    Date of submission to Infoshop
31-Mar-2006                                                    09-Apr-2007
For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
03-Apr-2006
“In country? Disclosure
Country                                                        Date of Disclosure
West Bank and Gaza                                             30-Mar-2006
Comments




C. COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL
         The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Northern Gaza Emergency Sewage Treatment (NGEST) Project (P074595)



OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment

Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                    Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review and
                                                                                                     Yes
approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                   Yes




The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information

Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                   Yes
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and
language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local                 Yes
NGOs?


All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared
                                                                                                     Yes
for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                   Yes
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of
                                                                                                     Yes
safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and
                                                                                                     Yes
the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?


 III. APPROVALS


                                            Pieter David Meerbach
  Task Team Leader(s)
                                            Adnan Farouq Saad Aldin Ghosheh


  Approved By

  Safeguards Advisor                        Brandon Enrique Carter                   22-Mar-2017
      The World Bank                                                                     RESTRUCTURING ISDS
      Northern Gaza Emergency Sewage Treatment (NGEST) Project (P074595)



Practice Manager/Manager            Steven N. Schonberger                  22-Mar-2017
