INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA13106
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Jun-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        India                       Project ID:  P155601
Parent        P119043
Project ID:
Project Name: Addl. Financing - Scaling Up Sustainable and Responsible Microfinance
(P155601)
Parent Project India: Scaling Up Sustainable and Responsible Microfinance (P119043)
Name:
Task Team       Subrahmanya Pulle Srinivas,Varsha Marathe Dayal
Leader(s):
Estimated        18-May-2015                Estimated    08-Sep-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFMDR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Microfinance (100%)
Theme(s):       Rural non-farm income generation (10%), Other social protection and risk
management (20%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise suppor t (50%),
Financial Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy (6%), Other Financial
Sector Development (14%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     300.00             Total Bank Financing:   200.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
Borrower                                                                    100.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       200.00
Total                                                                       300.00
Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
Category:
Page 1 of 6


﻿Is this a        Yes
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The objective of the project is to scale up access to sustainable microfinance services to the
financially excluded, particularly in under-served areas of India, through, among other things,
introduction of innovative financial products and fostering transparencyand responsible finance.
B. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
3. Project Description
The main rationale for the proposed additional financing for this well-performing project is to help
sustain SIDBI's ongoing successful efforts in the microfinance sector and lock-in the gains from the
parent project so that the positive momentum built up thus far is entrenched and further capitalized
upon. The proposed additional financing would help further scale up funding support to MFIs in
India through provision of debt, quasi-equity, and equity financing and this will (i) support MFIs'
operations and growth, (ii) enhance MFIs' financial strength, and (iii) enable them to leverage and
crowd-in private commercial funds to on-lend larger amounts to the underserved. It would also help
sustain the focus on responsible lending practices, expand financing to low income states and under-
served areas, introduce new/innovative products for MFIs, and provide transitioning support to MFIs
that may transform to small banks that are able to provide a more comprehensive suite of financial
services and scale up project impact further. While clearly sector practices have improved and a good
foundation has been laid as part of the parent project, sustained further efforts on this will help ensure
that client protection principles get fully entrenched in the sector in the long term. The good progress
on lending to low income states needs to be enhanced, just as the introduction of new products such
as subordinate debt and equity for MFIs and micro-enterprise graduation loans to clients could better
meet the needs of the sector.
The proposed Additional Financing is also broadly aligned with the World Bank Group's
commitment to Universal Financial Access by 2020. India is a priority country for the UFA goal.
While impressive progress has recently been made in expanding ownership of accounts through the
government's Jan Dhan Yojana initiative, there are still a substantial number of adults without bank
accounts to be reached, and microfinance institutions (if and when they convert to small banks under
RBI's new guidelines) may be relatively well placed to reach these difficult to reach market
segments. The proposed Additional Financing provides for the possibility of SIDBI's support to
MFIs which convert to small banks and offer bank accounts, and thereby also contribute to furthering
financial inclusion - widespread usage of a full range of financial services, including credit - which is
the ultimate objective of the UFA initiative.
The project's objective and the Government's request for additional financing are consistent with the
World Bank Group's Country Partnership Strategy 2013-17 (Report # 76176-IN, discussed by the
Board of Executive Directors on March 21, 2013) which focuses on three main engagement areas: (i)
integration, through infrastructure and strengthening of market mechanisms; (ii) transformation,
through capacity building of urban and rural institutions; and (iii) inclusion, through social programs
Page 2 of 6


﻿and promotion of human development. The proposed additional financing contributes directly to
engagement area (iii) through its impact on enhancing financial inclusion of the poor and
underserved and indirectly to engagement area (ii) through its impact on financial, operational, and
corporate as well as sectoral strengthening of MFIs that operate in both rural and urban areas.
The existing arrangement for the parent project, where safeguards responsibility has been delegated
to the Global Practice will continue for additional financing.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The microfinance activities under the original project were carried out across India targeting mostly
underserved areas. The proposed additional finance project will continue similar efforts. The
additional financing will not finance a specific set of pre-identified investments. Funds will be
intermediated to a number of MFIs to microfinance clients. No specific sector has been identified,
and financial intermediaries will undertake on-lending on market principles.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Satya N. Mishra (GSURR)
Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The proposed project activities are generally
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                environmentally benign. However, to minimize residual
safeguards risks, Exclusion List of Activities for
Environmental Management (ELAs) with supporting
enforcement mechanism has been agreed with SIDBI.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           Project will not impact Natural Habitats
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           Project does not lead to impacts on forests
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           Pest management will not be required
Physical Cultural       No           Project is not expected to affect any Physical Cultural
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 Resources
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           Project will not impact
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No          Project will not lead to this
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           Project will not impact
4.37
Projects on International  No        Not applicable
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No           Not applicable
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Page 3 of 6


﻿A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental:
The proposed additional financing will be continued to be intermediated by SIDBI to several
MFIs. While there are no set of pre-identified investments, funds will be intermediated to a
number of MFIs to microfinance clients. All the MF activities financed under the parent project
have been rationalized through an Exclusion List of Activities (ELAs). Based on the ELAs, the
hazardous activities such as packaging inflammable materials (including fire crackers), household
dying, etc, which could pose environmental safeguards risks have been minimized. By and large
all the activities financed under the parent project are environmentally benign - these typically
include embroidery, mat making, tailoring, wool knitting, handloom weaving, rope making,
carpentry work, handicrafts, general stores, vegetable vending, etc. Given this, ELAs document for
environmental management was jointly reviewed by WB and SIDBI team and confirmed the
appropriateness of application of ELAs for Environmental Management, complying with OP 4.01
- Environmental Assessment. The project would not lead to any potential large scale, significant
and/or irreversible environmental impacts.
Social :
No specific social safeguard issues, including those related to OP 4.10 and OP 4.12 and to child
labor, have been experienced during the implementation of the parent project nor are they
expected in the implementation of the additional financing and no potential direct or indirect
negative impacts either in short or long term are anticipated against the the proposed activities in
the project.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Environmental and Social Safeguards: No potential indirect and/or long term impacts are expected
due to anticipated future activities
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Project alternatives are not relevant in the context of environmental and social safeguards.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environmental Safeguards: The ongoing mechanism of environmental safeguards management
through application of ELAs has been effectively streamlined in to SIDBI's on lending process.
The ELA has been effectively applied in the parent project as part of credit appraisal through a two
stage environmental screening process. The first level of screening is part of SIDBI's credit
appraisal, wherein the MFI's micro-finance portfolio will be reviewed by credit officers to
determine the nature of activities, and further stipulate an on-lending legal covenant for application
of ELA by the MFI. The second level of screening and application of ELA is being followed by
the MFIs as part of their appraisal for micro-financing activities under the parent Project. Such
arrangements have been formalized as part of SIBI's on-lending covenants. The application of
ELAs and compliance of the same are certified by MFIs on a semi-annual basis and SIDBI
conducts an annual audit on ELA compliance by MFIs. In line with this process SIDBI has applied
the necessary safeguards screening steps as part of the implementation of parent project and the
annual audits have confirmed the compliance. Given the effectiveness of this streamlined process,
Page 4 of 6


﻿the same approach will be continued for the additional financing. The disclosure of ELA for the
parent project will continue to be effective (at SIDBI and Bank end) and no separate disclosure is
envisaged.
Social Safeguards:
No specific social safeguards issues are expected.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders of the parent project included MFIs and the recipients of micro-finance from
MFIs. With regard to environmental safeguards, the proposed measures relate to a negative list of
micro-finance activities - ELA, which is part of SIDBIs on-lending legal agreements. This
measure will effectively address the environmental impacts. These have been found to be
satisfactory and will continue.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                               08-Dec-2009
Date of submission to InfoShop                            18-Dec-2009
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
India                                                     15-Dec-2009
Comments: The Exclusion List of Activities for Environmental Management (ELA) document
was disclosed as part of the preparation of the parent project. Since the ELA
document holds good for the Additional Financing Project, the disclosure (in country
as well as Infoshop) has been continued to effective
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ] No[X]     NA[
report?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Page 5 of 6


﻿Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X]    No [  ]   NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X]  No [  ]   NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Subrahmanya Pulle Srinivas,Varsha Marathe Dayal
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Niraj Verma (PMGR)                    Date: 05-Jun-2015
Manager:
Page 6 of 6


