INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC12151
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Sep-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Sep-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Philippines                Project ID:   P153814
Project Name:   Metro Manila Flood Management-Phase 1 (P1538 14)
Task Team       Joop Stoutjesdijk,Yan F. Zhang
Leader(s):
Estimated       08-Oct-2015                Estimated     19-Nov-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWAO2                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
GEF Focal       International waters
Area:
Sector(s):      Flood protection (70%), Solid waste management (15%), Sub-national
government administration (15%)
Theme(s):       Water resource management (60%), Municipal governance and institution
building (10%), Urban planning and housing policy (10%), Urban services and
housing for the poor (20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     500.00            Total Bank Financing:  300.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
Borrower                                                       192.60
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development          300.00
Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                7.40
Total                                                          500.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Development Objective(s) / Global Environmental Objective(s)
1. Project Development Objective(s)


﻿The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to reduce flood risks to beneficiaries in
flood-prone areas of Metro Manila that are served by targeted pumping stations. The PDO will be
achieved through an integrated set of interventions to modernize existing pumping stations and
make improvements to appurtenant infrastructure; switch pumps from diesel to electric power
where needed; construct new pumping stations to accommodate urban expansion; increase short-
term water retention capacity in the drainage areas; reduce the volume of indiscriminately dumped
solid waste into waterways by means of community-based programs where feasible; and support
community-based resettlement of informal settler families encroaching in easements for drains and
*         waterways linked to the project pumping stations to safer in-city locations.
2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
There will be no specific global environmental objective. A GEF Grant (US$7.4 million) will
support efforts to accelerate the improvement of water quality of Manila Bay by defining the
appropriate institutional arrangements and enhancing the regulatory, monitoring, and planning
capacity of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR). The GEF funds will
assist DENR in adequately regulating and monitoring the water quality in the Manila Bay
catchment area. The improvement in water quality as a result of the activities in the project,
especially solid waste management, will be captured through the water quality monitoring systems
to be developed under this GEF grant.
C. Project Description
Component 1: Modernization of Drainage Areas (US$355 million, preliminary estimate). Many of
the 57 pumping stations managed by MMDA are over 30 years old and no longer operate at full
capacity. In 2013, MMDA has started with the partial modernization of 12 pumping stations for
which government made available PhP 1.59 billion. MMDA has gained good experience with this
program which will be completed during the first half of 2015. Under the proposed project, it will
implement an accelerated program of modernizing pumping stations. MMDA has carried out an
inventory of its existing pumping stations and it is expected that this component will modernize
about 30 pumping stations, the exact number and locations to be determined during project
implementation, based on a number of screening criteria. As part of the modernization program,
pumps will be replaced with modem, more efficient, and higher capacity units. The design discharge
determination will be underpinned by hydrological studies of the drainage areas and the best type of
pump will be selected for each given situation, including submersible pumps, possibly with variable
speed drive, as well as horizontal axial pumps. It is envisaged that five pumping stations (a sub-
project) will be selected during project preparation and designed for project year 1 implementation.
The selection of these pumping stations is currently ongoing. Improvement to appurtenant
infrastructure such as flood gates, drainage channels, manholes, etc. may also be necessary. The
energy source will, where needed and possible, be changed from diesel to electricity. The
component will also finance cleaning and improving linked waterways and drainage channels, as
well as provision of specialized waterways maintenance equipment. This component will support the
MMDA program to construct a number of new pumping stations, estimated at the moment at around
25 to 30, based on a long-list prepared by LGUs, to serve flood-prone areas around Metro Manila
where the population has grown rapidly over the past 10-20 years. Under the project each proposed
site will be studied comprehensively to determine whether a particular proposal is feasible and a
priority for implementation. A program of increasing the water retention capacity within the project
drainage areas will also be developed and implemented. This could include rooftop rainwater
collection, retention of drainage water in public areas such as basketball courts, parking garages, etc.
Component 2 - Minimizing Solid Waste in Waterways (US$75 million). This component will


﻿complement the solid waste management programs of the participating LGUs, specifically in the
densely populated drainage areas of the targeted pumping stations to reduce solid waste dumped into
waterways, which is adversely affecting the efficiency of pump facilities. The component will
support awareness and educational programs to change behavioral of people, including promoting
O
segregation of waste at the source. It will also support interventions within the project areas such as
garbage bins, recycling containers, material recovery facilities, garbage trucks, etc. The project will
also support, where feasible, MMDA's agenda to apply appropriate technologies, such as "waste-to-
energy" to run pump facilities, taking into account the full range of costs and benefits, including
externality effects. This may include the introduction of incinerators, where feasible and allowed by
law. Government has awarded a contract to prepare a feasibility study for waste-to-energy facilities
and the project intends to incorporate technically and financially viable interventions. This
component plans to develop and implement appropriate institutional arrangements in the
implementation and long term operation and maintenance (O&M) mechanism of the interventions,
including possible results-based financing approaches that will incentivize improvements in solid
waste management outcomes. Management of water hyacinths or water lilies, one of the causes of
pump breakdowns and stoppages, will be addressed. The project will finance appropriate equipment
for harvesting, but also programs that encourage processing for reuse of products as community
livelihood activities, which are especially practiced by women.
A GEF Grant (US$7.4 million) would assist the Department of Environment and Natural Resources
(DENR) in adequately regulating and monitoring the water quality in the Manila Bay catchment area.
The improvement in water quality as a result of the activities in the project, especially solid waste
management, would be captured through the water quality monitoring systems to be developed under
this GEF grant.
Component 3 - Participatory Housing and Resettlement (US$45 million). This component will
support a community participatory approach to resettlement for Informal Settler Families (ISF) to be
affected by the drainage area improvements. Almost all pumping stations, both existing and
proposed, are located in densely populated areas with ISFs living along many of the waterways
served by the pumping stations. Existing pumping stations to be modernized are typically well
fenced with no informal settlers and no need for resettlement. However, some waterways linked to
existing pumping stations are encroached and some ISFs may have to move to ensure proper O&M
of the waterways and drainage channels and the pumps. Due diligence will be needed to ascertain if
a       remedial actions will be needed for those previously resettled to ensure that their resettlement is
consistent with the objectives of World Bank policy (OP4.12). In spite of efforts to avoid
resettlement in site selection, it is likely that some resettlement will be necessary for construction of
the new pumping stations. Encroachments along and over some of the associated waterways will
necessitate some resettlement as well to allow proper O&M of the drainage infrastructure. The
magnitude of project affected persons will be estimated during project preparation, but initial
numbers point at a range in the order of 1,000 to 2,500 ISFs.
Informal Settler Families will be consulted - using a community participatory approach to
resettlement - and offered different options that will include among them in-city resettlement, out-of-
city resettlement, and/or cash compensation. For in-city resettlement the environmental and social
safeguards framework (ESSF) and resettlement policy framework (RPF) will include a menu of
options which include: (i) SHFC's Community Mortgage Program; (ii) SHFC's High Density
Housing program; (iii) NHA in-city program; (iv) LGU-led resettlement with SFHC refinancing; and
(v) rental housing support. The housing options need to be analyzed in a flexible manner without
dismissing any option prematurely. The options have to be accessible, equitable, affordable, and


﻿flexible and done in consultation with project affected people, in accordance with OP 4.12. As such
other options suggested by the communities will also be considered.
The component would finance for participating LGUs the following: (1) technical assistance grants
O
to support community organizing, participatory community mapping and surveying, shelter planning,
technical studies, livelihoods assistance, post-resettlement estate management, and documentation;
and (2) site development and community infrastructure. It will also assess financing a revolving fund
for land acquisition and housing construction, which will be re-financed by SHFC to enable the seed
fund to be used for other ISF housing projects in the future. Possible fund flow to the LGUs and
financial management mechanism on how to revolve the funds and ensure strict fiduciary
arrangements will also be established by project appraisal. Finally, the component may also finance
rental housing assistance to ISFs to be affected by the construction of new pumping stations for a
transitional period while waiting for the new housing units to be completed.
The component will also support capacity building to participating LGUs on shelter planning and
institutionalizing the Local Housing Boards, which function as a platform for engaging various
stakeholders such as communities, key shelter agencies, non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
private developers, and others to collaboratively plan and manage ISF housing projects.
Component 4 - Project Management and Coordination (US$25 million). The component will support
the operation of the Project Management Office (PMO) to be established by MMDA, headed by a
Project Manager, to coordinate the overall planning, implementation, and supervision of project
activities, central procurement, and management of funds. It is expected that Department of Public
Works and Highways may become involved for the design and construction of a number of new
pumping stations, but the arrangements for this and extent of involvement are still being discussed.
The component will provide funding for: (i) incremental operating costs, including office rentals and
utilities, per diem and other travel expenses for staff, vehicles operation and maintenance, and
allowances for contractual staff (short term); (ii) office equipment and materials, which includes
computers, printers, and communication equipment; (iii) technical and management training of
MMDA and PMO staff, including in safeguards issues, as needed; (iv) training of the PMO staff in
strategic communications, the formulation of a communication plan, and the execution of the same,
headed by a dedicated communication specialist. Citizen engagement will also be monitored by the
PMO team; (v) management of safeguards related issues, including preparation of safeguards
o       instruments (the actual land acquisition and resettlement will be financed under Component 3); (vi)
technical and management consultants to support the PMO, MMDA, and LGUs, as needed, including
safeguards consultants; and (vii) project monitoring and evaluation (M&E), including carrying out a
detailed baseline study, periodic monitoring and a completion assessment study.
Gender-related activities will be addressed under components 2 and 3. Under component 2, among
informal waste pickers, many are women (and their children) because they lack alternative livelihood
options and may face specific hardships (e.g. as single parents and female heads of household). On
the other hand, other jobs in the solid waste sector are typically the domain of men (e.g. more formal
jobs as waste collectors, whether through handcarts or municipal garbage trucks). Government has
certain programs in place to train and support resettled women with alternative livelihood activities at
their new locations, which will also be included under component 3. The project will take, as needed
and feasible, gender dimensions into consideration when designing specific actions. Gender impacts
will be specifically monitored.


﻿D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project sites will cover the Greater Metro Manila Area. There is an inventory of existing
pumping stations and associated drainage areas, but the specific interventions to be financed by the
project are not yet known and will need to be investigated, surveyed, assessed, and designed during
project implementation. It is envisaged that five pumping stations (a sub-project) will be selected
and prepared for project year 1 implementation. The selection of these pumping stations is currently
ongoing. Interventions will vary from drainage area to drainage area. Similarly, a number of
potential areas have been identified for new pumping stations proposed for financing under the
project. The overall area of influence is the drainage area that drains to a pumping station. Although
the general drainage areas, which are densely populated built-up areas, have been identified, the
exact numbers and specific sites for additional new pumping stations and related solid waste
management and relocation activities are not yet known. Specific interventions will be determined
during project implementation when each drainage area will be investigated and studied in detail to
first of all determine whether inclusion of a proposed site in the project is required, feasible, and
viable, and if yes, what is required to fulfill the objective of the project.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
An assessment of the institutional capacity for safeguards policies will be conducted during project
preparation. Initial information indicates that the MMDA safeguards capacity and that of the LGUs
is inadequate and follow-up institutional and technical capacity-building for both the environment
and social safeguard policies will be required. MMDA has already established a team that will be
responsible for preparation of safeguards documents and plans. The staff and other specialists in
MMDA have been through an orientation of the Bank's safeguards policies and have participated in a
Bank-managed one day safeguards workshop. Those in government's housing sector (HUDCC,
SHFC, HDMF (or Pagibig) are familiar with the OP 4.12. on Involuntary Resettlement, but not with
environmental safeguard policies. There will be support from consultants, as needed, which will be
financed under component 4.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Danilo G. Lapid (GSURR)
O
Frederick Edmund Brusberg (GSURR)
Gerardo F. Parco (GENDR)
Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz (GENDR)
Roberto B. Tordecilla (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment is
OP/BP 4.01                              triggered as it is anticipated that environmental
impacts will occur in modernizing existing pump
stations, constructing new pumping stations, the
cleaning of waterways and drainage channels related
to pump stations, and expanded solid waste
management activities. This also includes impacts
from ancillary facilities (off sites), resettlement


﻿programs, as well as social impacts.
Anticipated environmental impacts may include
collection and disposal of solid waste and
construction debris, dredged silt and spoils, worker
health and safety, disruptions to local traffic, disposal
of worn-out pumps and equipment, spent fuel, oil
and lubricants from the pumping stations, dust and
noise during construction works, domestic
wastewater, run-off, loss of vegetation, cut and fill of
undeveloped terrain, loose soil and debris during site
development and construction, siltation of
waterways, and poor aesthetic quality.
Since specific activities in each drainage area of the
pumping stations will only be determined during
project implementation when each area will be
investigated and studied in detail, an Environment
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be
prepared prior to appraisal to define the process for
addressing all safeguards concerns during project
implementation. The ESMF will describe the
process for the environment and social assessment of
the potential impacts of all activities taking place
within the drainage areas for all project components
combined. It will contain information, resources,
institutional responsibilities, and technical assistance
on how to implement it. It is noted that a separate
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be
prepared and disclosed before appraisal. The ESMF
will include a summary of the content and
requirements of the RPF. The ESMF will also
provide information how alternatives, if any, will be
assessed and how induced and cumulative impacts,
when relevant, will be assessed during project
implementation.
As will be described in the ESMF and as required for
a specific project area, an integrated Environment
and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for all
activities within each drainage area where a pumping
station will be modernized or constructed, will be
prepared during project implementation. This
includes, as needed, the assessment of impacts of
ancillary facilities such as disposal sites of solid
wastes and dredged materials/sludge, including an
environmentally-sound scheme for the final disposal


﻿of dredged materials/sludge based upon the thorough
analysis and characteristics of the sludge,
resettlement site development and social impacts
beyond those related to resettlement (e.g., impacts of
riparians during dredging, impacts on livelihoods of
waste pickers in waterways, impacts on health, odor,
nuisance, etc.). The ESIA will include information
about the specific sites and identify the anticipated
impacts and management measures for all project
activities. As required for a specific project area, an
Environment and Social Management Plan (ESMP)
will be prepared, detailing the mitigating measures,
monitoring parameters, frequency, responsible
agencies and costs, once the specific activities are
identified during implementation. A Grievance
Redress Mechanism will also be developed and will
be presented, as required, to communities during the
public consultations. The GRM will be part of the
safeguards instruments and its key elements and
measures to disseminate it will also be documented
in the PAD and appraisal stage ISDS.
An Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP) will be
prepared as part of the ESMF and will be used, as
needed, for each site. It will describe the
management of construction-related impacts
associated with all components, including the solid
waste management schemes under Component 2 and
the resettlement and rehousing studies and schemes
to be supported under Component 3.
It is envisaged that five sub-projects will be selected
for year 1 implementation. After selection, due
diligence surveys and investigations will be done to
assess whether there has been any past resettlement.
As credible plans will be prepared for the project, for
two representative sub-projects that will have land
acquisition and/or resettlement the Borrower will
prepare either a due diligence report or resettlement
action plans (RAP), with the form of report
depending on the time of resettlement (before or after
December 2014) and satisfactory to the Bank, prior
to appraisal. In summary, the Borrower will as
needed prepare, consult, and disclose the following
safeguard instruments prior to appraisal: (i) one
resettlement policy framework; (ii) one
environmental and social management safeguards


﻿framework; (iii) one due diligence report for a sub-
project with legacy resettlement issues and one
resettlement action plan for a sub-project with future
resettlement issues); and (iv) five environmental and
social impact assessments and environmental and
social management plans.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    Yes           Interventions on existing pumping stations,
associated drainage areas and waterways, and related
activities will take place in original locations and
likely not affect natural habitats. Activities related to
new pump stations and associated waterways will
take place in built-up areas in urban settings, which
are unlikely to be considered as natural habitats.
Nevertheless, this policy is triggered as the project
area may potentially impact natural habitats outside
the city, although the project will not support
activities that would significantly convert or degrade
natural or critical natural habitats. The screening
criteria in the ESSF will determine the potential
impacts on existing and new pumping stations, their
drainage areas, ancillary facilities and related
activities such as disposal sites and resettlement sites.
Screening will also be conducted for potential
impacts on natural habitats for candidate relocation
sites for the project affected people. No settlements
will be allowed in critical natural habitats as
prescribed in this OP and in accordance with the
national regulations.
The ESIA will identify natural habitats and other
ecologically sensitive areas in the area of influence
of the project that may be affected by any of the
project activity under all components. If the ESIA
indicates that a project would significantly convert or
degrade non-critical natural habitats, the project will
include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank.
Such mitigation measures could include, as
appropriate, minimizing habitat loss (e.g., strategic
habitat retention and post-development restoration)
and establishing and maintaining an ecologically
similar area.
Forests OP/BP 4.36             No            This policy is not triggered. The project and its
activities take place in urban areas where there are no
forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09        No            This policy is not triggered as the project will not use
pesticides.


﻿Physical Cultural Resources  Yes         This policy is triggered even as the rehabilitation and
OP/BP 4.11                               reconstruction works will mainly be done in the
original sites/locations. The ESSF will include the
screening for the presence of physical cultural
resources and specify chance finds procedures. The
ESIA will determine any possible cause of
disturbance and negative impacts to PCR such as
historical areas, architectural land marks and other
cultural property, which may need to be mitigated.
During construction, the landscape of the existing
and new sites and off-site facilities may also be
affected and structural damage to old structures may
occur due to vibrations and excavation of adjacent
areas. The ESIA will confirm impacts of priority
investments on PCRs, and where needed, a PCR
management plan will be formulated as part of the
ESMP, including chance find procedures that will be
followed during construction.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No           This policy is not triggered because there are no
4.10                                     ancestral domains nor Indigenous Peoples
communities as defined by Bank policy in the urban
areas of Metro Manila.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        The following references apply and are explained in
BP 4.12                                  more detail in this section:
Land Legacy Issues apply to resettlement activities
that took place prior to Bank engagement in the
project (December 2014 - the month of project
identification mission) within the footprint of the
project. Land legacy issues are to be addressed in
compliance to country legislation and consistent with
objectives of OP 4.12. The safeguard instrument to
be prepared is a Due Diligence Report with remedial
measures and an action plan if and as needed to
ensure the consistency of past rehousing/resettlement
with OP 4.12.
Applicability of OP 4.12. For the purposes of
compliance with the requirements, applicability of
OP 4.12 and bank safeguards is December 2014 - the
month of project identification mission. After this
project identification, OP 4.12 compliance applies
and any sub-project-related land acquisition and
resettlement after that date and throughout the
project duration should be compliant with the
requirements of OP 4.12, including compensation at
full replacement cost for loss of assets and other


﻿resettlement assistance.
Works to be undertaken within existing pump
stations will likely not need land acquisition or
resettlement of ISFs as they are well fenced and
contained. Most of the new pump station sites are
expected to be in densely populated urban areas. For
a number of these new sites, land acquisition of
limited areas will be needed, some through acquiring
private lots. Other new pumping stations may be
located along public roads or waterway easements,
thus minimizing displacement of people.
Despite avoidance and minimizing resettlement, it is
likely that as many as 1,000 to 2,500 ISFs now living
along waterways and on potential pump station sites
in flood-prone areas to be served by new pumping
stations will need to be resettled by the project as
their presence along and over waterways would
affect the O&M of drainage systems, including
pumps.
Many ISFs are occupying land along and over
easements for drains and associated waterways.
They have been during the past few years and
continue to be resettled to physically safer locations
under an on-going government program (Oplan
Likas) that is to be completed in 2016 around the
time the project is expected to become effective.
Oplan Likas focuses on removing ISFs from danger
zones. Oplan Likas is considered "linked" to the
project where there is overlap between the pumping
station construction and operation footprint.
When the project starts working on a particular
drainage area during project implementation, a
systematic due diligence on the past resettlement, if
any, from waterways in a drainage area will be
carried out. It is likely that the due diligence in a
number of areas will reveal that ISFs have been
resettled out of the city, far from livelihood sources
and employment and removed from pre-existing
social networks before December 2014. Legacy
issue arise in the context of the project when there
has been land acquisition and resettlement under
Oplan Likas on land that is directly needed for the
project, i.e. for the rehabilitation, building, and most


﻿importantly the operation and maintenance of the
pumping stations and waterways and drainage
channels. In such case, land acquisition and
resettlement will need to be consistent with the
objectives of OP 4.12. This may also have to
consider livelihood restoration measures to address
gaps. The project may (still to be agreed by
government) during the early stage of project
implementation finance a technical assistance to
determine livelihood restoration opportunities for
previously resettled ISFs. Such TA would be part of
the project due diligence and action plan to address
legacy issues in a manner consistent to the objectives
of OP 4.12. A preliminary stocktaking study on
Oplan Likas may be carried out prior to appraisal to
inform project design on previous resettlement and
livelihood restoration.
The project proponent will provide before appraisal
data that shows the potential overlaying between the
(i) existing pumping stations and (ii) the areas that
have been cleared (or are planned to be cleared) by
the GoP-funded Oplan Likas Program; and a matrix
setting out details of the entitlements of the ISFs
resettled under the GoP Oplan Likas Program have
received. This information is important to the
understanding of the scope of the potential legacy
and land issues of the proposed Bank project. The
risks related to the Bank's involvement in Metro
Manila Flood Management Master Plan as a whole
and this project in particular need to be clearly
articulated in project documents. Specifically, the
PAD should include an annex that provides: (i) a
thorough explanation of the Bank's involvement in
the Master Plan and Oplan Likas and an explanation
of the relationship between the Project and the Oplan
Likas program; and (ii) a table with all the identified
TAs that were supported by the Bank for the
preparation of the Master Plan and the
conceptualization and implementation of Oplan
Likas.
Land acquisition and resettlement during the project
that is directly needed for the project (i.e.
resettlement of those occupying areas which should
absolutely be cleared of occupants for sustainable
and safe operation of the pumping stations) has to be


﻿compliant with OP 4.12. It is noted that in certain
instances engineering solutions may be found that
are equally effective in addressing sustainability and
efficiency of pumping stations and avoid the need for
any resettlement. Land acquisition and resettlement
that takes place under Oplan Likas or another
government-funded resettlement program after
December 2014, but prior to project effectiveness
will also need to be in compliance with OP 4.12. In
such cases when the drainage area gets selected for
financing under the project, the Borrower would
need to carry out a due diligence to assess
compliance with OP 4.12 and provide for remedial
measures to be taken as needed prior to starting work
on any project site.
ISFs will be consulted - using a participatory
approach - and offered different options that will
include among them in-city resettlement, out-of-city
resettlement and cash compensation. For in-city
resettlement the RPF will include different sub-
options for ISF such as: (1) SHFC community
mortgage program; (2) SHFC high-density housing
program; (3) NHA In-City Rehousing Program, (4)
LGU-led rehousing with SHFC refinancing. The
NHA off-city resettlement model will also be
described, as will be cash compensation and/or rental
support as an option. The housing options need to be
analyzed in a flexible manner without dismissing any
option prematurely at this stage. The options have to
be accessible, equitable, and flexible and done in
consultation with project affected people, in
accordance with OP 4.12. Such consultations with
community organizations, LGUs, and other key
stakeholders may also lead to other rehousing
modalities.
For all options civil society organizations and Local
Government Units will play a key role. Financial and
technical support will be provided by the Project.
Financing land acquisition and housing construction
will be provided by the Social Housing Finance
Corporation and the National Housing Authority. For
in-city options financial support to ISFs may be
provided for temporary in-city rental
accommodations in safe locations while the
organizational, financial, and technical arrangements


﻿for participatory community-based resettlement are
put in place for implementation under the proposed
project.
Any land acquisition needed for Component 2
(Minimizing Solid Waste in Waterways) will also be
covered by the RPF. Further, it will also contain a
Social Development Framework for policies and
procedures in livelihood restoration of those whose
loss of income is not due to land acquisition, e.g.
informal waste pickers.
Project funds may be used to finance rental housing
assistance to ISFs or for a revolving fund for land
acquisition and housing construction under
Component 3. Details will be provided in the PAD
and ISDS appraisal stage on the exact type of land
expenditures to be financed and its justification.
Government is still deciding whether loan proceeds
or counterpart funds will be used, but if loan
proceeds will be used it will be explained how these
expenditures meet the Bank's Articles of Agreement
requirement that they are used for productive
purposes and they are to be reasonably priced. If
loan proceeds are used, a memo will have to be
prepared for RVP approval, justifying the proposal to
finance these expenditures.
The ESMF and the RPF will be monitored to
determine issues met in implementation so that it
may contribute to future resettlement required by the
implementation of the Master Plan for Flood
Management in Metro Manila and Surrounding
Areas.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     No            This policy is not triggered since it will not require
the construction of dams nor will any project
structure rely on dams.
Projects on International     No            This policy is not triggered as it is not located in
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                        international waters.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No           This policy is not triggered as it is not located in
BP 7.60                                     disputed areas.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Sep-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿The safeguard-related studies will start in February 2015, with MMDA starting to work on
preparation of safeguard instruments. It is noted that these dates are as per current milestones.
Discussions are ongoing with RVP to change the Board date to late Q3 as more time is needed to
prepare the safeguards instruments. Until RVP and SECPO have agreed the milestones cannot be
changed, hence September 30, 2015 is still shown here. It is more likely that safeguard
instruments are ready before the end of 2015.
.~ IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Joop Stoutjesdijk,Yan F. Zhang
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                      Date: 03-Sep-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Ousmane Dione (PMGR)                    Date: 03-Sep-2015
Manager:


