                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC11881

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Nov-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Bhutan                         Project ID:      P154477
                            Project Name:       Bhutan Weather and Disaster Improvement Regional Project
                            Team Leader(s):     Poonam Pillai,Dechen Tshering
                            Estimated Date      15-Mar-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:      GSU18                          Lending          Lending Instrument
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          General public administration sector (50%), General water, sanitation and
                                                flood protection sector (50%)
                            Theme(s):           Regional integration (10%), Natural disaster management (60%), Climate
                                                change (30%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 2.3                          Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery                                        1.8
                              South Asia Water Initiative (SAWI)                                                         0.5
                            Environment          B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The main objective of the proposed activity is to strengthen the Royal Government of Bhutan's
                           capacity for improved weather and hydrological forecasting and disaster related early warning
                           systems.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project has 2 Components:

                           Component A: Strengthening Weather and hydrological forecasting and Services (USD 1.30
                           million)
                           The main objective of this component is to strengthen the capacity of DHMS to provide more
                           accurate and timely weather services. It will be implemented by the DHMS and will have 3 sub-
                           components as follows:
                         Sub-component A1: Strengthening meteorological and hydrological forecasting (USD 0.90 million)
                         This component will finance procurement of priority monitoring systems (such as low level wind
                         shear alert systems and ceilometers, glacier monitoring), weather and flood forecasting through
Public Disclosure Copy




                         acquisition of hardware (e.g. workstations), infrastructure, software, and upgrading the ICT network.
                         It will also support development of a Common Alert Protocol for weather and water related
                         disasters.

                         Sub-component A2: Demand Assessment and Dzongkhag level Service Delivery (USD 0.2
                         million)
                         This component will finance design and implementation of a user needs survey for weather, water
                         and climate services at the national level. It will also fund design of an agromet decision support
                         system, generate agromet information products and dissemination to two Dzongkhags.
                         A brief case study will be produced from this pilot activity.

                         Sub-component A3: Institutional Capacity Strengthening, Project Management, Regional
                         Collaboration and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) (USD 0.2 million)
                         This component will support institutional capacity building of DHMS in areas such as emergency
                         management, hydrological and flood forecasting, use and calibration of hydrological models, winter
                         weather and related topics. It will also support regional collaboration to facilitate in avaiiling
                         trainings and exchange of data for improved forecasting. Funds will also be used to support project
                         management including M&E activities to track implementation progress.

                         Component B: Strengthening Disaster Preparedness (USD 1.00 million)
                         The objective of this component is to strengthen disaster preparedness and response through
                         improved disaster management information system. It will be implemented by DDM. It will have
                         three sub-components as follows:

                         Sub-component B1: Developing a Disaster Management Information System (USD 0.4 million)
                         This component will finance activities to put together a robust disaster risk management information
Public Disclosure Copy




                         system which will house all relevant data from across sectors in the country. Funds will be used to
                         procure hardware, software and consultancy services to develop and use targeted hazard and risk
                         information. Hands on trainings for relevant staff will also be provided for sustaining the system.

                         Sub-component B2: Community based disaster risk management (CBDRM) and response capacity
                         (USD 0.3 million)
                         This component will support formulation of contingency plans and disaster management plans in
                         selected thromdes (municipalities) and dzongkhags and conduct mock drills to strengthen CBDRM.
                         This component will also support establishment of urban search and rescue (SAR) teams in four
                         thromdes and strengthen the capacity of SAR teams at the national and local levels. Funds will be
                         used to carry out workshops and discussions, procure SAR equipment and conduct SAR trainings.

                         Sub-component B3: Institutional Capacity Strengthening, Regional Collaboration, Project
                         Management and M&E (USD 0.3 million)
                         This component will support the institutionalization of committees and task forces for disaster
                         management in the country at the national and local levels as per the DM Act 2013. Funds will also
                         support training and capacity building of officials from both national and local levels related to topics
                         such as Disaster Preparedness and Response Planning, Disaster Information Management Systems
                         and Information Dissemination, Mainstreaming Disaster Risk Management in Development
                         Processes, EOC Management Training, Disaster Risk Management Planning and implementation,
                           CBDRM, etc. Detailed design and costs of EOCs at the national and local levels will also be
                           supported through this sub-component. The design will provide technical details of the infrastructure,
                           ICT and equipment. Proper details will also be provided to link the disaster management information
Public Disclosure Copy




                           system developed through sub-component B1 to the EOCs. Project management including M&E
                           activities for the project will be supported under this component.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Majority of activities to be supported by the project are related to capacity building, system
                           improvement, consultation, training & workshops, equipment purchase and software development. In
                           this regard the scope of project is nationwide. Few activities proposedunder the project, such as
                           installation of low level wind shear alert system (LLWAS) and Ceilometers, involve minor civil
                           works and installation of simple equipment within selected airports (Paro, Bumthang, Gelephu and
                           Yongphula). The Gelephu airport is located in the relatively plain terrain in the southern part of
                           Bhutan while all other three airports are in the hilly/ mountain terrain (in the narrow valleys). There
                           are settlements around all the mentioned airports. Bumthang is a beautiful landscape and is a major
                           tourist attraction.
                           The nature of activities envisaged under the project, such as procurement of hardware, administration
                           of user survey, design of emergency operation centre (EoC), strengthening of community based
                           disaster risk management system, training and capacity building activities, also suggests that
                           environmental and social impacts of the project will be minimal, if any. The environmental impacts
                           of installation of Low Level Wind Shear Alert System (LLWAS) at Paro and Ceilometers at
                           Bumthnag, Gelephu and Yongphula are likely to be minor and confined to the respective airport
                           territory. Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), specific to these activities, needs to
                           be prepared. Detailed design of the Emergency Operation Centre (EoC), location of which is not-
                           known at this stage, will ensure that corresponding environmental and social assessment will be done
                           together with the engineering design.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           One of the implementing agencies, DDM has prior experience with Bank-supported projects of
                           similar nature—PHRD Grant for Improving Resilience to Seismic Resilience, TA for Improving
                           Disaster Management Capacity, and a GFDRR Grant for Safe Schools and Hospitals. Accordingly,
                           they have basic awareness regarding World Bank’s environmental and social safeguard requirements.
                           However, additional support e.g. human resource, training and capacity building activities, for the
                           management of social and environmental impacts/issues will be required during project
                           implementation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Bandita Sijapati (GSURR)
                           Drona Raj Ghimire (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             Minor impacts likely due to possible civil
                           BP 4.01                                              works, if any; electronic waste, battery
                                                                                management.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                           No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09                      No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/              No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               TBD                  It is not clear at this stage whether any kind of
                           4.12                                                              civil works requiring land will be implemented
                                                                                             under the project or not.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No                               Not Applicable
                           Projects on International        No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                           A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?: Yes
                               i. Explanation
                                  Yes to reflect the changes/additions made in project design.
                               ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
                                  18-Dec-2015
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.
                              Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) specific to installation of Low Level Wind
                              Shear Alert System (LLWAS) at Paro and Ceilometers at Bumthang, Gelephu and Yongphula will
                              be prepared by Appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Poonam Pillai,Dechen Tshering
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Zia Al Jalaly (SA)                                           Date: 02-Nov-2015
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst (PMGR)                             Date: 04-Nov-2015
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
