                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                          RESTRUCTURING STAGE
            Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon       approval of the project restructuring
.




                                                                                          Report No.:ISDSR21405
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated: 14-Jun-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                           Mauritania                      Project ID:               P132998
    Project Name:                      SUSTAINABLE LIVELIHOODS FOR RETURNEES AND HOST
                                       COMMUNITIES IN THE SENEGAL RIVER VALLEY (P132998)
    Task Team Leader(s):               Daniel P. Owen
    Estimated Appraisal                                                Estimated Board
    Date:                                                              Date:
    Managing Unit:                     GSU01                           Financing                 Emergency Recovery
                                                                       Instrument:               Loan
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency                      Recovery) or OP               No
    8.00(Rapid Response to Crises and         Emergencies)?
                                               Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           2.85                               Total Bank Financing: 0.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                           Amount
    Borrower                                                                                                        0.00
    Japan Social Development Fund                                                                                   2.85
    Total                                                                                                           2.85
    Environmental Category:            B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?        No

2. Current Project Development Objectives


Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)


3. Project Description
Component 1: Improved livelihood opportunities (US$ 2,370,000).
The component, which has three subcomponents, aims at generating a more comprehensive and diversified
set of rural income generating opportunities, with an emphasis on women and youth, through selected
interventions in key aspects of the value chain. It shall help to rebuild the social fabric and contribute to
improved sustainable livelihoods. Component 1 aims at strategically intervening in key aspects of the value

                                                      Page 1 of 8
chain in rural production through quick and complementary actions that can trigger sustainable processes of
recovery. It is envisaged that the rapid disbursement of three packages of grants ((i) households; ii)
vulnerable households – women/youth; and iii) community start-ups) will quickly channel resources to the
beneficiary communities to acquire production resources. In order to optimize the use of such resources and
maximize their impact, the project will provide complementary support to improve the skills of the
beneficiaries and communities on organizational and production practices. Given local conditions, access to
veterinary services and improved irrigation are crucial to increase productivity and the project will support
seed activities in these areas that can later be scaled up by follow up interventions by local stakeholders.
While recognizing that fully dealing with issues such as land tenure and conflict resolution are beyond the
reach of the resources of the project it is considered that the production of information material on these
issues can contribute to improved collaboration at the project level and eventually trigger more robust actions
to deal with these issues.

1.1 Reducing food insecurity through support in the provision of production inputs for 3,830 households
(US$1,595,300): This sub component would provide:
a) Small grants for livestock re-stocking (cattle, sheep/goat and poultry), pest control, seeds (wheat, maize,
millet niébé and market vegetable gardening seeds) and fertilizers. In addition to these inputs, light
agricultural equipment, such as hoes, watering cans, rakes etc. will be introduced in the agricultural inputs
stores, which would be sold at affordable prices to producers. Grants for an average value of USD250 will be
allocated to each household based on the baseline studies and agreements with communities on the volume
and type of input to be provided.. The activity will be performed by the implementing partner responsible for
the administration of the small grants. On the livestock restocking, the pilot would apply a traditional social
mechanism known locally as habbanaye – a form of animal ownership rotation managed by the village
management committee. The pilot would provide 2 animals to the most deprived and vulnerable households
(usually female-headed), and after two birth cycles, the mother animal will be transferred to another selected
household, while the young animals remain the property of the former owner. It is envisaged that
approximately 600 vulnerable households will be provided with additional support under the pilot restocking
program, with grants of USD200 in average. Restocking activities will cover cattle and sheep/goat livestock.
Given that the present population of sheep/goat in the country is approximately 10 times that of cattle and
that the most vulnerable households have a preference for smaller-sized livestock, it is expected that most of
the demand will focus on the latter. However, the program will make efforts to ensure that a balanced
population of livestock is achieved to respond to the income and nutrition needs of the target population.
b) Facilitation of access to veterinary services and establishment of livestock feeding centers. The activity
will be performed by the implementing partner responsible for the administration of the small grants; and
c) In terms of micro-irrigation, the project will design and construct small, pilot, irrigation systems that are
affordable and appropriate to the needs of the target communities aiming at their replication under follow up
programs.

1.2 Support to complementary vocational training and income-generating activities for women and youth for
1,500 households (US$248,000) by the provision of: a) market gardening activities , enterprise and
marketing, on farm and non-farm activities focusing on food processing methodologies and techniques as a
mean to promote agribusiness and small-scale markets, for e.g. dried foods and vegetable products,
production enhancement as well as marketing strategies. The pilot would work with already existing
professional training centers, such as the one in Boghé Rosso area. Training will be linked to the extent
possible to existing activities and or to the project’s income generating activities; and b) small-scale start-up
inputs. The project will also conduct a rapid assessment of options for the access of communities to
sustainable financing, including, among others, micro-credit mechanisms and community level ‘Savings for
Change’ groups. It is envisaged that the recommendations of the assessment will be applied to follow up
activities.



                                                   Page 2 of 8
1.3 Strengthening community structures in twenty two communities (US$526,700): this sub component will
enhance capacities through the provision of sub-grants to 22 community based organizations/associations.
The CBOs in conjunction with communities will implement projects to be financed with the funds, e.g. for
animal ownership rotation or savings for change. To this effect, the pilot will also provide CBOs with
training on the setting up and management of associations, access to credit and commercialization; and the
provision of complementary functional literacy and numeracy education when necessary. The setting up of
associations will take into account successful experiences in the country, as the establishment of “community
development associations” (ADC) under the Rural Community Development Program (PDRC)
(Government/World Bank). Training will target the main groups covered by the activities under the other sub
components, thus enabling the creation of associative units that maximize the use of the provided production
inputs and creates a mechanism for their sustainable operation. This will also include a mechanism for
discussion of various groups within the community to share experience and knowledge to maximize the
sustainability of acquired techniques supported by the project. To support this process and lay the
foundations for community cohesion and improved access to assets the project will develop and disseminate
information material on issues of crucial interest to the communities as land tenure and conflict resolution.


Component 2 - Project Management and Participatory Monitoring and Evaluation (US$ 480,000).
This component would support project management and administration as well as Participatory Project
Monitoring and Evaluation and Dissemination of results and lessons learned.

2.1 Project Management and Administration (US$374,000). This subcomponent would support the
establishment of a Project Support Unit including a small management and technical team that will provide
overall project coordination and oversight in collaboration with ANLSESILP and existing institutional
structures to enhance and mainstream project activities. To enhance ownership, sense of belonging and
control of the development of this target area, local and international NGOs would be involved in the
implementation of the project activities. Moreover, a Steering Committee, comprising of ANLSESILP,
UNHCR, local authorities, World Bank, and a civil society representative, would be established. The role of
the Steering Committee is to ensure (i) sound coordination of interventions, (ii) involvement of all key
stakeholders (ANLSESILP, relevant government institutions, etc.), and (iii) ownership of the pilot project.

2.2 Participatory Project Monitoring and Evaluation (US$106,000). This subcomponent would support the
establishment of a participatory community-based project monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system
involving civil society and vulnerable groups in assessing performance of the grant in meeting its objectives
and adhering to its targeting and funding criteria to maximize the benefits for the most vulnerable groups.
The M&E system will be based on objectively verifiable indicators and utilizing Geographic Information
Systems (GIS). M&E will be supported by the establishment of a baseline and ANLSESILP’s data base. The
proposed Participatory Monitoring and Evaluation system will take into account the literacy and language
issues of the beneficiary groups and is designed to track beneficiary and population-based data at various
stages of implementation. “Participation” is key in terms of project innovation and sustainability. Qualitative
and quantitative data will be gathered at individual, household, and community levels. The system will utilize
a range of complementary data collection techniques including improved technologies, such as the use of
GIS to track beneficiary participation in different program activities, i.e. identification cards, electronic
“check-in” systems, and so forth. This is done for internal program management purposes and for
performance monitoring and measurement of program impacts. Thus, under this subcomponent, the project
would also finance an impact evaluation which will include a comparison of villages that benefitted from
pilot project interventions with villages that did not benefit. Furthermore, the subcomponent would also
finance dissemination of results and lessons learned from this pilot for a possible scale-up of interventions in
other target areas in need of support. The component also includes the conduction of an Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF), Pest Management Plan (PMP) and Resettlement Policy Framework


                                                  Page 3 of 8
(RPF) at the beginning of the project by ANLSESILP /PSU. These instruments will be an integral part of
project management as well as of the participatory M&E system to be established by the project. The
component caters for the provision of training and information dissemination on the development and
application of participatory M&E systems.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics                 relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented in 17 communities in Brakna including nine returnee communities (Donaye,
Féthie M’Boyo, Tessem 1, Dar Salam Wodabé, Houdallaye, Woura Amadou Hawa Dia, Sénokouna, Bour
and Goural) and eight host/neighboring communities (Donaye Village, Diattar, Tessem Village, Dar Salam
Oulad Seydi, Carrefour, Goural village, Taiba and Leleiwa). Seven returnee and host communities close to
Rosso town will be targeted in Trarza (Rosso Lycée, Jadida, Tonguenne, Medina Salam, Keur Madické,
Tekess Coumba and PK6). The total target population including returnee and host/neighboring communities
is approximately 15,700 people or 3,830 households with the returnee population representing 63% of the
total target population. The communities are located in the Senegal River Valley basin, which is an
international waterway shared with Guinea, Mali, and Senegal. As there are no other salient physical
characteristics relevant to the application of safeguard policies in the project intervention area, the project is
classified as category B.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the                     Team
 Mame Safietou Djamil Gueye( GSU01 )

 Melissa C. Landesz( GEN07 )

6. Safeguard Policies                          Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01            Y
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                    N
Forests OP/BP 4.36                             N
Pest Management OP 4.09                        Y
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11         N
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                  N
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12            Y
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      N
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP Y                    8 of the 24 communities targeted by the Project
7.50                                                           have requested livelihood sub-grants to support
                                                               micro-irrigation systems. The systems will
                                                               source water from the Senegal River, an
                                                               international waterway.

                                                               Each of the 8 communities that have requested
                                                               sub-grants for water pumps plan to plant two
                                                               seasons of rice and legumes per annum. The
                                                               incremental rate of abstraction or discharge into
                                                               the above-mentioned international waterway or
                                                               their tributaries as a result of the proposed
                                                               additions or alterations is likely to be minimal.

                                                   Page 4 of 8
                                                              The annual incremental rate of abstraction is
                                                              estimated to be 10,013,500 m3, or 0.04% of the
                                                              mean annual discharge of the Senegal River.
                                                              The total surface area of land that will be
                                                              irrigated by these water-related sub-project is
                                                              estimated to be 444.50 hectares, resulting in
                                                              limited and localized impact.

                                                              With consideration for the limited volume of
                                                              water needed to service the proposed sub-
                                                              projects, an exception was sought from the
                                                              AFRVP office to the notification requirement
                                                              in accordance with Paragraph 7 (a) of OP 7.50.
                                                              AFRVP approval of the exception memo was
                                                              received on 22 May 2017. Pre-requisite
                                                              authorizations were also received from LEG,
                                                              Practice Manager, Regional Safeguards
                                                              Advisor, Country Director, and AFRDE. The
                                                              ISDS is being updated accordingly to trigger
                                                              the policy under the exception.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          N

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is classified as environmental and social category B type due specifically to activities supported
under Component 1, which are site specific, relatively small in size, likely to induce minor negative effects
which are easily manageable. Most potential risks and impact arise from pest control activities in agriculture
(small irrigation) and use of fertilizer, and specific income-generating activities which either require
acquisition of land and/or use of natural resources (e.g. forestry products) or produce nuisances (e.g. waste).
It is possible that inadequate selection and/or design of livelihood support activities could affect socio-
economic and environmental sustainability. Likewise, insufficient support to community organizations and
conflict mediation could jeopardize the implementation process/agenda. The impacts which could occur and
that need to be prevented are: (i) acute/accidental intoxication due to inappropriate handling of chemical
products (pesticide, fertilizer); (ii) degradation of natural vegetation; (iii) social conflicts in case of
miscommunication and lack of participation of primary beneficiaries; (iv) land and property right/security
conflicts (i.e. acquisition of conflicting or unsuitable lands); and (v) abstraction of water from the Senegal
River which will require compliance with OP 7.50 concerning Projects on International Waterways.

Although land expropriation and restriction of access to natural resources are not expected during
implementation, the fragility of the context requires good social and environmental safeguards mechanisms
throughout the life-cycle of the project.

In light of the activities described in Component 1, the following three safeguard policies were triggered at
appraisal: OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), OP 4.09 (Pest Management), OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary
Resettlement). In addition, the current ISDS triggers OP/BP 7.50 (Projects on International Waterways) in
light of upcoming proposed micro-irrigation sub-projects described in the Safeguards section of this

                                                   Page 5 of 8
document. No significant and irreversible impact is foreseen during implementation.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
No indirect and/or long term impacts are expected due to past and anticipated future activities in the project
area.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
The only alternative is a "no project" alternative. The "no project" alternative would significantly devoid
communities of opportunity to strengthen community structures and improve their livelihoods. Being in rural
settings, many of these communities receive little to no standard service provision from state authorities, as
the capacity and resources available to the state to carry out development work are very low. Consequently,
the “no project” option has been discarded.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment
of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
In compliance with the safeguards requirements, three safeguards documents of a project comprising similar
activities (Additional Financing of PDIAIM-II) were updated by the Client: (i) the Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF); (ii) the Pest and Pesticide Management Plan (PMP); and (iii) the
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The three updated instruments have been approved by the WB and
the Government and re-disclosed simultaneously in-country (in a language understandable and at locations
easily accessible by stakeholders) and at the InfoShop prior to appraisal. All parties have been made aware
of the mitigating requirements which are monitored and evaluated regularly.

The preliminary assessment has enabled the identification of appropriate mechanisms for sustainable
livelihood improvement interventions. During project preparation, the Government undertook extensive
public participatory consultations on the project areas. Beneficiary communities including women, youth,
poor and vulnerable groups have been fully engaged in all aspects of design and implementation.
Consultations with beneficiary communities as well as other stakeholders during project preparation provided
the basis for the design of a participatory grievance redress mechanism that builds upon existing traditions.

The Mauritanian regulatory framework on environmental and social assessment is still weak and the project
implementing agency (AGENCE TADAMOUN) has no internal capacity for the implementation of the
safeguards instruments under preparation. Provision has been made by the project to enhance the technical
capacity of AGENCE TADAMOUN and ancillary agencies to ensure appropriate implementation and follow
up of the social and environmental mitigation measures outlined in the ESMF, PMP and RPF. Expert
consultants and contractors have been recruited at key stages during project implementation to provide
technical assistance and supervise works. In this manner, screening of project activities for adverse
environmental and social impacts has concluded, with technical oversight and approval provided by the
Direction de Contrôle Environnementale (DCE).
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders in the implementation of this project are: (i) the Project Support Unit (PSU) including a
small management and technical team that provide overall project coordination and oversight in collaboration
with AGENCE TADAMOUN and existing institutional structures to enhance and mainstream project
activities; (ii) the beneficiary communities including host and returnees communities; and (iii) civil society
organizations and technical government departments involved in the activities’ implementation. These
stakeholders are consulted and their views taken into consideration in project design and implementation.
Regular safeguards training is provided to beneficiary communities to acclimate them to safeguards
considerations and best practices.

                                                  Page 6 of 8
    .




B. Disclosure Requirements
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                         08-Oct-2013
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                      10-Mar-2014
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary
of the EA to the Executive Directors
 "In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




     Mauritania                                                           30-Oct-2013
 Comments: PHENVCOMM
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                       08-Oct-2013
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                    18-Oct-2013
 "In country" Disclosure
PHRESCTRY




 Mauritania                                                               30-Oct-2013
 Comments:
 Pest Management Plan
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Y
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                       08-Oct-2013
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                    18-Nov-2013
 "In country" Disclosure
PHPESTCTRY




 Mauritania                                                               30-Oct-2013
 Comments: PHPESTCOMM
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including       Yes   [X]    No []          NA        []
 EMP) report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes   [X]    No []          NA        []
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP          Yes   [X]    No []          NA        []
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




 OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management         Yes   [X]    No []          NA        []
 issues?
 Is a separate PMP required?                                Yes   [X]    No []          NA        []
 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a        Yes   [X]    No []          NA        []
 safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements
 included in project design?If yes, does the project team
 include a Pest Management Specialist?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy            Yes   [X]    No []          NA        []
 framework/process framework (as appropriate) been

                                               Page 7 of 8
          prepared?
          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for           Yes [X]     No []        NA    []
          safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan?
          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                Yes []      No [X]       TBD   []
          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or        Yes []      No [X]       TBD   []
          access to assets that leads to loss of income sources or
          other means of livelihoods)
PHCompliance




          OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?       Yes []      No [X]       NA    []
          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the      Yes [X]     No []        NA    []
          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
          Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
          and sent?
          Has the RVP approved such an exception?
PHCompliance
                                                                       Yes [X]     No []        NA    []
          The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [X]     No []        NA    []
          the World Bank's Infoshop?
          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a       Yes [X]     No []        NA    []
          public place in a form and language that are
          understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
          and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




          All Safeguard Policies
          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [X]     No []        NA    []
          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
          measures related to safeguard policies?
          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been         Yes [X]     No []        NA    []
          included in the project cost?
          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project     Yes []      No []        NA    [X]
          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
          related to safeguard policies?
          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been           Yes []      No []        NA    [X]
          agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
          reflected in the project legal documents?

    III. APPROVALS

    Task Team Leader(s):                Name: Daniel P. Owen
    Approved By:
    Safeguards Advisor:                 Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)               Date: 13-Jul-2017
    Practice Manager/Manager:           Name:                                    Date:




                                                          Page 8 of 8
