INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR15074
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Sep-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Sep-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Congo, Republic of         Project ID:   P124085
Project Name: Forestry and Economic Diversification Project (P124085)
Task Team       Jean-Christophe Carret,Julian Lee
Leader(s):
Estimated       28-Mar-2012                Estimated     24-May-2012
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEN01                       Lending       Technical Assistance Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (77%), Forestry (20%),
Agricultural extension and research (3%)
Theme:          Environmental policies and institutions (45%), Land administration and
management (17%), Participation and civic engagement (16%), B iodiversity
(13%), Rural markets (9%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                   No
O
U         Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
O
Total Project Cost:      32.60            Total Bank Financing:    10.00
o        Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              22.60
International Development Association (IDA)                     10.00
Total                                                           32.60
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
The project development objective is to increase the capacity of the Republic of Congo to: (i)
Page 1 of 10


﻿promote better implementation of its forestry legislation; and (ii) enhance the policy environment for
participation of local communities and the private sector in sustainable forest management and
reforestation.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
The project development objective is to increase the capacity of the Republic of Congo to: (i)
promote better implementation of its forestry legislation; and (ii) enhance the policy environment for
participation of local communities and the private sector in sustainable forest management and
a        reforestation.
3. Project Description
The project aims to strengthen the forest administration's and the local and indigenous communities'
ability to co-manage forests.It is structured in three components:
1) Capacity building of the forest administration: This component implements activities that aim to
improve the operational capacity of the central and decentralized administration by installing
management tools and providing equipment that is necessary for effective forest management. This
includes the installation and operationalization of five information management systems for
planning, monitoring and evaluation, human resource and financial management, and forest
information management. Moreover, the implementation of the new forest law will be supported
through the development of its application texts and related implementation manuals. Lastly,
equipment (vehicles, boats, uniforms, IT equipment, buildings, and surveying equipment) will be
provided to the central and decentralized forest administration.
2) Involvement of local communities and indigenous populations in forest resource management:
This component will support the development of simple management plans for the designated
community development areas (s6ries de d6veloppement communautaire) contained in forest
concessions, and will support communities in their involvement in the implementation of forest
concessions' forest management plans. In addition, the project will work with communities to
identify priority investments. The project will support communities in their ability to apply for funds
from the local development funds in forest concessions, and will finance micro-projects that can
increase and/or diversify their income streams, including in afforestation and reforestation in savanna
regions, non-timber forest product value chains, and environmental services. In the north of the
country, it will support the development of the cocoa value chain through agro-forestry approaches
that involve banana cultivation in association with cocoa plants to provide immediate and diversified
income streams for farmers who chose to join the government's cocoa promotion program. Support
for marketing will also be provided.
3) Prospective studies and communications: This component will provide forward-looking
information and data to allow the administration to formulate new projects on major forest sector
issues. It will also support the dissemination and communication of the forest legislation and of the
administration's activities.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
A significant portion of project activities do not entail activities on the ground. Rather, they focus on
providing technical assistance to the government and to local communities for the development of
technical and institutional capacities for effective co-management of the forest sector. Exceptions
apply to the rehabilitation and/or construction of offices for the decentralized forest administration,
Page 2 of 10


﻿which generally takes place in small urban settings.
Support to local communities for the establishment of simple management plans will be provided in
the forest management units of Ngombe, Pokola, Kabo, Loundounougo-Toukoulaka, Ipendja,
U        Lopola, Mokabi-Dzanga, and Missa, located in Sangha and Likouala departments in the heavily
forested north of the country. In the south, this support will be provided in Louadi-Bihoua,
Loumongo, Ingomina-Lelali, Gouongo, Mpoukou-Ogote, Bambama, and Letili, located in
Lekoumou department, part of the second major forest area in the country. Support to cocoa/banana
cultivation will take place in the designated community development areas of forest concessions with
approved forest management plans in Sangha and Likouala departments, primarily in the forest
management units of Pokola, Kabo, and Loundounougou-Toukoulaka. Activities will center on
degraded and deforested land within these areas.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Abdoulaye Gadiere (GENDR)
Antoine V. Lema (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies  Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental          Yes         The project has been rated EA category B since its
Assessment OP/BP 4.01              beginning. It remains so, as the micro-projects that will be
financed are site-specific and small-scale, with limited
potential environmental adverse impacts. An ESMF was
prepared and disclosed in 2012. The same ESMF was
revised in 2015 to take into account the triggering of
OP4.04 on Natural Habitats in addition to the OP/PB4.36
and OP4.09 on Pest Management because the
restructuring of the project includes a new activity that
supports cocoa farmers with a possibility of use of
pesticides.
The revised ESMF was reviewed by the World Bank,
consulted upon and disclosed within the Republic of
Congo through Les Depeches de Brazzaville NO 2282 of
Monday, April 13, 2015 and in La semaine Africaine NO
3485 of Tuesday, April 14,2015. It was disclosed in the
Infoshop on August 25, 2015.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes         The application of this policy seeks to ensure that all
4.04                               project activities on the ground, take into account the
conservation of biodiversity, as well as the numerous
environmental services and products that natural habitats
provide. Overall, agroforestry activities, in combination
with simplified management plans, are expected to have
positive impacts on natural habitats as degraded land is
reforested, new habitats are created on afforested land,
pressure on natural forests is reduced. The revised ESMF
gives guidance to avoid any adverse impact on natural
habitats.
Page 3 of 10


﻿Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes           Overall, project activities are expected to have positive
impacts on forest, in that the main goal of the Project is to
support the management of forest areas through capacity
building of the forest administration. Potential impacts of
project activities on the ground on natural forests are
considered in the ESMF. The ESMF reflects the
requirements of the Bank's Operational Policy regarding
forest management, in particular as these relate to the
establishment of plantations.
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes            The restructuring adds an activity to support cocoa
farmers, resulting in the possibility of using pesticides.
For this reason, the project triggered OP4.09 on pest
management, even though the project will not purchase
them. To be in full compliance with this policy, the client
developed an Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP).
This was reviewed by the Bank's safeguard specialists,
consulted upon and disclosed in the country through Les
Depeches de Brazzaville NO 2282 of Monday, April 13,
2015 and in La semaine Africaine NO 3485 of Tuesday,
April 14,2015. The disclosure at the Infoshop was
occurred on August 25, 2015.
Physical Cultural        Yes           This policy will be triggered since pilot activities on the
Resources OP/BP 4.11                   ground could promote actions in areas containing sites
deemed physical cultural resources by local populations
(e.g. holy/secret sites such as sacred groves, sacred
forests, etc.). Therefore, though it is not anticipated that
the Project will have negative impacts on any such sites
given the participatory management approaches
employed, the ESMF includes provisions for mitigative
action should the need arise.
O
Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes           Some of the pilot activities undertaken by the Project will
BP 4.10                               take place in areas inhabited by indigenous peoples. To
ensure due diligence is exercised, an Indigenous Peoples
Planning Framework (IPPF) has been developed, setting
out principles and procedures for timely and effective
mitigation of indigenous communities' concerns. This
requires the government to identify indigenous peoples,
consult with them properly, and ensure that they
participate in, and benefit from project activities.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes           This policy aims to avoid involuntary resettlement to the
OP/BP 4.12                             extent feasible, and to minimize and mitigate its adverse
social and economic impacts in cases where resettlement
or other involuntary restrictions cannot be avoided. The
current set of project activities result in only a very slight
possibility of land acquisition/involuntary resettlement.
Project activities are more likely to trigger this safeguard
Page 4 of 10


﻿policy in situations involving involuntary restrictions of
access forest management / reforestation areas and the
natural resources within. A Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) has therefore been prepared,
establishing the frame of reference for sustainable use of
said natural resources. The preparation of the RPF
promoted community ownership and fostered social
accountability, thereby contributing to sustainable
management of the relevant natural resources.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project will not finance dams nor rely on dams.
4.37
Projects on International  No        The project is not expected to affect international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 waterways.
Projects in Disputed    No           The project will not be located in a disputed area.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The overall environmental impacts of the project are expected to be positive. No significant,
long-term or irreversible adverse impacts are expected from the implementation of activities
financed under this project. By building institutional capacity of the forest administration, the
project aims to support environmentally sustainable forest management. By introducing
agroforestry approaches to forest areas, a diversion from slash and burn agriculture as currently
practiced is expected. Most of the adverse environmental and social impacts associated with these
investments will be small-scale and site-specific. Consequently, they are deemed to be
O
U           manageable. Based on these aspects, the project is classified as EA category B and triggers five
environmental safeguards policies: OP/PB 4.01; OP/PB4.04;OP/PB4.36;OP/PB4.09 and OP/PB
O        4.11.
Though the overall social impact of the project is expected to be positive, the potential for negative
social outcomes nonetheless exists, in particular if the project's support to participatory
management of forest and savanna areas were to be inadequately managed. Similarly, the
development of application texts for the new forest law will require close attention. No large scale
or irreversible adverse impacts are expected for this investment. Two social safeguard policies are
triggered: OP/PB4.10 and OP/PB 4.12.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
No long-term impact due to project activities is foreseen.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Page 5 of 10


﻿The project implementation unit (PIU) under the formal leadership of the Department of Studies
and Planning has overseen the preparation of the safeguards work and associated documents and
has been monitoring the implementation of the recommended mitigation measures since the
beginning of project implementation.
Consultants were also hired during project preparation and at restructuring to support the PIU in
conducting the necessary safeguards studies. The consultants supported the PIU to prepare three
safeguards instruments: an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF); a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF); an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF). These
instruments were cleared by the Bank and disclosed prior to appraisal. At restructuring, the
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was updated and disclosed. As
indicated above, an Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) was also prepared and disclosed in
order to guide the project in the event of pesticide use, even though the project will not purchase
pesticides.
The ESMF prepared by the borrower contains (a) a systematic environmental and social impact
assessment for all activities before selection and implementation; (b) procedures for conducting
activity-specific ESIAs or Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP); (c) capacity
building and awareness raising campaigns for relevant stakeholder groups for better
implementation and monitoring of project safeguard measures; and (d) establishment and
implementation of a consultation framework for environmental control and monitoring.
The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) provides clear principles, organizational arrangements
and detailed guidance on (i) minimizing land acquisition and subsequent physical or economical
displacement; (ii) compensating project-affected persons; (iii) rehabilitating livelihoods; (iv)
addressing grievances; and (v) implementing the Resettlement Policy Framework through the
preparation of Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) and submitted to the Bank, as required, for
approval after specific design information becomes available during project implementation.
O
The IPMP is designed to provide guidance to farmers to avoid using pesticides and other chemical
products without precautions. In other words, it transfers knowledge in terms of authorized
products, risks related to water and soil pollution as well as people contamination.
The IPPF outlines guidance to address potential adverse impacts on the indigenous peoples.
During project implementation, Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPP) will be prepared if necessary to
avoid, minimize, mitigate or compensate adverse impacts on these specific groups of peoples.
Experts of the project coordination unit have received training on environmental and social
safeguards of the World Bank. Designated environmental and social experts be responsible
implementing them in a rigorous manner to avoid, mitigate, compensate for or remove the
negative impacts of the project.
The Bank's supervision missions will include environmental and social specialists who provide
technical assistance and guidance to the environmental and social experts as well as capacity
building.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Page 6 of 10


﻿The principal project stakeholders include: government officials, local and indigenous
communities, the public and private sector, but also civil society. Particularly, policy makers,
ministry employees and forest technicians, whose skills will be enhanced, localcommunities
(including indigenous peoples) in forest concession areas and in savanna areas in and around
plantations.
About 10 percent of Congo's population (about 300,000 people) is constituted of indigenous
pygmy communities, some of them with specific semi-nomadic lifestyles and a particular
*           relationship to the forest. Congo has progressive legislation guaranteeing their rights, and in some
forest concessions, appropriate tools have been developed which help them to participate in forest
management planning so that their interests are met. In supporting participative processes for land-
use decision-making, the project specifically identifies the need to ensure that the rights and
aspirations of indigenous pygmy communities are respected, and defines measures to meet this
goal.
During the preparation of the safeguard instruments stakeholders were consulted through
workshops or through the disclosure in newspapers as indicated above. These consultations
provided an opportunity to voice opinions. Viewpoints, comments and recommendations have
been reflected in the final versions of documents. In addition, the client was advised to regularly
consult stakeholders during the preparation of ESIAs, ESMPs, RAPs and IPP over the course of
project implementation.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                              05-Aug-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           25-Aug-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Congo, Republic of                                       15-Apr-2015
Comments: ESMF was revised as part of restructuring.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                              24-Feb-2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                           09-Mar-2012
"In country" Disclosure
Congo, Republic of                                       03-Sep-2012
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                              26-Feb-2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                           09-Mar-2012
Page 7 of 10


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Congo, Republic of                                         03-Sep-2012
Comments:
O
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?             Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                05-Aug-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             25-Aug-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Congo, Republic of                                         15-Apr-2015
Comments: Pest management plan was developed as part of restructuring.
Technical Assistance Project
For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please
indicate type of document disclosed, if any.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [    ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]   NA [    ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [   ]  NA [ X ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
Is a separate PMP required?                              Yes[X] No[       ]  NA [    ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a      Yes [ X] No [    ]  NA [    ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Page 8 of 10


﻿Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?            Yes [  ] No [    ]  TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [ ] No [ ] TBD [ ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA [    ]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X]
does it include provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Page 9 of 10


﻿Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Jean-Christophe Carret,Julian Lee
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)           Date: 10-Sep-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Benoit Bosquet (PMGR)              Date: 17-Sep-2015
Manager:
Page 10 of 10


