                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               CONCEPT STAGE
.




                                                                                        Report No.:ISDSC22264
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Jun-2017
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed 23-Aug-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    A. Basic Project Data
    Country:                       Fiji                          Project ID:              P151209
    Project Name:                  Fiji: FCPF Implementation Support (P151209)
    Task Team Leader(s):           Ms. Anisi,Haddy Jatou Sey
    Estimated Appraisal                                          Estimated Board
    Date:                                                        Date:
    Managing Unit:                 GEN2A                         Financing
                                                                 Instrument:
    Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:        3.80                            Total Bank Financing: 0.00
    Financing Gap:             0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                      Amount
      Borrower                                                                                                  0.00
      Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility                                                  3.80
      Total                                                                                                     3.80
    Environmental Category:
    Is this a Repeater project? No

    B. Project Objectives
    The development objective of Grant is to assist Fiji to catTy out the Readiness Preparation Activities by
    supporting the preparation of its REDD+ strategy through a participatory and inclusive process, the
    establishment of a national MRY system, and by producing technical work and policy advice to help
    strengthen sustainable land and forest management practices.
    C. Project Description
    The Readiness Preparation Proposal (R-PP) Roadmap1 includes all activities necessary for Fiji to achieve a
    state of REDO+ Readiness. The proposed Read iness Preparation Grant wi ll provide US$ 3.8 million over a
    period of four years (20 15 to 20 19) to finance a subset of those activities, focusing on the technical aspects
    of the R-PP Roadmap. Broader awareness rais ing and capacity building activities will be financed by the
    Government and Deutsche Gesellschaft fUr lnternationale Zusammenarbeit (GlZ) (US$ 0.6 million
    respectively).

    The Readiness Preparation Grant will finance the main elements of the R-PP that will not only help Fiji


                                                Page 1 of 6
develop its REDO+ strategy, but strengthen sustainable land and forest management practices through
targeted technical work and policy advice. In particular, the Readiness Preparation Activities will aim to (i)
strengthen existing institutions for REDO+ through the establishment and operationalization of a Fiji
National REDO+ Unit and assessment and strengthening of existing feedback, and grievance redress
mechanisms (FGRMs) for REDO+; ( ii) deve lop National REDO+ strategy and an Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF), which wi ll be va lidated by a broad spectrum of stakeholders
through the Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) and be informed by several analytical
studies; and ( iii) put in place a robust monitoring system for REDO+, includ ing a preliminary national
Reference Emission Level/Reference (RELIRL), national Measurement, Reporting and Verification (MRY)
system and a safeguards information system. These activities will also strengthen existing forest policy,
practices and management systems, information and data, partic ipatory methods and human and
institutional capacity, which will support sustainab le land and forest management practices.
D. Project location and Salient physical characteristics                  relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The REDD+ Readiness Activities does not entail activities on the ground.

Fiji is an archipelago comprised of over 330 islands spread over a large area of ocean. The Project will not
fund any on-the-ground activities but would include plans for such activities to operate in forested areas of
Fiji, which cover approximately 80% of Fiji's land mass. Over 80% of the total land area also remains under
customary ownership. Three trial pilot REDD+ sites are already in place. It is expected that future REDD+
sites will be predominately in rural areas, and have a combination of land tenure arrangements including
customary ownership including reserve and non-reserve land, as well as leased lands.

The likely safeguard issues are detailed in Part II of this ISDS. Specifically, the SESA to be prepared during
the REDO readiness phase will analyze land holding and tenure arrangements, and identify and assess the
potential for any involuntary land acquisition issues or restriction of access to natural resources to occur, and
management processes will be embedded into the ESMF. The ESMF will include, as required, a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and/or Process Framework (PF), all of which will be part of the
SESA, in order to ensure avoidance, minimization, and/or appropriate compensation for adversely affected
persons or populations in downstream implementation.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Fiji's National REDO+ Policy was developed through a comprehensive multi-stakeholder consultation
process and endorsed by cabinet in 2011. The National REDD+ Steering Committee is a multi-sectoral
institutional arrangement established to coordinate the REDD+ agenda. The GoF has already mobilized a
multi-sectoral Technical Safeguards Working Group to support the National REDO+ Steering Committee
and issued a series of policy statements relevant to safeguards associated with the program including the
protection and respect of rights of Indigenous People, biodiversity conservation and preservation of the
natural forest (e.g. the Forestry Policy in 2007, the Fiji REDD-Pius Policy in 2011 and the National Climate
Change Policy in 20 12).

Government agencies currently involved in the Readiness activities (e.g. the Forestry Department, the
Ministry of iTaukei Affairs, the Secretariat of the Pacific Community, the iTaukei Land Trust Board and the
Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources) have exhibited awareness of safeguard issues and
demonstrated strong commitment to undertake the SESA. The GoF has also conducted an assessment of the
country's present legal and institutional framework vis-a-vis the requirements of the REDO+ program (i.e.
Republic of Fiji: Legal Framework for REDD Plus, 2013) relevant to safeguards issues, such as the land
rights and security of tenure, community involvement in forest management and environmental impact
assessment (EIA) of REDD+ activities.


                                             Page 2 of 6
Despite these efforts, GoF's familiarity of World Bank (WB) Safeguard Policies and Procedures is limited
and not universal, and the statutory framework does not fully meet WB Safeguard Policies and Procedures
requirements. For instance, although grievance mechanisms exist for customary land disputes, access to an
adequate grievance redress mechanism or legal remedy regarding land management or change of use varies
needs to be broadened to be inclusive of other ethnic groups, land users and vulnerable persons. Other
example areas of shortcomings include ambiguity in land-related legislation and lack of community
consultation for proposed developments or land use changes. The WBG will conduct a comprehensive
institutional capacity assessment to determine national capacity for applying and complying with WB
Safeguard Policies during readiness preparation, a detailed analysis of social and environmental impacts to
be conducted by a specialist team delivering the Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA)
will occur in tandem with consultations on the REDO+ Strategy Options. These assessments will identify
additional measures needed to ensure safeguard compliance beyond the existing institutional framework,
domestic laws, regulations and policies. The ToR for this specialist team will be approved by the WBG prior
to approval of WBG funds. Subsequently, guidelines for effective participation and consultation, carbon
transactions, benefit sharing schemes and regulations on the management of REDO+ funds will be
developed.

The key output of the SESA is the formulation of an ESMF to address the safeguards issues and satisfy the
requirements of the WB Safeguard Policies. The ESMF will govern the screening, the preparation,
review, approval and compliance monitoring of projects to be undertaken in the REDO+ program.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Ross James Butler( GSU02 )
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies                       Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes                 This policy is triggered ·as the Readiness
                                                        Preparation Activities will result in drafting of
                                                        REDO+·
                                                        Strategy Options, which may have potential long-
                                                        term impacts on forest, land use, .and landowner
                                                        and leaseholder rights.

                                                        The assessments and plans generated by the
                                                        Readiness Preparation Activities will be informed
                                                        by policy requirements of OP 4.01 and other
                                                        relevant safeguard policies. The potential social and
                                                        environmental impacts of the REDO+ Strategy
                                                        Options will be assessed through a SESA, with
                                                        TOR cleared by the WB.

                                                        Component 3 will support the development and
                                                        establishment of a comprehensive monitoring
                                                        system for non-carbon impacts of REDO+,
                                                        including safeguards as well as co-benefits.
                                                        Activities will review
                                                        existing monitoring institutions regarding
                                                        safeguards and then build a robust safeguards
                                                        information system.

                                          Page 3 of 6
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           Yes            This policy is triggered as the Readiness
                                                     Preparation Activities will result in drafting of
                                                     REDO+ Strategy Options, which are expected to
                                                     have significant positive environmental impacts to
                                                     natural habitats due to a reduction in forest loss.
                                                     This policy is triggered to ensure the REDO+
                                                     Strategy Options take into account biodiversity
                                                     conservation as well as the conservation of critical
                                                     natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                    Yes            This policy is triggered as the Readiness
                                                     Preparation Activities will result in drafting of
                                                     REDO+ Strategy Options, which are expected to
                                                     have significant positive impacts on the health and
                                                     quality of forests as the overall objective is to
                                                     reduce deforestation and forest degradation. This
                                                     policy is triggered due to the potential changes in
                                                     the management, protection, or utilization of natural
                                                     forests or plantations that could arise from REDO+
                                                     Strategy Options and activities which may affect
                                                     the rights and welfare of people and their level of
                                                     dependence upon or interaction with forests.
                                                     Triggering of this Policy will ensure that the work
                                                     carried out with WB funding is properly informed
                                                     in relation to potential impacts on Forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09               Yes            This policy is triggered as the Readiness
                                                     Preparation Activities will result in drafting of
                                                     REDO+ Strategy Options, which might lead to
                                                     agricultural intensification, and/or reforestation and
                                                     forest management
                                                     programs that require pest management. The
                                                     REDO+ Strategy Options and SESA will address
                                                     critical issues related to pest management.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes           This policy is triggered as the Readiness
                                                     Preparation Activities will result' in drafting of
                                                     REDO+ Strategy Options, which could affect areas
                                                     containing sites with physical cultural resources
                                                     (e.g. monuments,
                                                     historical buildings, archaeological or
                                                     paleontological sites, holy sites, etc.). The SESA
                                                     (and ESMF) will assess if ground implementation
                                                     of REDO+ Strategy Options is likely to include
                                                     these sites and ensure
                                                     the appropriate measures are adopted in order to
                                                     protect them.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         Yes            The Readiness Preparation Activities are likely to
                                                     benefit Indigenous People and occur predominately
                                                     on the customary lands of Indigenous Peoples
                                                     (referred to as iTaukei). The application of this
                                                     policy will ensure that consultation regarding

                                       Page 4 of 6
                                                          REDO+ Strategy Options is culturally appropriate
                                                          and inclusive, and provides evidence of broad
                                                          community support for REDO+ activities on their
                                                          lands. The nature and extent of impacts on
                                                          Indigenous Peoples will be determined through a
                                                          social assessment (SA) as part of the SESA. Given
                                                          that Indigenous Peoples will form the
                                                          overwhelming majority of people in the project
                                                          area, elements of an Indigenous Peoples Plan will
                                                          be incorporated overall project design. Guidance for
                                                          this is provided in the SESA Terms of Reference.
    Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12     Yes           Since REDO+ Strategy Options are under
                                                          development, potential impacts, including the type
                                                          and extent of potential land acquisition, economic
                                                          or physical displacement or access restrictions to
                                                          resources, remains unknown. This policy is
                                                          triggered to ensure landowners, leaseholders and
                                                          land users and forest dependent communities and/or
                                                          individuals are properly consulted and not coerced
                                                          or forced to accept or commit to REDO+ activities
                                                          or other forest management/reforestation activities
                                                          involuntarily, and that best practice approaches as
                                                          informed by OP 4.12 are adopted. The SESA will
                                                          identify and assess the potential for any involuntary
                                                          land acquisition issues or restriction of access to
                                                          natural resources to occur, and management
                                                          processes will be embedded into the ESMF. The
                                                          ESMF may include, as required, a Resettlement
                                                          Policy Framework (RPF) and/or Process
                                                          Framework (PF), all of which will be part of the
                                                          SESA, in order to ensure avoidance, minimization,
                                                          and/or appropriate compensation for adversely
                                                          affected persons or populations in downstream
                                                          implementation. Sub-component 1.2 of the
                                                          Readiness Preparation Grant will fund assessment
                                                          of existing grievance mechanisms at the national
                                                          and decentralized levels, assess the capacity of
                                                          institutions and customary mechanisms that would
                                                          handle grievances, and support their strengthening
                                                          specifically for REDO+.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37               No            The REDO+ strategies and activities will not
                                                          involve the construction of, nor will be affected by,
                                                          new or existing dams.
    Projects on International Waterways     No            The REDO+ strategies and activities will not affect
    OP/BP 7.50                                            any international waterways.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60   No            The REDO+ strategies and activities will not be
                                                          located in any disputed areas.
.




                                            Page 5 of 6
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
.




    A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS:
        31-Dec-2016
    B. Time frame for launching and completing the         safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
       The specific      studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage       ISDS.
        The main safeguard instrument to be applied is the SESA. The SESA includes the preparation of an
    ESMF. The ESMF may evolve and be updated over time when new REDO + strategy options and projects or
    activities (including investments), or policies/regulations are identified during implementation of REDO+.
    The SESA addresses the key environmental and social issues associated with the analysis and preparation of
    REDO+ strategy options as well as REDO+ projects, activities (including investments), policies and
    regulations. In this manner SESA can ensure compliance with WB's environmental and social safeguards.

    The SESA process requires that the selection of REDO+ strategy options should take into account the
    country's institutional and capacity constraints for managing environmental and social risks, and the potential
    environmental and social impacts associated with these strategy options. Any identified gaps to manage
    these risks and potential impacts in relation to relevant WB's safeguard policies should be identified along
    with the strategy options to feed into t~e preparation of the ESMF. The ESMF should provide a framework
    to manage and mitigate the potential environmental and social impacts related to specific projects and
    activities (including investments and carbon finance transactions), in the context of the future
    implementation of REDO+.

    The ESMF will be structured to contain subject-specific frameworks addressing the relevant requirements of
    the applicable environmental and social safeguard policies including, but not necessarily limited to, a RPF
    and/or PF.


V. Approval
    Task Team Leader(s):                      Name: Ms. Anisi,Haddy Jatou Sey
    Approved By:
    Safeguards Advisor:                       Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                           Date: 22-Aug-2017
    Practice Manager/Manager:                 Name: Iain G. Shuker (PMGR)                        Date: 23-Aug-2017


    1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
    InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
    persons.




                                                         Page 6 of 6
