                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              CONCEPT STAGE
.




                                                                                    Report No.:ISDSC17331
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Feb-2017
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed 09-Mar-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    A. Basic Project Data
    Country:                      Nepal                        Project ID:            P149239
    Project Name:                 Business Models for Private Sector-Led Mini-Grid Energy Access Project
                                  (P149239)
    Task Team Leader(s):          Tomoyuki Yamashita
    Estimated Appraisal           16-Oct-2017                  Estimated Board        30-Jan-2018
    Date:                                                      Date:
    Managing Unit:                GEE06                        Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                                                                   Financing
    Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:        8.00                          Total Bank Financing: 0.00
    Financing Gap:             0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                 Amount
      Borrower                                                                                              0.00
      Strategic Climate Fund Credit                                                                         2.00
      Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                                          6.00
      Financing Gap                                                                                         0.00
      Total                                                                                                 8.00
    Environmental Category:       F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project? No

    B. Project Objectives
    16. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase electricity delivery from renewable energy
    mini-grids by mobilizing private energy service company (ESCO).

    17. The market for private sector-led renewable-energy-based mini-grid will be developed through technical
    assistance (TA) and financial support. Funding for the mini-grid subprojects will be sourced from the SREP,
    private developers, the NRREP and the Central Renewable Energy Fund (CREF), and the Government.
    C. Project Description
    The key results expected and associated indicators are as follows:



                                               Page 1 of 8
PDO indicators:
(a) Generation capacity of energy constructed or rehabilitated (MW)
(b) People provided with new or improved electricity service
(c) Annual electricity output from renewable energy (GWh)

Intermediate indicators:
(a) Number of private sector-developed mini-grid subprojects
(b) Number of annual consultations with citizens and surveys with publicly disclosed reports summarizing
findings
(c) Number of beneficiaries disaggregated by type of customers, that is, anchor, business, and community
(A-B-C) and women-headed business and households

The proposed project consists of three components: (a) Support to Mini-grid Subprojects, (b) Preparation for
Mini-grid Interconnections, and (c) Project Management. The total cost for the proposed project is US$ 6.0
million.

Component 1: Support to Mini-grid Subprojects (US$4.7 million). This component will support the
establishment of about seven renewable energy mini-grids based on the A-B-C business model, which will
provide modern energy services to A-B-C customers in rural and urban areas. Two subcomponents will
provide support to both investment financing and TA necessary to open up the energy service company
(ESCO) market.

o Subcomponent 1A: Financial Support for the A-B-C Business Model Mini-grid (US$4.2 million). This
subcomponent will provide financing support to ESCOs to facilitate financial closure and enhance financial
viability of the subprojects. The SREP grant will be provided to ESCOs in the form of loans with a
marginally commercial interest rate for subprojects whose proposals (based on Detail Design (DD) results)
are approved by the Independent Evaluation Panel (IEP) and the Technical Review Committee (TRC). The
SREP loan will be provided to ESCOs through a few of the CREF partner banks or a new financing channel
established by selecting partner banks specifically for this project. Disbursement of the loan will be in
tranches tied to explicit milestones in project preparation and implementation. For example, ESCOs will be
eligible to receive 50 percent of the total loan as the first tranche when the subproject gets approval for
construction (based on the DD results). Support for a subproject shall be revoked when construction has not
started within six months from the first lending. According to construction progress until successful
completion and testing and commissioning of a subproject, the rest of 50 percent of the total loan will be
provided every trimester.

With the proposed US$4.2 million in loan, about seven mini-grids of capacity from 100 kW to 1,000 kW can
be supported. To attract subproject developers, the SREP loan conditions should compare favorably to the
benefits that the developer could get by opting for the full amount of the government subsidy or by accessing
CREF loans from other donors instead. The SREP loan terms, such as with grace period and longer
repayment period, will be set to attract ESCOs and to help them in making their business sustainable.

For the rural model, after the AEPC shares market intelligence regarding demographic patterns,
electrification rates, locations of anchor and business customers, and other salient facts, potential ESCOs
will be invited to submit expressions of interest to establish mini-grids in about five locations. On a
competitive basis, promising candidates will be selected by the IEP and the TRC to carry out DD and
prepare business plans for funding consideration (it is possible that some subprojects among about five
candidates will be dropped at this stage). These DDs will be partially funded from the TA budget for the
project. Upon completion and submission of DDs and final business plans, another round of evaluation by
the IEP and the TRC will determine the subprojects eligible for the SREP loan.


                                           Page 2 of 8
For the urban model, the AEPC will accept subproject proposals (or initial business plan based on feasibility
studies) from ESCOs. The IEP and the TRC will evaluate the submitted subproject proposals and select
about five eligible subprojects for the DD execution and detailed business plans preparation, partially funded
from the project’s TA budget. Completed DD results and prepared final business plans for proposed
subprojects for the urban model will be evaluated by the IEP and the TRC again to decide eligibility for the
SREP loan (it is possible that some proposed subprojects will be dropped at this stage).

o Subcomponent 1B: TA to the A-B-C Business Model (US$0.5 million). The project will support the
identification, financing, implementation, and performance assessment of subprojects utilizing the A-B-C
business model or other innovative business models in both rural and urban areas. ESCOs will receive
training and advisory support. ESCOs that are interested in entering the access to energy business will be
assisted with market research and information on suitable technologies that are currently being used
successfully in developing country environments, so that they can decide which types of technology partners
to approach on their own for a business engagement.

The project will also provide technical support to ESCOs to help them address the challenges in accessing
funding sources. Technical support will help build the confidence of anchor customers, which may be
skeptical of the ESCO’s ability to provide continuous and reliable power as stipulated in the Power Purchase
Agreement (PPA), and partner banks, which may be unsure about the ESCO’s ability to pay back its debt on
time.

This subcomponent will support TA activities, such as:

o Partial cost support for DD executed by ESCOs (except for two pilot subprojects for which DDs may be
prepared using either AEPC or World Bank budget during the project preparation period)

o Creation of an enabling environment, such as the preparation of technical specifications for mini-grids and
prepaid metering system.

o Promotional activities and capacity building among stakeholders. This includes promotional
activities/workshops to connect developers, financiers, anchor customers, end users, and so on. This
component will also support capacity development activities aimed at filling specific knowledge gaps among
relevant stakeholders (for example, training on business plan development for ESCOs and assessment of
business proposals for commercial banks). Activities for capacity building will be aligned with the World
Bank-supported Nepal Renewable Energy Training Program, whose target audience, technologies, and
content are especially relevant to the proposed project.

o Rural community consultations (inviting both men and women from B and C customers), focus group
discussions, periodic socioeconomic survey (for example, a baseline survey and yearly surveys after the
subprojects’ commissioning), and analysis to monitor the impacts of electrification, including on citizen
engagement and gender, by collecting data from the same interviewees. These citizen engagement activities
will support the creation of an enabling environment for subprojects and inform awareness raising activities.

Component 2: Preparation for Mini-grid Interconnections (US$0.8 million). This component will allow the
AEPC, NEA, mini-grid owners, and potential private sector operators to test different technical
arrangements and business models for future interconnections of existing and new mini-grids to the main
grid in rural areas. These mini-grids could be powered by hydropower, solar, or hybrid generating systems.
This component will have two subcomponents:



                                           Page 3 of 8
o Subcomponent 2A: Financial Support for Different Interconnection Options (US$0.5 million). Financial
support to cover the grid connection costs of four existing mini-grids in rural areas will be provided by the
project. The mini-grid subprojects will be chosen to test alternative physical and business arrangements. This
subcomponent will provide funding support for the physical equipment and software needed for
interconnection of pilot subprojects for both MHPs and solar mini-grids, whether community or privately
owned.

o Subcomponent 2B: TA to Support Different Interconnection Options (US$0.3 million). Under this
subcomponent, technical and financial studies will be funded to prepare technical standards as well as to
identify appropriate financing instruments to support future grid connection of mini-grids in rural areas. In
addition, consultations with stakeholders (commercial banks, local communities, mini-grid owners, potential
private sector operators, and the GoN) will be held to create an enabling environment. The engineering
support from the TA will focus on the technical requirements for achieving an operationally reliable physical
interconnection that will allow the mini-grid to operate either in parallel with the main grid or as a stand-
alone small electrical system during times of blackouts on the main grid. The business advisory from the TA
will explore options to bring in private operators who can assist existing community-owned MHPs in
achieving efficient, reliable, and coordinated operations once the interconnection takes place.

Component 3: Project Management (US$0.5 million). This component will support the AEPC to institute
and sustainably maintain the Project Implementation Unit (PIU). In particular, it will help in hiring key
AEPC contract staff/consultants for the PIU and establish an IEP. The IEP will consist of international and
national technical and financial experts to evaluate subproject proposals submitted by ESCOs. Only
subprojects approved by the IEP and AEPC (TRC) are eligible to receive the SREP loan. This component
will also support the preparation of the Project Operational Manual (POM), including a monitoring and
evaluation framework, and other key documents such as a standardized PPA to facilitate long-term
engagement between ESCOs and anchor customers, standardized expressions of interest from potential
ESCOs to participate in the subprojects, a standardized DD format to demonstrate viability of proposed
subprojects, standard bidding documents for potential ESCOs to select contractors, and so on.
D. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
Both Component 1 and Component 2 of the project are likely to involve physical components and
infrastructure that may result in adverse environmental and social risks and impacts, as described below.

With regard to Component 1, although subproject sites are not known and will be decided based on the
results of DD of subproject proposals, some of the mini-grids for the rural model are likely to be located in
relatively remote places in the mountain/hill. The mountain/hill areas of Nepal, such as the Annapurna
Conservation Area, Langtang National Park, Manaslu, Upper Mustang, and Everest National Park, will be
included in the project locations. The mountain/hills of Nepal are rich in biodiversity and geologically
fragile in terms of landslides and soil erosions.

The environmental and social impacts of mini-grid construction and operation subprojects by ESCOs will
vary depending on the location and scope of each subproject; it likely that most of them will be moderate
given the small size. Environmental and social impacts of most of the subprojects are likely to be moderate.
The project supports mini-grid subprojects using renewable-energy-based solutions such as mini-
hydropower, solar PV, wind, bioenergy, and hybrid systems. Their precise size and locations are not known
at this stage, although pilot subprojects’ DD may be carried out during project preparation stage, as deemed
feasible. For example, for a 500 kW mini hydropower plant, which diverts partial river flow to the intake by
a weir at a height of 2 meters (m), only a part of the river flow will be used for the power generation, the
same quantity of water diverted will be returned to the same river. Similarly, for a 500 kWp mini solar farm,


                                            Page 4 of 8
a small land dimension of 50 m in width and 150 m in length is needed for solar panels installation. A
distribution/transmission line of either 11 kV at about 10 m height or 33 kV at about 15 m height will be
used to evacuate electricity to a mini-grid service area.

Some subproject may be located in the protected area/sensitive natural habitats. These subprojects could be
considered to require more attention with regard to risk assessment and management measures. Mini-grids
represent more sustainable and cleaner power source based on renewable energy in places where other
sources of energy are not easily available. For example, these mini-grids may be used by eco-lodges in
national parks built and operated to allow Nepal to benefit from its rich natural capital in a sustainable
manner, while also preserving it for future generations. Nevertheless, construction and operation of
subprojects in such areas is associated with potential impacts on areas with biodiversity value (e.g. national
legally protected areas, internationally recognized areas, and other habitats and ecosystems of significant
importance as defined in World Bank Safeguard Policies OP4.04 and OP4.36, with the applicability of the
latter to be determined during project preparation), many of which are located across Nepal. The project will
also draw on available good international practice with regard to biodiversity conservation to inform design
of assessment and mitigation measures, as appropriate. A detailed approach to risk management in this area
will be incorporated in the ESMF.

Component 2 of the project, managed by AEPC, involves provision of financial support for physical
equipment needed for pilot projects involving mini-grid interconnections. This component will most
probably not result in any adverse environmental and social impacts necessitating environmental and social
screening and implementation of mitigation measures, since all works (minor equipment installation and line
connections) will be executed within existing facility area, such as in power house. Mini-grids for which con
nection options would be tested through pilot project are likely to be located in rural areas, may be
community or privately owned, and powered by MHPs and solar sources. Risks and impacts of this
component will be analyzed further during project preparation to understand whether any impacts are
possible in addition to labor/occupational health and safety (OHS) impacts.

Additionally, environmental and social risks associated with subprojects under Components 1 and 2 may
involve labor and working conditions issues during construction, potential impacts on physical cultural
resources, and Indigenous Peoples. Other impacts of associated access roads (although not anticipated at this
time). These aspects will be taken into account during screening and Environmental and Social Impact
Assessments (ESIAs) preparation, as appropriate and commensurate with nature and magnitude of risks and
impacts.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
AEPC has been implementing World Bank projects for over ten years and is familiar with World Bank’s
safeguard policies. AEPC implemented demand-driven micro hydropower based mini-grid projects and has
been implementing SREP-Supported Extended Biogas Project for which framework approach is being used.
Hence, AEPC is familiar with the framework approach. Additionally, relevant environmental and social
requirements of Nepal will be further analyzed during project preparation and incorporated into the ESMF.
Relevant World Bank Group Environmental, Health, and Safety (EHS) Guidelines will also be applied to
subprojects.

Financial Intermediaries’ (CREF and local partner bank) capacity varies. Therefore, the capacities of the
participating banks/ FIs, and capacity of the AEPC, CREF, ESCOs and other stakeholders for safeguards-
related issues will be assessed during the ESMF preparation, and necessary measures for strengthening the
capacities of all involved stakeholders, if necessary, will be developed.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                                           Page 5 of 8
     Drona Raj Ghimire( GEN06 )
     Ekaterina Grigoryeva( GEN03 )
     Jun Zeng( GSU06 )
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
    Safeguard Policies                      Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
    Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes               There is possibility of impacts on physical and
                                                          biological environment due to construction and
                                                          operation of the subprojects under both
                                                          Components 1 and 2.
    Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04             Yes           Some subprojects are likely to be located in the
                                                          protected areas and/or sensitive critical or natural
                                                          habitats.
    Forests OP/BP 4.36                      TBD           This policy remains TBD as potential impacts on
                                                          forest is not-understood at this stage.
    Pest Management OP 4.09                 No            Project does not envisage use of pesticide.
    Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 TBD            This policy remains TBD as potential impacts on
                                                          PCR not-known at this stage.
    Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10           Yes           There are IPs communities collectively attached to
                                                          proposed subproject areas. At the time the project
                                                          preparation, exact location of the specific project
                                                          sites, except for two pilot subprojects for mini-grid,
                                                          cannot be determined. Therefore, an Indigenous
                                                          Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) will be
                                                          prepared to address the IP issues.
    Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12     TBD           Proposed project activities may cause land taking,
                                                          but it is uncertain at this moment if land acquisition
                                                          will be done on willing-seller willing-buyer basis or
                                                          on involuntary basis. Thus, further clarification will
                                                          be executed prior to appraisal. If the policy is
                                                          triggered, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                                                          would be prepared and disclosed before appraisal).
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37               No            Run of river mini hydropower scheme requires only
                                                          small water diversion structure (or weir, less than 5
                                                          meter height) and side-intake.
    Projects on International Waterways     TBD           Mini-hydropower scheme divert small quantity of
    OP/BP 7.50                                            water from streams, and water will be returned to
                                                          the stream after power generation. This will not
                                                          affect quantity and quality of water body. In
                                                          addition, mini-hydro will be constructed not in
                                                          international rivers, but in their small brunch rivers.
                                                          However, this policy remains TBD.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60   No            Subprojects will not be located in disputed areas.
.




III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                                            Page 6 of 8
.




    A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS:
       05-Oct-2017
    B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The
       specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
        The overall project is classified as FI (Financing Intermediary) since the Bank’s funding under
    Component 1 (main project component) will be provided through CREF (a wholesale FI/ apex) to retail FIs -
    participating financial institutions (or local partner banks) for on-lending to final borrowers (ESCOs).

    Based on the overall design of Component 1 of this project, the core responsibility for ensuring that ESCOs
    carry out adequate ESIAs commensurate with the nature and level of risks and impacts, will rest with AEPC.
    Outcomes of the ESIA − including resulting Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) for
    mitigation of identified risks and impacts − will be integrated into the process for sub-project selection
    conducted by IEP and TRC. Subsequently, through its legal and contractual relationships with partner banks,
    AEPC (with assistance from CREF, as feasible) will ensure that appropriate legal covenants concerning
    environmental and social compliance are included in lending agreements between partner banks and ESCOs
    for financing of identified subprojects. This will include appropriate remedial measures and a defined role
    for AEPC, CREF and partner banks to monitor ESCO’s compliance with them.

    Accordingly, to ensure the above risks and mitigation requirements are adequately understood and
    implemented by all involved parties (AEPC, CREF, local banks, and ESCOs), Environmental and Social
    Framework (ESMF) will be prepared by the main implementing agency, AEPC, before project appraisal and
    in consultation with project participants and other stakeholders. The ESMF will include the screening
    process for categorization of subprojects (A, B, or C) and detail the applicable requirements in line with the
    World Bank safeguards polices and relevant good international practices, to ensure that adequate ESIAs,
    ESMPs, and other necessary instruments are prepared and implemented by ESCOs for all subprojects under
    Component 1 (and by AEPC for Component 2, only if needed). The ESMF will clarify the roles and
    responsibilities of AEPC, IEP, TRC, CREF, Participating Financial Intermediaries (PFIs), and ESCOs
    regarding environmental and social (E&S) due diligence, management of risks and impacts, and monitoring/
    supervision. The ESMF will also incorporate processes for compliance monitoring, as well as a capacity
    building plan for all key stakeholders, as needed and commensurate with their respective roles. Additionally,
    IPPF and RPF (if necessary) would be prepared and disclosed before appraisal as the subprojects locations
    would not be known at that time. However, in case where the project preparation phase will identify two
    pilot projects for development of a Detailed Design (DD), the site-specific instruments (ESIA, ESMP, and
    other instruments, as relevant) would be prepared in addition to the framework.

    During project preparation, further efforts will be made to identify risks and impacts, as well as appropriate
    mitigation measures and plans associated with potential subprojects based on ESIA results for the pilot
    subprojects (as feasible). The ESIAs and corresponding mitigation instruments (ESMPs etc.) will be
    prepared prior to making a financing decision by AEPC and CREF/ PFIs on each subproject, in order to
    better integrate E&S considerations into investment decision-making cycle, as per the good practice in
    projects involving private and financial sector. Key ESMP actions would be incorporated into loan
    agreements between PFIs and ESCOs.

    The project will follow World Bank’s consultation and disclosure requirements. The ESMF will be disclosed
    locally/in-country and on World Bank’s website. During project preparation, the project team will assess the
    system and capacity of all key project participants (AEPC, CREF, local banks, and ESCOs) for adequately
    fulfilling their respective responsibilities for environmental and social assessment and propose measures to
    strengthen capacity, as necessary.


                                                Page 7 of 8
V. Approval
 Task Team Leader(s):                      Name: Tomoyuki Yamashita
 Approved By:
 Safeguards Advisor:                       Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA) Date: 28-Feb-2017
 Practice Manager/Manager:                 Name: Demetrios Papathanasiou                      Date: 09-Mar-2017
                                           (PMGR)


  1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the

 InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
 persons.




                                                      Page 8 of 8
