                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA17948
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-May-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-May-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          India                             Project ID:   P151072
                            Project Name:     National Agricultural Higher Education Project (P151072)
                            Task Team         Edward William Bresnyan
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         02-May-2016                       Estimated   16-Jun-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GFA12                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Agricultural extension and research (50%), Tertiary education (30%), Agro-
                                              industry, marketing, and trade (10%), Public administratio n- Education (5%),
                                              Information technology (5%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for the knowledge economy (35%), Managing for development results
                                              (5%), Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Improving labor markets (20%),
                                              Rural policies and institutions (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     165.00           Total Bank Financing:               82.50
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                    Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                    82.50
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                           82.50
                              Total                                                                                165.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed NAHEP would support participating Agricultural Universities and ICAR in providing
                           more relevant and higher quality education to agriculture university students.

                                                                     Page 1 of 11
                         3. Project Description
                         Project Beneficiaries
Public Disclosure Copy




                         NAHEP would target the 73 institutions that form the ICAR-AU System, consisting of State
                         Agricultural Universities (61), Deemed Universities (5), Central Universities with Agricultural
                         Faculty (4) and Central Agricultural Universities (3). Students would benefit from: (a) a movement
                         from teaching- to learning-centered education, leveraging ICT and external partnerships; (b) effective
                         stakeholder participation in curricula development, pedagogy options and course evaluation; (c)
                         increased equity in educational access through vocation and technical certificate programs; and (d)
                         an overall improvement in the learning and academic environment that would both expand and
                         sharpen their skill set needed for future employment. Faculty would benefit from: (a) increased
                         collaboration among Indian AUs and with other universities globally to raise research quality and its
                         linkage to educational quality and relevance; and (b) training and capacity-building to improve the
                         delivery of education and its learning outcomes

                         - Increased AU on-time graduation rates, disaggregated by gender and SC/ST;
                         - Increased cut-off scores for students in ICAR Entrance Tests, disaggregated by gender and SC/ST;
                         - Increased student placement rates, disaggregated by gender and SC/ST;
                         - Increased faculty research effectiveness; and
                         - Number of project beneficiaries, disaggregated by students/ faculty, gender and SC/ST (core
                         indicator).


                         PROJECT DESCRIPTION

                         Component 1 - Support to Agricultural Universities (USD 146.4 million, of which IDA USD 73.2
                         million): would finance investments by participating AUs to improve the quality and relevance of
                         agricultural education and research toward agricultural transformation. The component has three sub-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         components.

                         Sub-component 1a - Support to State-level AUs (USD 69.4 million, of which IDA USD 34.7 million)
                         would specifically target reform-ready State-level AUs and support competitively selected and
                         performance-based Institutional Development Plans (IDPs), financed through ICAR?s existing
                         Development Grant window. The IDPs under this subcomponent seek to improve: (a) learning
                         outcomes and future employment for AU students; and (b) faculty teaching performance and
                         research effectiveness. Through the IDPs, the AUs would identify and prioritize key challenges,
                         propose interventions to respond to these challenges, and set timelines and indicators for measuring
                         achievement of greater quality and relevance at tributable to these interventions. The IDPs would
                         also leverage other funding sources (e.g., existing or additional state-level funds, private sector,
                         foundations) along with ICAR?s Development Grant. NAHEP would finance each IDP through a
                         subproject grant directly to the participating AU. Activities financed under each IDP would include:
                         (a) capacity building and training for agreed governance reforms that promote AU autonomy and
                         sustained accreditation; (b) updated infrastructure (i.e., minor civil works, goods) for research and
                         teaching; (c) faculty development (i.e., training, consultant services); (d) networking with industry
                         and other learning institutions, both national and international; (e) increased vocational education
                         through the launching of certificate programs; (f) more effective student job placement; and (g) own-
                         revenue generation for AUs. Each IDP would also specify a Twinning Plan with a recognized high-
                         performing university, either in India or abroad.


                                                                     Page 2 of 11
                         Sub-component 1b - Centers for Advanced Agriculture Science and Technology - CAASTs (USD
                         46.2 million, of which IDA USD 23.1 million) would support competitively selected CAAST
Public Disclosure Copy




                         proposals by reform-ready AUs to establish multidisciplinary centers for teaching, research and
                         extension on critical and emerging agricultural topics (e.g., globalization; climate change and
                         resilience; land and water use efficiency; scalable technology; effective pedagogy and knowledge
                         transfer; agro-industry; and agro-entrepreneurship). Multi-stakeholder consultations would inform
                         the geographic locations and core themes f or the proposed CAASTs, after which participating AUs
                         would compete for CAAST funding. Approved AUs would be financed through a CAAST
                         subproject grant directly to the participating AU. The sub-component would finance: (a) research and
                         teaching equipment (i.e., goods); (b) faculty and scientist development fellowships, (c) student
                         scholarships, primarily at the postgraduate level; and (d) costs associated with twinning arrangements
                         with similar centers (e.g., universities, research centers) both outside and within India (i.e., training,
                         consultant services, and non-consultant services).

                         Subcomponent 1c - ICAR innovation grants to AUs (USD 30.8 million, of which IDA USD 15.4
                         million) - would primarily support technical assistance and consultant services required to: (a) make
                         AUs reform ready (i.e., attain accreditation) to permit their participation in subcomponents 1a and
                         1b; and (b) promote mentoring of non-accredited AUs by existing reform-ready AUs and other
                         interstate and international academic partnerships.

                         The Project Implementation Plan, satisfactory to the Bank, would include detailed guidelines for
                         developing, evaluating and implementing IDPs (under subcomponent 1a), CAAST subprojects
                         (under subcomponent 1b) and innovation grants (under subcomponent 1c), including procedures for
                         inviting, reviewing and ranking specific proposals, implementation and monitoring of approved
                         subproject grants, and targeting methodology to ensure equitable AU access ? particularly among
                         those in lagging states ? to each subcomponent.

                         Reform readiness: The Education Division/ ICAR uses the voluntary accreditation process as a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         determinant of an AU?s reform readiness. Accreditation confirms that the given AU: (a) has clearly
                         defined and appropriate objectives (i.e., leadership); (b) has established an enabling environment that
                         makes achievements of these objectives possible (i.e., governance); (c) is substantially accomplishing
                         its objectives (i.e., effectiveness); and (d) is organized, staffed and supported so as to ensure its
                         continuation (i.e., sustainability). ICAR awards accreditation at three levels ? university, college,
                         and program ? and bases its decision to accredit a given AU on three sources of evidence: (a) AU
                         self-examination; (b) institutional peer review; and (c) final decision by the ICAR Accreditation
                         Board (see Annex 2). NAHEP would support AUs in their efforts to attain accreditation through
                         subcomponent 1c.

                         Subproject Cycle - IDPs, CAASTs and Innovation Grants:
                         - Following a dissemination campaign to create overall NAHEP awareness, interested AUs would
                         define their institutional development goals and develop associated activities and outcomes (with
                         technical assistance as required) into IDPs/ CAAST Proposals (or develop Innovation Grant
                         proposals), which are submitted to the Education Division/ ICAR;
                         - IDPs/ CAAST Proposals (or Innovation Grants proposals) are evaluated by the Technical
                         Committee for eligibility (i.e., reform ready, accreditation) and compliance with environmental,
                         financial, institutional, social and technical guidelines (per the Project Implementation Plan);
                         - Subproject agreements are signed between AUs and the Education Division/ ICAR to support
                         finance of approved IDPs/ CAASTs (or Innovation Grants) and specify the use of subproject

                                                                       Page 3 of 11
                         resources, and the rights and responsibilities of AUs and the Education Division/ ICAR;
                         - The Education Division/ ICAR transfers subproject resources to AUs for IDP/ CAAST (or
                         Innovation Grant) implementation;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         - AUs contract goods, works, consultant services and non-consultant services, in accordance with the
                         approved IDP/ CAAST (or Innovation Grant) the norms established in the Project Implementation
                         Plan, and prepare reports (e.g., Financial Utilization Certificates) which they submit to the Education
                         Division/ ICAR to document the use of subproject resources.

                         Component 2 - Investments in ICAR Leadership in Agriculture Higher Education (USD 10.4 million,
                         of which IDA USD 5.2 million) - would finance ICAR?s internal reforms to enhance its effectiveness
                         in: (a) coordinating, guiding and managing agricultural higher education across the ICAR-AU
                         System; and (b) its interactions with AUs and key stakeholders nationwide through interventions that
                         increase the quality and relevance of agricultural higher education. As the Education Division/
                         ICAR is responsible for national coordination and quality assurance of agricultural higher education,
                         the component would leverage ICAR?s comparative advantage in: (a) assessing systemic challenges
                         across the ICAR-AU System; and (b) incubating solutions.

                         The component would finance goods, training, consultant services and non-consultant services such
                         as: (a) change management services to aid the Education Division/ ICAR in its internal reform of the
                         Development Grant; (b) technical assistance to participating AUs for developing and implementing
                         IDPs, CAASTs and Innovation Grants; (c) partnerships between the Education Division/ ICAR and
                         other globally recognized agricultural higher education institutions; (d) digital information systems
                         for AU data collection, analysis and dissemination to improve quality metrics in agricultural higher
                         education; (e) an improved curricula review process to tighten its relevance in today?s dynamic job
                         market; (f) enhanced methods to consolidate and disseminate global best-practices in agricultural
                         higher education (e.g., national and global benchmarking); (g) institutionalization of stakeholder and
                         advisory inputs to better inform research, education and extension across the ICAR-AU System; and
                         (h) an External Advisory Panel, drawing on both national and international expertise relevant to
                         agricultural higher education, to provide a vehicle for best-practice dissemination and adoption by
Public Disclosure Copy




                         participating AUs.

                         Component 3 ? Project Management and Learning (USD 8.2 million, of which IDA USD 4.1
                         million) - would support NAHEP project management, primarily through the Education Division/
                         ICAR, to administer, supervise, monitor and evaluate overall project implementation. The
                         component would support: (a) an NAHEP Steering Committee that would provide strategic guidance
                         to the Education Division/ ICAR throughout project implementation; (b) a Technical Committee to
                         evaluate IDP, CAAST and Innovation Grant proposals; (c) a communication strategy to build
                         awareness among AUs and other stakeholders regarding the objectives and activities of the proposed
                         NAHEP; and (d) training and capacity-building for both ICAR and the AUs to achieve and sustain
                         increased quality, relevance and effectiveness of agricultural higher education across the ICAR-AU
                         System.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed project would target the 73 institutions of the ICAR-AU System, consisting of State
                         Agricultural Universities, Deemed Universities, Central Universities with Agricultural Faculty and
                         Central Agricultural Universities. IDPs, CAASTs and Innovation Grants would finance goods,
                         works, consulting services and non-consulting services for these AUs on existing campuses. All
                         activities will take place on existing land and no new land acquisition is envisioned.


                                                                      Page 4 of 11
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Anupam Joshi (GEN06)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Surbhi Dhingra (GSU06)
                         Vanitha Kommu (GEN06)

                         6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental               Yes        This is triggered to screen the proposed investments
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                  against any potential adverse impacts.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP      No         The proposed project would not finance any activity that
                         4.04                                   may endanger any critical (or other) natural habitat.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36          No         The proposed project does not finance any activity that
                                                                involves forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes            Although the proposed project would not promote
                                                                pesticides or chemical fertilizers, any residual risk
                                                                emerging from using small amounts of pesticides or other
                                                                agrochemicals on farmer's fields for research activities
                                                                prescribed in the project (e.g., demonstration plots) would
                                                                be addressed through the development of integrated pest
                                                                management practices for the project as a part of the
                                                                management plans.
                         Physical Cultural           No         Small construction activities executed under the proposed
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11                   project would primarily involve retrofitting existing
                                                                buildings or developing laboratory extension facilities in
                                                                existing university campuses. Thus, no excavations or
                                                                deep digging would occur.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/      Yes        The policy is triggered given the project is country-wide
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.10                                and the beneficiaries would also include students
                                                                belonging to Scheduled Castes (SCs) and Scheduled
                                                                Tribes (STs) and other disadvantaged groups. A Social
                                                                Assessment was carried out and an Equity Action Plan
                                                                (EAP) / Indigenous People's policy Framework has been
                                                                prepared..
                         Involuntary Resettlement No            This policy has not been triggered given that project shall
                         OP/BP 4.12                             not finance civil works involving compulsory land
                                                                acquisition, involuntary resettlement, or causing
                                                                restriction of access to natural resources. The project
                                                                activities will focus on improving the quality and access
                                                                of technical education and will only support minor repairs
                                                                and refurbishments of existing infrastructure. There are no
                                                                issues of encroachment in any of the public lands to be
                                                                used.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP        No         No dams are involved.
                         4.37
                         Projects on International   No         No international waterways are involved.
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50


                                                                 Page 5 of 11
                            Projects in Disputed         No             No disputed areas would be covered under the proposed
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                            project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project involves limited construction activities such as refurbishing/upgrading technical
                              education facilities such as laboratories, library, etc. These activities are not expected to cause any
                              significant environmental or social impacts. Likely environmental and social impacts, which will
                              be limited in nature, may include temporary construction related impacts.

                              Environment: The negative impacts on environment are limited and localized (restricted to minor
                              civil works within the premises of State-level AUs, and absence of safety norms in laboratories
                              like safe disposal of hazardous wastes, etc.). However there are opportunities for integration across
                              AU curricula of climate resilience, sustainable production systems, and overall reduction of the
                              environmental foot print of Indian agriculture. Such integration can also be extended to faculty
                              development (e.g., training and capacity-building), as well as ongoing and future research and
                              extension programs.

                              Social: NAHEP would finance minor civil works such as refurbishing/upgrading higher education
                              facilities such as classrooms, library buildings, etc. within the existing premises, and is not
                              expected to cause any significant environmental or social impacts. Likely environmental and
                              social impacts, which will be limited in nature, may include temporary construction-related
                              impacts. No civil work involving compulsory land acquisition or involuntary resettlement shall be
                              financed. Therefore, the World Bank's Operational Policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP
                              4.12) has not been triggered. The project institutions, especially those in low-income states, are
Public Disclosure Copy




                              located in states and communities inhabited by tribal communities, and hence, Operational Policy
                              on Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) has been triggered.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The project is designated as Category B.

                              The project interventions, on the whole, will have a positive impact on the technical education
                              sector, specific interventions envisaged under the project such as refurbishment/ retrofitting/major
                              repair works of existing classrooms/laboratories/libraries may have some potential but limited
                              adverse environmental impacts in the local context. Therefore, these activities are central to the
                              approach and design from an environmental management and safeguards perspective for the
                              project.

                              Some specific long-term environmental impacts are associated with the operation and management
                              of the institutes/buildings itself. Appropriate water and sanitation facilities, disposal of wastes
                              including management of e-wastes, energy use/efficiency, disaster preparedness and dealing with
                              issues where institutes are exposed to noise or other sources of pollution require regular attention.
                              However, such adverse impacts are not likely to be large-scale or irreversible in nature. These can
                              be avoided/ minimized to a great extent and the positive outcomes from the project can be


                                                                          Page 6 of 11
                          enhanced substantially by putting appropriate institutional mechanisms, procedures and capacity in
                          place, to deal with such issues.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          The anticipated future activities such as minor civil works for improving and expanding existing
                          facilities within the technical education campuses are likely to generate temporary employment
                          opportunities for the local people. Expanded influx of students and teachers may also contribute to
                          expansion of the local market, especially in the rural locations.

                           With proper management, the project interventions are not likely to cause any large scale,
                           significant or irreversible damage to the natural, physical or social environment.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           None.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           ICAR is well versed with the Bank's safeguards arrangements and has previously implemented
                           several Bank-funded projects (e.g., National Agriculture Technology Project, National
                           Agricultural Innovation Project). The safeguards performance for most of these projects was rated
                           Satisfactory. Apart from Bank-financed projects, ICAR operates a series of research laboratories,
                           which have standards in place for laboratory management and emergency protocols. Some amount
                           of capacity building would be required to ensure that disposal of biological material and other
                           laboratory chemicals adhere to prescribed norms.

                          A limited Environmental Assessment (EA) and Social Assessment (SA) study was undertaken by
                          the Education Division/ ICAR for the proposed project with guidance from the Bank team. The
                          study included a specific comprehensive questionnaire targeted at NAHEP project institutions to
                          learn from their experiences as well drawing on an accumulation of practices from projects
                          financed by the Bank with similar approaches. As part of the EA and SA, the current processes,
Public Disclosure Copy




                          systems and capacity of the implementation agencies from an environmental management
                          perspective and social management approaches were also reviewed.

                          EMF - A limited Environmental Assessment (EA) study was undertaken by the Education
                          Division/ ICAR for the proposed project, with guidance from the Bank team specialists. The study
                          included a specific comprehensive consultation questionnaire targeting AU faculty and students.
                          As part of the EA, the current processes, systems and capacity of ICAR from both an
                          environmental management and social/ equity perspective were reviewed. To effectively plan,
                          design and integrate environmental dimensions into the overall project preparation and
                          implementation, an Environment Management Framework (EMF) has been prepared, and
                          incorporated into the PIP. The draft EMF has been disclosed by the Education Division/ ICAR
                          (www.icar.org.in) and shall be locally disclosed in each participating AU.

                          The Education division/ ICAR prepared an Equity Action Plan (EAP) / Indigenous People?s
                          Policy Framework (IPPF) for the purposes of OP/BP 4.10. The EAP addresses issues of gender
                          equality and social inclusion with special attention to the needs of the Scheduled Tribe and the
                          Scheduled Caste students and faculty members fulfilling the requirements of OP 4.10 with free,
                          prior, informed consultation held with the primary stakeholders. The EAP/IPPF has been finalized
                          using mostly qualitative research methodologies, including intensive stakeholder interviews and
                          focus groups discussions with male and female students and faculties from various social

                                                                    Page 7 of 11
                          backgrounds, including ST and SC groups, and poor and disadvantaged communities. The EAP/
                          IPPF draws extensively on the experience of previously financed Bank?s projects. The EAP/ IPPF
                          identifies key issues and problems affecting academic performance and overall development of
Public Disclosure Copy




                          students and recommends a set of actions to address the same. Key recommended actions in the
                          EAP/IPPF include: (i) improving the learning efficiency, English language skills, and non-
                          cognitive skills of the students, especially those from socially and economically vulnerable groups
                          including ST and SC, (ii) supporting faculty to improve their knowledge levels, pedagogical skills,
                          and sensitivity to gender equality and social inclusion issues in educational institutions, (iii)
                          encouraging and institutions of excellence to organize annual technology innovation forums to
                          enable students from various colleges share experiences and innovations; (iv) promoting
                          mentorship amongst students and teachers (to aid needy students and younger faculty members);
                          and (v) supporting research scholars as a part of IDPs. The measures proposed in EAP/IPPF are
                          linked with key performance indicators. The overall project also proposes to monitor carefully and
                          report on the impact of project interventions on vulnerable groups, on a regular and timely basis so
                          that corrective actions can be taken. The project will focus on low-income states, which will have
                          a positive impact on equity.

                           Implementation Arrangements: Each participating AU will prepare and include the EAP/IPPF in
                           the Institution Development Plan submitted for funding. There shall be institution level student-
                           faculty committees to approve and moni tor the implementation of the EAPs. The Dean/ Head of
                           Department (HOP) will be generally the nodal officer responsible for implementing the EAP. The
                           institutional arrangements will integrate professional capacity and expertise to plan and implement
                           actions in fulfilment of the EAP/IPPF. The ICAR other project institutions will have a nodal
                           officer responsible for monitoring and supporting the EAP implementation. The Bank task team
                           and its safeguards specialists will carry out periodic field visits to and training support for the
                           Education Division/ ICAR and the participating AUs as part of overall NAHEP implementation
                           support.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Stakeholders: The primary stakeholders include the intended target population or beneficiaries of
                           the project being supported through the proposed operation ? the State Agriculture Universities in
                           India, as well as officials from the ICAR. This includes students, faculty, members of the
                           Governing Body, tribal students and communities, and those likely to be affected by any
                           temporary impacts.

                          Consultations: Stakeholder participation is central to design and implementation of the project and
                          provides for information sharing, consultation and collaboration measures. Guidelines for
                          consultation have been laid out in the EMF and the EAP/IPPF to ensure proper consultation and
                          participation of stakeholders at the various stages, including preparation and implementation at the
                          institute level. The key elements of strategy include: (i) consultations with primary stakeholders
                          people during project planning and implementation, (ii) information disclosure and dissemination,
                          (iii) grievance redress mechanisms, and (iv) feedback on project implementation (including EMF
                          and EAP/IPPF) through third party monitoring.

                          In accordance with applicable Bank policies, consultations were carried out through an on-line
                          survey with NAHEP project institutions- covering students and faculty, as part of the limited
                          environment and social assessment process. The final round of pubic consultation will be held
                          during the appraisal mission. The initial consultation indicates that the stakeholders strongly


                                                                     Page 8 of 11
                           support the proposed project. The feedback/inputs from these on-line discussions have been
                           primarily used for preparing the environment management instrument (i.e. the Environment
                           Management Framework) of the project. The project will continue to hold stakeholder
Public Disclosure Copy




                           consultations as a part of EMF and SMF implementation.

                           Disclosure: The draft EAP/IPPF has been disclosed on ICAR?s website (www.icar.org.in) and has
                           also been disclosed in the Bank?s Infoshop. The Education Division/ ICAR - as well as each
                           participating AU - will have a nodal officer responsible for monitoring and supporting the
                           implementation of the EAP/IPPF.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Apr-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-May-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            03-May-2016
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Apr-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-May-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            03-May-2016
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Apr-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-May-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            03-May-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?




                                                                    Page 9 of 11
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                             Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                             in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                             Management Specialist?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Edward William Bresnyan
                            Approved By


                                                                       Page 10 of 11
                         Practice Manager/   Name: Martien Van Nieuwkoop (PMGR)   Date: 04-May-2016
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                          Page 11 of 11
