INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
0                                               Report No.: ISDSC13195
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:          Uzbekistan                 Project ID:   P155689
Project Name:     Integrated Single Window Office for Social Assistance and Employment
Services
Team Leader(s): Oleksiy A. Sluchynskyy
Estimated Date    22-Jun-2015
of Approval:
Managing Unit:    GSPDR                      Lending       Lending Instrument
Instrument:
Sector(s):        Public administration- Other social services (70%), General public
administration sector (30%)
Theme(s):         Social Safety Nets/Social Assistance & Social Care Services (30%), Social
Protection and Labor Policy & Systems (40%), e-Government (30%)
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:   0.55                 Total Bank Financing: 0
Financing Gap:        0
Financing Source                                                           Amount
Rapid Social Response Program                                                  0.55
Environment       C-Not Required
Category:
B. Project Development Objective(s)
The PDO is to increase coordination among SPL programs and functions , to strengthen capacity of
MLSP in delivering services to the vulnerable and needy groups of the population and implementing
complex reforms, to establish a solid foundation for implementation of a national social Registry.
C. Project Description
The project will focus on improving social service delivery by increasing the efficiency of the
processes behind it, especially at the level of district operation, and by strengthening the capacity of
MLSP's staff. It will support development of a detailed blueprint for the implementation of the
Integrated Single Window Office (ISWO) for provision of social assistance and employment
services. The ISWO concept then will be piloted in up to two regional offices and evaluated,
allowing MLSP to further improve the blueprint based on the learnings from the pilot. In addition, an
assessment of HR development needs for MLSP and local governments will be conducted to inform
customized trainings that the project will provide to strengthen the capacity of MLSP regional level


﻿staff to deliver the new mode of services. Mahalyas will be among the direct beneficiaries of the
project in what the MLSP modernized offices will offer as improved services. Furthermore, it is
planned to automate the operational interface between the MLSP and Mahalyas, as part of the design
and implementation of a new MIS system. The activities under the project will be broken down into
O
the following three components:
Component 1: Design, pilot, and evaluate the ISWO concept, develop a reform roadmap ($350,000) -
RE
This component will focus on developing and piloting (on the basis of up to 2 regional offices) a
concept of Integrated Single Window Office (ISWO) for the service provision to the population by
the MLSP, with needs assessment and design of a business process and a software to automate the
processes of identification, enrollment, decision, grievances, and monitoring of social assistance and
labor programs. Specific activities will include:
1. Assessment of current business processes of service provision at all levels, from local self-
government to the national level, with implications specifically for operation of the regional offices.
2. Development of proposals for optimization of roles, functions, and business processes (including
options for strengthened payment procedures and integration with the MOF Treasury systems);
development of standards in the social assistance and employment services provision to eligible
groups of population.
3. Inventory of the existing software applications and databases supporting operation of the regional
offices and developed by the MLSP at different times and for different purposes.
4. Assessment of capacity of the existing software application packages to meet the needs of various
social and employment programs, with the view of operational consolidation.
5. Recommendations for integration of the existing software packages and corresponding databases
under a framework of the ISWO, with the step by step guidance on implementation of the future
centralized system of Registry of social beneficiaries
6. Design and implementation of a software application to operate at the regional level as a building
block for the future consolidated MIS. The new software will support the full array of services
provided by the regional MLSP offices.
7. Analysis and design of specialized software applications supporting operation of Mahalyas.
Provision of tablet computers to facilitate the work of MLSP inspectors working with Mahalyas.
8. High level design of the future Management Information System (MIS) and the Registry of
beneficiaries.
o       9. Develop procedures for monitoring of the pilot processes and evaluation of the results.
10. Preparations for the pilot, including design of the operational documents (the Operations Manual,
public awareness materials, guidelines for monitoring and verification)
11. Pilot the new ISWO concept and organize activities related to pilot evaluation.
12. Finalize operational procedures and standards; produce a final package of materials as a
Roadmap for implementation of the national rollout.
13. Draft a safeguards framework and a manual to support capacity building for the future rollout
activities to be implemented as part of the operation that will follow implementation of this grant.
In addition to national and international consulting services, this component will finance limited
procurement of computer hardware and office equipment, including tablet computers, as well as
development of specialized software applications and a database, provision of necessary connectivity
and power supply as may be needed, minor office upgrade costs, and operating expenses. The office
upgrades may include any renovations - such as electricity, plumbing, cosmetic upgrades (walls
restoration and painting, windows and doors repairs, etc) - that do not involve demolitions or
changing structural integrity of the buildings otherwise, and that do not trigger safeguards polices, as


﻿per further consultations with the safeguards team on the basis of the renovations plan to be produced
by the Ministry.
O
U       Component 2: Strengthen capacity to improve service delivery ($50,000) - RE
This component will focus on important activities complementary to the Component 1:
1. Assess the HR development needs for MLSP and local governments.
2. Design customized training programs for the staff at the different levels of the pilot
implementation:
a. At the level of the district offices, training for MLSP officers in client management, case
management, specifics of various programs, uses of the new software application, and the computer
literacy
b. At the local government level, training on new mode of services provided by MLSP, including
case management, etc.
c. At MLSP level, training on the principles of effective management, planning, and budgeting for
the social assistance and employment programs
3. Delivery of the workshops in the pilot areas
4. Define training needs and curriculum for the future stages of the reform, as preparations to the
planned IDA operation
The above activities will be complemented by a campaign of raising awareness among the staff about
benefits of the anticipated changes and sensitizing them to the new operational mode. This is to
ensure a broad buy-in of the reforms by the staff of the regional offices.
This component will finance national and international consultancies, as well as training and
workshop activities, including associated operating costs.
Component 3: Project management ($50,000) - RE
This component will finance establishment and operation of a PIU within MLSP, including the
management and fiduciary team of national consultants (composed of, as to be further determined,
financial management, procurement, office management, project monitoring specialists), and the
costs of audit, minor office upgrade costs (see defitnition above) and operating expenses, as well as
various short term national and international consultancies.
Component 4: Bank supervision and implementation support component ($100,000) - BE
This component will finance staff and consultants time, travel, and operating expenses for
implementation support as well as design and implementation of a study tour program and activities
related to pilot evaluation. Given important cross-sectoral policy linkages and operational synergies,
we will closely coordinate within the SPL team as well as with the social development (GP SURR)
team.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Main office of the Ministry in Tashkent as well as two pilot sites - to be deterimind - presumably one
in the rural setting and another in more urban environment.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
As part of building fiduciary capacity of the Ministry, the support will be extended to raise awareness
of the associated safeguards issues (both social and environmental) and conduct preparation activities


﻿for the proposed forthcoming operation, subsequent to implementation of this grant, including in
safeguards analysis, framework, and manual.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Arcadii Capcelea (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies             Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/   No
BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No
Forests OP/BP 4.36             No
Pest Management OP 4.09        No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  No
BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10  No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  No
4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No
Projects on International      No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
O
IV. APPROVALS
Team Leader(s):       Name: Oleksiy A. Sluchynskyy
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                      Date: 06-May-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Penelope Jane Aske Williams (PMGR)     Date: 07-May-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.


