                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC15594

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-May-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             World                           Project ID:      P157752
                            Project Name:   Enhancing Coherence and Integration of Economic and Social Statistics in
                                            Support of the Implementation of 2008 SNA
                            Team Leader(s): Maurice Nsabimana
                            Estimated Date 25-May-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       DECDG                           Lending          IPF
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           General public administration sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):            Economic statistics, modeling and forecasting (40%), Other public sector
                                                 governance (30%), Managing for development results (30%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.912                          Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Program to Support Statistical Capacity Building in ECA                                      0.912
                            Environment       C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           In line with the Bank policy and strategy to identify the key areas in which support can best assist a
                           country in achieving sustainable development and eliminating extreme poverty, the project aims to
                           help countries to improve their capacity to produce consistent and coherent socio-economic statistics
                           and ultimately to properly implement the 2008 SNA across the 12 EECCA countries and Mongolia,
                           in order to advance the data foundation for measuring sustainable development, and to support
                           evidence based policymaking and effective monitoring. Specific objectives include:
                           ➢❨¢ Further development and enhancement of national plans for the implementation of the 2008
                           SNA and supporting statistics. Improved availability and quality of statistics in priority areas
                           identified in the regional and national implementation plans;
                           ➢❨¢ Improvement of price statistics for inflation measurement and for compiling national
                           accounts aggregates at constant prices;
                           ➢❨¢ Improvement of statistical business registers, in particular concerning the quality and the
                           coverage of national statistical business registers;
                           ➢❨¢ Improvement of statistics on the informal sector and remittances through extended use of
                           household surveys, with the final aim to improve the coverage and exhaustiveness of national
                           accounts statistics.
                           C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The proposed ECASTAT project will build on the activities and progress achieved so far in the work
                           to support implementation of 2008 SNA and supporting economic statistics in the EECCA region.

                           The project will have the following four key activities, from 2017 to 2020:
                           1.       Participation of experts focusing on underrepresented EECCA countries in the international
                           statistical Expert Group meetings in Geneva;
                           2.       Organization of regional workshops for experts from the EECCA countries;
                           3.       Development of statistical methods/tools for integrating migration in household surveys;
                           4.       Development of training materials.

                           The project activities will involve participation of experts particularly from underrepresented
                           EECCA countries in the regular biennial Expert Group meetings that UNECE are organizing in
                           cooperation with other international organizations. This includes the Expert Groups on national
                           accounts, consumer price indices and business registers. The Expert Groups discuss a wide range of
                           methodological issues in the respective areas with focus on practical implementation of international
                           standards and recommendations and sharing of best practices.

                           The project will build on existing UNECE programs to support the implementation of
                           2008 SNA and supporting statistics in the region, as well as the global assessments of national
                           statistical systems. It will draw on established partnerships with national and international statistical
                           agencies involved in statistical capacity building activities in the region, and in particular, depending
                           on the modules, the World Bank (WB), UNESCAP, IMF, Eurostat, OECD, EFTA, ILO, ROSSTAT,
                           CIS-STAT and other relevant multilateral and bilateral partner organizations.

                           Thus the project will avoid overlap and duplications and build on synergies with existing and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           planned capacity building activities in the EECCA region. Coordination will be ensured through the
                           UNECE Steering Group on National Accounts. To ensure the effective implementation of the
                           project, activities will encourage the exchange of national good practices, undertake benchmark
                           studies and stimulate the establishment of an active network of experts from the EECCA region.

                           All activities, documentation and training material will be provided in Russian and English.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       No            The project is proposed to be as classified as
Public Disclosure Copy




                           BP 4.01                                          Category C, given no environmental impacts are
                                                                            expected since the project consists of training
                                                                            activities that do not have potential negative
                                                                            environmental impact/risk associated issues.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No            The project does not contemplate rehabilitation
                                                                            or new works in areas of natural habitats or that
                                                                            would significantly impact natural habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No            The project will not finance activities in forests
                                                                            or that could potentially affect forest resources
                                                                            or their management.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09            No            The project does not involve purchase or use of
                                                                            pesticides or finance any activities that could
                                                                            lead to changes in pesticide use or pest
                                                                            management practices.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No            The project does not contemplate rehabilitation
                           BP 4.11                                          or new works that could potentially affect
                                                                            physical cultural resources.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No            The project will strengthen the statistical
                                                                            capacity of government institutions, and as such
                                                                            will not finance any activities affecting areas
                                                                            where indigenous communities are present or to
                                                                            which they have a collective attachment.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No            The project will strengthen the statistical
                           4.12                                             capacity of government institutions and as such
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            will not finance any activities that might lead to
                                                                            land acquisition, resettlement, or the restriction
                                                                            of access to natural resources.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No            The project will neither support the construction
                                                                            or rehabilitation of dams nor will it support
                                                                            other investments which rely on services of
                                                                            existing dams.
                           Projects on International          No            The project will not finance activities involving
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                             the use or potential pollution of international
                                                                            waterways.
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No              The project will not finance activities in
                           7.60                                             disputed areas as defined in the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                             Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):             Name: Maurice Nsabimana
                           Approved By:
                         Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                                           Date: 18-May-2016
                         Practice Manager/                Name: Grant James Cameron (PMGR)                                   Date: 23-May-2016
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                         InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                         affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
