                             INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               CONCEPT STAGE
.




                                                                                    Report No.:ISDSC21902
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-May-2017
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed 31-May-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    A. Basic Project Data
    Country:                      Uzbekistan                  Project ID:              P154808
    Project Name:                 Jobs and Skills for the Modern Economy (P154808)
    Task Team Leader(s):          Afrah Alawi Al-Ahmadi,Christopher David Miller
    Estimated Appraisal           10-Oct-2017                 Estimated Board          14-Dec-2017
    Date:                                                     Date:
    Managing Unit:                GSP03                       Financing                Investment Project
                                                              Instrument:              Financing
    Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:       100.00                         Total Bank Financing: 100.00
    Financing Gap:            0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                 Amount
      International Development Association (IDA)                                                        100.00
      Total                                                                                              100.00
    Environmental Category:       B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project? No

    B. Project Objectives
    The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to improve the employment outcomes among job-
    seekers; and enhance the capacity of micro, small and medium private enterprises to create jobs.

    More specifically:
    (i) Employment outcomes among job-seekers will be improved as evidenced by greater workers mobility
    from a lower to higher wage jobs, job security as evidenced by formal employment contracts, and greater
    duration in jobs following skills upgrading;
    (ii) New jobs will be created by MSMEs that are supported by the project as they expand their production,
    and grow within the spectrum of MSMEs sizes.
    C. Project Description
    The proposed project will facilitate growth in new job creation among MSMEs as well as improvement in
    quality of job outcomes through labor market intermediation and skills upgrading. These will be achieved
    through (i) enhancing the effectiveness of labor market intermediation, including for hard-to-reach groups,
    while providing access to and enhancing the effectiveness of skills training that is responsive to private
    sector labor demand; and (ii) improving access to financial and non-financial services by MSMEs, especially

                                               Page 1 of 4
those with the potential for creating more and better jobs, and therefore contribute to higher growth and
productivity. The project design will include features that ensure gender equity in accessing project-
supported labor market opportunities. An incentive structure will be developed to encourage PFIs and
training providers to target and reach female-owned MSMEs and female job-seekers. Additionally, the
project’s results indicators include gender disaggregated data which will be monitored regularly to inform
project design adjustments, if needed, to ensure women are provided equal opportunities.

The project will include the following three components:
Component 1: Labor market intermediation and skills upgrading. The component aims to increase labor
productivity by improving job matching and upgrading skills to respond to employers’ demands.
Component 2: Financial and non-financial services for MSMEs. The component aims at addressing key
constraints faced by the MSME sector in their access to financial and non-financial services.
Component 3: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation. A Project Management Unit (PMU)
will be established and financed within MoL to coordinate technical aspects and manage the fiduciary
aspects of the project, support implementation, monitor progress, and prepare and submit timely reports.
D. Project location and Salient physical characteristics               relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
A social screening and safeguard analysis has not been conducted. From the information available,
Component 3 of the project which will entail rehabilitation of government buildings (Employment Centers)
throughout Uzbekistan may involve some civil works and, possibly, land acquisition. A proper screening
would need to be conducted to ascertain the extent of the civil works and what specific policies would be
triggered. The Credit Line under the Component 2 will cover the whole country. The exact locations will be
defined at the time of applications by the MSME’s and screening.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Client, the Ministry of Labor, has some experience in implementing the World Bank projects. However,
social screening and safeguard analysis have not been conducted to ascertain the borrower’s institutional
capacity for safeguard policies. The Team will assess Borrower Capacity during project preparation to
determine appropriate capacity building needs. Where this institutional capacity is found to be weak, a range
of measures could be put in place to enhance capacity. This could include hiring a dedicated safeguards
consultant. The World Bank specialists will conduct on-the-job training to the Client and relevant
consultants during the project preparation and implementation. A proper screening would need to be
conducted.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the                   Team
 Rustam Arstanov( GEN03 )
 Zainab Usman( GSU03 )
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies                        Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes                  The project would not entail any significant
                                                         environmental impacts. Impacts under the
                                                         Component 1 will include those related to minor
                                                         construction and rehabilitation. Credits to SMEs
                                                         under the Component 2 will not be provided to
                                                         activities that might be assigned safeguards
                                                         Category A. Therefore, the Project was assigned a
                                                         Safeguards Category “B”. Component 1 of the
                                                         project may include rehabilitation works at

                                           Page 2 of 4
                                                    Employment Centers (ECs) which might have
                                                    construction related minor adverse impacts on
                                                    environment and people. Such impacts include dust,
                                                    noise, vibration, occupational health and safety
                                                    risks, asbestos related health impacts and other.
                                                    Such risks are easily manageable. The construction
                                                    contractor will have to implement mitigation
                                                    measures described in the site-specific EMPs.
                                                    Component 2 contains a credit line for small and
                                                    medium enterprises (MSMEs). The environmental
                                                    impacts are dependent on the type of MSME
                                                    activities and cannot be determined at the moment.
                                                    The screening process will have to be established in
                                                    order to define environmental category of the loans
                                                    and the type of required environmental assessment.
                                                    No Category "A" activities or activities included in
                                                    the IFC exclusion list will be funded. Also, the
                                                    activities that have a potential of triggering any
                                                    safeguard policy that is not triggered before the
                                                    project Appraisal by the Bank will also be
                                                    excluded. The likely safeguards instrument to be
                                                    prepared by Appraisal would be an Environmental
                                                    and Social Management Framework because the
                                                    location of the Employment Centers that will be
                                                    refurbished under the project will not be known by
                                                    Appraisal. In addition, it is likely that the list of
                                                    enterprises (and their activities) that will receive
                                                    credit support under the Component 2 will be
                                                    defined only during the project implementation.
                                                    The ESMF will contain an environmental screening
                                                    procedure for the credit line.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No            No activities that have a potential to impact natural
                                                    habitats will be financed under the project.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No            No activities related to forestry or forests will be
                                                    financed.
Pest Management OP 4.09               No            Some activities under the credit line may be in
                                                    agribusiness, but expected to be related to off-farm
                                                    activities (e.g. value chain) without involvement of
                                                    use of pesticides, as well as their purchase,
                                                    transportation and disposal.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No           The project will not entail significant civil works.
                                                    Although Component 3 will entail rehabilitation of
                                                    government buildings which may involve some
                                                    civil works and construction. At this point, it does
                                                    not appear that these rehabilitation activities will
                                                    require significant land acquisition and thus affect
                                                    physical cultural resources. This will however be
                                                    ascertained during project preparation.


                                      Page 3 of 4
    Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                        No                The reasons that OP/BP 4.11 above will not be
                                                                           triggered apply. It does not seem that the
                                                                           rehabilitation activities will require significant land
                                                                           acquisition and thus affect physical cultural
                                                                           resources. This will however be ascertained during
                                                                           project preparation.
    Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                  Yes               Component 3 of the project will entail rehabilitation
                                                                           of government buildings which may involve some
                                                                           civil works and construction (and possibly land
                                                                           acquisition). An RPF may need to be prepared even
                                                                           though the sites for these potential land acquisitions
                                                                           will not be known by Appraisal.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                            No                The project activities will neither affect existing or
                                                                           future dams nor will they be dependent on existing
                                                                           or future dams.
    Projects on International Waterways                  No                The project will not finance any activities
    OP/BP 7.50                                                             implemented at the International Waterways.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                No                The project will not finance any activities
                                                                           implemented at the International Waterways.
.




III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
.




    A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS:
        01-Oct-2017
    B. Time frame for launching and completing the         safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
       The specific      studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage       ISDS.
        The ESMF is to be cleared by the Bank, disclosed and consulted upon by Oct 1st, 2017. Resettlement
    Policy Framework (RPF) to be prepared by client, cleared by the Bank, disclosed and consulted upon by the
    Appraisal stage.


V. Approval
    Task Team Leader(s):                      Name: Afrah Alawi Al-Ahmadi,Christopher David Miller
    Approved By:
    Safeguards Advisor:                       Name: Nina Chee (SA)                               Date: 31-May-2017
    Practice Manager/Manager:                 Name: Andrew D. Mason (PMGR)                       Date: 31-May-2017


    1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
    InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
    persons.




                                                         Page 4 of 4
