                                  The World Bank
                                  Building Statistical Capacities in the Ministry of Education




                                                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                    Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                 Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Nov-2017 | Report No: ISDSC23046




                         Nov 30, 2017                                                                                              Page 1 of 6
                                  The World Bank
                                  Building Statistical Capacities in the Ministry of Education



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                       Project Name                    Environmental Category   Country
                                                            Building Statistical
                           P165120                          Capacities in the Ministry      C - Not Required         Guatemala
                                                            of Education
                           Team Leader(s)                   Estimated Date of Approval      Managing Unit            Financing Instrument
                                                                                                                     Investment Project
                           Enrique O. Alasino Massetti                                      GED04
                                                                                                                     Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Financing (in USD Million)

                           SUMMARY             -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                    0.35
                           Total Financing                                                                                                       0.35
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                         0.00


                           DETAILS  -NewFin2




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of this Project is to strengthen the capacity of MINEDUC to collect, manage, analyze and
                           use high-quality statistical information to design, implement and evaluate evidence-based interventions to address key
                           sector challenges.

                           C. Project Description
                                 1. Description

                           The proposed Project will be financed through a Recipient Executed Grant from the Trust Fund for
                           Statistical Capacity Building (TFSCB) over a period of eighteen months. The total Project amount is
                           US$450,000.

                           The Project will be divided in three components:

                                 1. Enhancing SIRE;
                                 2. Boosting SIRE to predict students at risk of dropping out;

                         Nov 30, 2017                                                                                                       Page 2 of 6
                                  The World Bank
                                  Building Statistical Capacities in the Ministry of Education




                                 3. Providing support for Project management.

                           Component 1. Enhancing SIRE – Requested amount: US$291,000.

                           The objective of this component is to strengthen SIRE, which is led by MINEDUC’s Planning Directorate
                           (Dirección de Planificación Educativa, DIPLAN). To this end, under this Component the Project will support:

                           Subcomponent 1.1. Detailed diagnosis of current data management and utilization practices, including a
                           benchmarking analysis with comparable countries. In particular, this component will finance the
                           implementation of the SABER conceptual background and operational tools to assess the Education
                           Management and Information System (henceforth, SABER- EMIS tool);

                           Subcomponent 1.2. Training MINEDUC technical staff on methods for processing and analyzing statistical
                           data included in SIRE. This subcomponent will finance training on processing and analyzing school- and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           student-level data (including learning assessment results). The training program will be comprised of
                           theoretical and practical modules, including: i) the use of BusinessObjects software, ii) statistical software
                           (e.g., SPSS, Stata, Big Data tools, etc.), and iii) econometric methods. The program will also include training
                           on sub-group analysis of particular interest to MINEDUC, including gender, ethnic group, and area of
                           residence. Training will be open to staff within the Directorate of Evaluation and Educational Research
                           (Dirección General de Evaluación e Investigación Educativa, DIGEDUCA) and DIPLAN, among others. This
                           subcomponent will also finance technical assistance to DIPLAN on the use of statistical information for
                           strategic planning, budgeting and quality assurance.

                           Subcomponent 1.3. Updating MINEDUC’s data analysis and management tools. In particular, this
                           subcomponent will finance: i) desktop computers, laptops and/or tablets for technical staff in charge of data
                           analysis to manage and deliver the information faster and better; and ii) acquiring licenses for statistical data
                           processing software (i.e., Stata). The acquisition of and installing the BusinessObjects software updates will
                           be financed by MINEDUC (US$100,000).

                           Subcomponent 1.4. Developing a “Good Practices in Statistical Information Management Manual” that
                           includes policies, strategies and mechanisms for managing, processing, analyzing and using statistical data,
                           following the Recommendation of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
                           (OECD) Council on Good Statistical Practice (OECD 2015) and the Code of Good Practices in Statistics for Latin
                           America and the Caribbean (Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean 2011).

                           Component 2. Boosting SIRE to predict students at risk of dropping out – Requested amount: US$98,000.

                           This Component will finance activities related to strengthening and enrichening SIRE to increase its
                           usefulness for informing evidence-based decision-making. In particular, related activities include: (i)
                           designing new questionnaires; (ii) programming new data entry mechanisms; (iii) expanding, disaggregating
                           and fine-tuning information fields; (iv) integrating the system with other systems (within MINEDUC or other
                           sectors); (v) implementing data quality assurance strategies, among others. Ethnic disaggregated data and
                           socio-cultural pertinent questionnaires will be integral parts of these activities to reflect Indigenous Peoples’

                         Nov 30, 2017                                                                                                Page 3 of 6
                                  The World Bank
                                  Building Statistical Capacities in the Ministry of Education




                           situation and inform education public policies. This subcomponent will also finance technical assistance for
                           designing a strategic plan for cost-effective information-based interventions aimed at reducing school
                           dropout based on international experience. Activities under this component will build on the results of the
                           pilot of the Early Warning System.

                           Component 3. Providing support for Project management – Requested amount: US$61,000.

                           This Component will finance Project management costs, such as hiring support staff (procurement and
                           financial management), a national consultant to provide technical assistance for overall project
                           management, operating costs such as equipment and office supplies, and will finance the required audit of
                           Grant implementation activities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          The project will be implemented nationwide, providing an opportunity to benefit Indigenous Peoples with
                          more targeted educational public policies, addressing the root causes of high drop-out rates amongst this
                          population. Indigenous Peoples in Guatemala are more likely to have fewer years of schooling than non-
                          indigenous population. Unfortunately, lack of disaggregated data in education may turn their situation
                          invisible and may hinder the implementation of much needed public policies. Guatemala has an impressive
                          cultural, ethnic and linguistic diversity. There are 122 municipalities with more than 80% of the population
                          identifying itself as indigenous. The departments with the highest rate of indigenous populations are located
                          to the West of the country: Totonicapán, Sololá, Quetzaltenango, Quiché, Huehuetenango, Alta Verapaz y
                          Chimaltenango.



                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          Despite limitations on the collection and use of disaggregated data to feed into the policy-making process,
                          MINEDUC has satisfactory track record of working with the World Bank in education.



                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Gunars H. Platais, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
                          Erika Piber, Social Safeguards Specialist
                          Dianna M. Pizarro, Social Safeguards Specialist



                         Nov 30, 2017                                                                                             Page 4 of 6
                                  The World Bank
                                  Building Statistical Capacities in the Ministry of Education




                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project                 Triggered?             Explanation (Optional)
                                                                                                   This policy is not triggered given that none
                                                                                                   of the proposed activities will have a
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                   No
                                                                                                   physical footprint with adverse
                                                                                                   environmental impacts.
                                                                                                   This policy is not triggered given that none
                                                                                                   of the proposed activities will have a
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                           No
                                                                                                   physical footprint with adverse
                                                                                                   environmental impacts on natural habitats.
                                                                                                   This policy is not triggered given that none
                                                                                                   of the proposed activities will have a
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                    No
                                                                                                   physical footprint and will not involve
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                   forests.
                                                                                                   This policy is not triggered given that
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                               No                 project activities will not involve the
                                                                                                   purchase or use of pesticides.
                                                                                                   This policy is not triggered given that none
                                                                                                   of the proposed activities include a physical
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                No
                                                                                                   footprint or soil removal that may affect
                                                                                                   physical cultural resources.
                                                                                                   As required for Bank TA, this grant will
                                                                                                   ensure the effective inclusion of Indigenous
                                                                                                   people's concerns and aspirations and
                                                                                                   processes outlined in OP/BP 4.10 within the
                                                                                                   ToRs for the support provided (i.e., profiles,
                                                                                                   activities and products to guide information
                                                                                                   collection and analysis).

                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                         Yes                The team will include a specialist in
                                                                                                   statistics with knowledge and experience in
                                                                                                   Indigenous Peoples’ statistics to ensure
                                                                                                   educational data disaggregation based on
                                                                                                   ethnicity and socio-cultural pertinence of
                                                                                                   new questionnaires. Within Component 1,
                                                                                                   the specialist will also support the
                                                                                                   development of training on sub-group
                                                                                                   analysis focused on Indigenous Peoples.
                                                                                                   This policy is not triggered given that
                                                                                                   project activities will not involve the
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                   No                 involuntary taking of land or the
                                                                                                   involuntary restriction of access to legally
                                                                                                   designated parks and protected areas.
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                             No                 This policy is not triggered given that the


                         Nov 30, 2017                                                                                                     Page 5 of 6
                                   The World Bank
                                   Building Statistical Capacities in the Ministry of Education



                                                                                                                      project will not support the construction or
                                                                                                                      rehabilitation of dams nor will support
                                                                                                                      other investments which rely on the
                                                                                                                      services of existing dams.
                                                                                                                      This policy is not triggered as project
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50                No                            activities will not be implemented in any
                                                                                                                      international waterways.
                                                                                                                      This policy is not triggered because the
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                         No                            proposed project will not affect disputed
                                                                                                                      areas as defined under the policy.


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? No


                              APPROVALS

                              Team Leader(s):                                  Enrique O. Alasino Massetti

                              Approved By

                              Safeguards Advisor:                             Noreen Beg                                        18-Oct-2017

                              Practice Manager/Manager:                       Yves Jantzem                                      18-Oct-2017


                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.




                         Nov 30, 2017                                                                                                                              Page 6 of 6
