INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
0                                               Report No.: ISDSCI 1969
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:          Moldova                    Project ID:   P154541
Project Name:     Strengthening capacity - EMIS
Team Leader(s): Anna Olefir
Estimated Date    31-Jul-15
of Approval:
Managing Unit:    GEDO3                      Lending       Lending Instrument
Instrument:
Sector(s):        Secondary education (100%)
Theme(s):         Economic statistics, modeling and forecasting (30%), Education for all (40%),
Managing for development results (20%), Social Inclusion (10%)
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:   0.37                 Total Bank Financing: 0.00
Financing Gap:        0.00
Financing Source                                                           Amount
Borrower                                                                       0.00
-          Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building                                   0.37
Total                                                                          0.37
Environment       C - Not Required
Category:
B. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen the quality, openness and use of
education statistics to better inform the ongoing education reforms in Moldova.
C. Project Description
The Government recognizes the importance of education and has, since 2011, been implementing an
ambitious efficiency and quality enhancing reform program. Ongoing consolidation of school
network requires proper statistical information to support and fine-tune reform measures so that to
ensure that students directly affected by the reform are adequately accommodated in the 'receiving'
schools. In 2013 the Ministry of Education with the support of the Bank developed the EMIS. The
grant will support:
1. Strengthening statistical and analytical capacity and information flows of the MoE, the Center for
Information and Communication Technologies in Education of the MoE, subnational (rayon)
authorities and schools to make use of the new EMIS through: (i) assessment of their statistical


﻿capacity and information flows; and addressing identified gaps with (ii) training sessions on data
collection, quality controls, information flows and analysis of the data (to education and IT personal
in line with the division of responsibilities over EMIS system); and (iii) revision of the statistical
operations and procedures, regulatory and managerial framework for educational indicators;
O
U       2. Improving quality and reliability of data collected through EMIS by: (i) developing and
implementing data validation mechanisms including module integrating/validating EMIS data with
the National Population registry; (ii) introducing digital signatures; and (iii) elaborating additional
present reports in EMIS;
3. Opening data in education sector in an user-friendly format through: (i) assessment of education
data needs of the stakeholders, (ii) catalogization of the identified data categories that need to be
collected, compiled in user-friendly manner, opened and regularly updated; (iii) development of the
open data webpages for dissemination and interactive visualization of educational data; and (iv) PR
campaign informing stakeholders on the education sector open data availability encouraging citizens
oversight of the education reforms.
The TF will support strengthening statistical capacity in relation to both (i) indicators related to
education itself (e.g. on access, participation and progressions such as primary school enrollment,
schools performance with comparative performance outcomes on regional and country level etc.) and
(ii) indicators and characteristics of the education system (such as number of teaching and non-
teaching staff, number of schools, school-size, student-teacher ratios etc.). Both types of indicators
will be released through open data web-pages of the MoE.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
0
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Environmental Assessment OP/   No
BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No
Forests OP/BP 4.36             No
Pest Management OP 4.09        No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  No
BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10  No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  No
4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No


﻿Projects on International           No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
U         7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
IV. APPROVALS
Team Leader(s):           Name: Anna Olefir
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:       Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                             Date: 13-Apr-2015
Practice Manager/         Name: Mario Cristian Aedo Inostroza (PMGR)           Date: 13-Apr-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.
0


