                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC12757

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Jun-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Jun-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Cameroon                         Project ID:      P152755
                            Project Name:      Electricity Transmission and Reform Project (P152755)
                            Task Team          Stephan Claude Frederic Garnier,Jan Friedrich Kappen
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          18-Jul-2016                      Estimated        31-Oct-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEE07                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (80%), General energy sector
                                               (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    325.00                     Total Bank Financing:        325.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        325.00
                              Total                                                                        325.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objectives is to improve the capacity, efficiency and stability of Cameroon's
                           national electricity transmission network.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project development objectives is to improve the capacity, efficiency and stability of Cameroon's
                           national electricity transmission network. The proposed project will finance priority investments to
                         upgrade and extend the national transmission networks and strengthen the reliability of power supply
                         in the interconnected systems. It will also support the sustainable institutional setup to manage and
                         operate the existing and new transmission asset. Lastly, by supporting the development of a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         hydropower project on the Sanaga River, it will support the further development of the sector and
                         ensure that the additional transmission capacity will in the future be utilized for cheap and clean
                         power.

                         The proposed project's main components, to be discussed with the government, are the following: (1)
                         establishment and operationalization of the national Transmission System Operator (TSO); (2)
                         strengthening of the national transmission grid; (3) technical support for competitive bidding for a
                         selected cost-efficient large-scale hydropower site; and (4) project management support and capacity
                         building.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Under component 2, the proposed project will finance a subset of the national electricity transmission
                         investment program (2016-2021), which has four main objectives: (i) Strengthening of Douala's
                         Transmission System; (ii) Strengthening of Yaoundé's Transmission System; (iii) Strengthening
                         the three National Transmission Networks (RIS, RIE and RIN) and Interconnections; and (iv) a
                         "Smart Grid" Investment Package.

                         The project also aims, under component 3, at financing studies for potential hydropower dam project.

                         The list of investments to be financed by the proposed Project is still indicative and the exact location
                         of the transmission lines and substations will not be known at the time of appraisal. The specific
                         investment locations are not yet known. However, transmission lines may affect environmental
                         sensitive areas such as wetlands, forests, national parks, and in addition affect an area broader than
                         the sites subject to physical works in terms of land acquisition and its likely impacts that include
                         displacement and loss of livelihoods.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The two main institutions with responsibility for the environment and social safeguards policy are the
                         Ministry in charge of Environment and the Ministry in charge of Land Registration of the Republic
                         of Cameroon. The environmental law of 1996 and its implementation decrees require that
                         environmental assessments be conducted for all large energy and other infrastructure projects which
                         have to be approved by the Ministry in charge of Environment through a Certificate of Conformity.
                         The capacity of all governmental agencies of implementing environmental and social regulation in a
                         sustainable way and supervising the enforcement of environmental management plans can be
                         strengthened.

                         There is a risk of delays due to inadequate planning and implementation of compensation and
                         resettlement measures under Cameroonian law. In order to minimize the risk of delays, the team has
                         agreed with the GoC to adopt a number of measures to ensure the forward-looking and proactive
                         management of resettlement and compensation issues. The proactive measures include the
                         streamlining and earliest possible initiation of processes related to the request for the DUP,
                         establishment of the evaluation committees (CCE) which will identify the project affected persons
                         and a legal covenant to secure sufficient financial resources for compensation payments (condition of
                         effectiveness). While much of this process is governed by Cameroonian law, the Bank will support
                         the GoC to prepare a CPR and methodological note for the CCE that will clearly outline the process
                           and standards to be used to determine eligibility and compensation amounts. It is expected that this
                           unified approach will reduce the amount of time required to complete the process.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (GEN07)
                           Kristyna Bishop (GSU01)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         Yes            Transmission lines may affect environmental
                           OP/BP 4.01                                      sensitive areas such as wetlands, forests, national
                                                                           parks, and in addition affect an area broader than the
                                                                           sites subject to physical works in terms of land
                                                                           acquisition and its likely impacts that include
                                                                           displacement and loss of livelihoods. Therefore the
                                                                           project is categorized A. But, since the specific
                                                                           investments locations will not be known before
                                                                           appraisal, frameworks (ESMF, RPF and IPPF) will
                                                                           be prepared, consulted upon and disclosed in-country
                                                                           and at Infoshop before appraisal and 120 days before
                                                                           Board date.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04      Yes

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36               Yes            Transmission lines may cross forest areas yet to be
                                                                           identified, mainly in the South and East
                                                                           Interconnected Networks areas
                           Pest Management OP 4.09          No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Physical Cultural Resources      TBD            This policy is triggered because of civil works that
                           OP/BP 4.11                                      will induce digging on the future project sites or
                                                                           borrow pits, this policy is triggered and chance find
                                                                           procedure will be inserted in the ESMF then
                                                                           reflected later on in enterprises contracts.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP         TBD            A social assessment is currently underway to
                           4.10                                            determine if there are indigenous peoples in the
                                                                           regions in which the project will be implemented.
                                                                           The results of the social assessment will be used to
                                                                           prepare an IPPF if necessary. The IPPF will include
                                                                           guidance regarding the preparation of IPPs if
                                                                           necessary during project implementation. It will be
                                                                           disclosed in country and on the Bank's Infoshop prior
                                                                           to appraisal per the requirements of the policy.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/     Yes            Negative impacts such as land acquisition,
                           BP 4.12                                         displacement and loss of livelihoods are likely. In
                                                                           order to provide guidance regarding how to minimize
                                                                           these impacts, a RPF is currently being prepared by
                                                                                                                        the Borrower. The RPF will explain the approach
                                                                                                                        under Cameroonian law as well as the Bank's
                                                                                                                        requirements in order to provide a clear orientation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        for the preparation of the RAP(s) and
                                                                                                                        implementation of compensation measures and
                                                                                                                        resettlement plans. The RPF will be disclosed in
                                                                                                                        country and on the Bank's Infoshop prior to appraisal
                                                                                                                        per the requirements of the policy.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   Yes                        Component 3 of the project will finance technical
                                                                                                                        support for competitive bidding for a selected cost-
                                                                                                                        efficient large-scale hydropower site
                                 Projects on International      No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-May-2016
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Launching of safeguard-related studies: March, 2016
                                      Completion of safeguard-related studies: June, 2016
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Stephan Claude Frederic Garnier,Jan Friedrich Kappen
                                 Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)                         Date: 30-Jun-2016
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Sameer Shukla (PMGR)                        Date: 30-Jun-2016
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
