                                  The World Bank
                                  Promoting Financial Inclusion Policies and Regulations in Jordan ( P163719 )




                                                     Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                   Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Apr-2017 | Report No: ISDSC21700




                         Apr 05, 2017                                                                                             Page 1 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Promoting Financial Inclusion Policies and Regulations in Jordan ( P163719 )



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                      Project Name                   Environmental Category        Country
                                                           Promoting Financial
                                                           Inclusion Policies and
                           P163719                                                        C - Not Required              Jordan
                                                           Regulations in Jordan (
                                                           P163719 )
                           Team Leader(s)                  Estimated Date of Approval     Managing Unit                 Lending Instrument
                           Ghada Ahmed Waheed                                                                           Investment Project
                                                           31-May-2017                    GFM05
                           Ismail                                                                                       Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                           PROJECT FINANCING DATA


                          FINANCING


                          FINANCING SOURCES

                            Select all that apply

                           [ ] Counterpart Funding          [ ✔ ] Trust Funds                  [ ] Parallel Financing



                           SUMMARY (USD)

                           Total Project cost                                                                              1,250,000
                           Total Financing                                                                                 1,250,000
                            Trust Funds                                                                                    1,250,000
                           Financing Gap                                                                                           0

                           DETAILS


                           Trust Funds
                           Source                                 Currency                            Amount                        USD Equivalent
                           MENA Transition Fund - IBRD as
                                                                  USD-US Dollars                    1,250,000                            1,250,000
                           Implementing Agency(MNIS)




                         Apr 05, 2017                                                                                                        Page 2 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Promoting Financial Inclusion Policies and Regulations in Jordan ( P163719 )



                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to support the implementation of the National Financial Inclusion Strategy (NFIS)
                           in Jordan.

                           C. Project Description
                           Component I: Operationalizing the Financial Inclusion Implementation Unit at CBJ (US$ 500,000).

                                   The CBJ has established a NFIS Implementation Unit following the establishment of the Financial Inclusion
                                        Steering Committee (FISC) and the Financial Inclusion Technical Committee (FITC). The objective of this
                                        component is to support the implementation of the NFIS through developing a well-functioning NFIS
                                        implementation unit, operationalizing a comprehensive M&E system and improving existing data
                                        infrastructure.
                                       This component comprises of three sub-components:
                                       Sub-component 1.1: Strategically staff, train and build capacity of the unit, in key skills that support the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                        coordination, monitoring and tracking and disseminating all relevant data and progress. Monitoring and
                                        evaluation tools will also be built to identify and track progress of marginalized population groups (often times
                                        women), and T.A will be provided to enable the unit in conducting key strategic research and tracking (both
                                        through supply and demand side data) of financially excluded population groups, particularly excluded women.
                                        This includes delivering relevant policy tools, conducting training seminars and workshops, and organizing
                                        study tours and on the job training.
                                       Sub-component 1.2: An assessment of data gaps will be conducted to identify and develop solutions to build
                                        any required data infrastructure needed to fully design and operationalize the M&E framework. This will
                                        include: (i) T.A in improving the frequency or depth of demand-side data collected, including adding additional
                                        modules to already available surveys building on the experience of the EU-GIZ demand side study of 2017;
                                        (ii) assisting in the development and consolidation of data currently missing; and (iii) adding relevant indicators
                                        or modules to supply-side data templates and supervisory templates collected by various agencies;
                                       Sub-component 1.3: Support the improvement of operating environment of the NFIS implementation unit. The
                                        unit will procure the required equipment and IT, both software and hardware in order to enhancing the data
                                        collection, processing and analysis. The sub-component will cover the hiring of experts to support this
                                        improvement process.
                                       Key outputs envisioned for this component include (i) an operational M&E framework; (ii) the delivery of
                                        multiple trainings and workshops to build capacity; (iii) data collection templates to consolidate financial
                                        inclusion data; (iv) the development of a Secretariat policy toolkit (including an M&E tracker to track the
                                        performance and completion of NFIS activities); and (v) facilitation of M&E reports, implementation reports
                                        and evaluation studies.

                           This component will be conducted in close coordination with GIZ.

                           Component 2: Developing a country-specific program of peer-learning and knowledge sharing (US$400,000).

                                   The project through partnership with AFI, AMF and WB will facilitate full engagement and peer learning among
                                        regulators and policymakers in Jordan by involving them in the broad array of services and offerings, with a
                                        special focus on the policy areas of priority that have been identified by the country based on the Financial
                                        Inclusion Market Diagnostic results. Specifically, this component will finance the following sub-components:



                         Apr 05, 2017                                                                                                             Page 3 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Promoting Financial Inclusion Policies and Regulations in Jordan ( P163719 )




                                        Sub-component 2.1: The Jordanian AFI membership during project duration will be funded under this
                                        component and will engage Jordan in the following member services, which are designed to address the
                                        national objectives of policymakers and regulators and will be modified to also address the national objectives
                                        of Jordan:

                                   Working Groups: These groups of 15-40 member institutions focus on specific policy areas, including: Digital
                                        Financial Services; Consumer Protection and Market Conduct; Financial Inclusion Strategy; Financial Inclusion
                                        Data; and SME Finance. The working groups are chaired by members and have led to important reforms in
                                        many of the countries involved and facilitated the production of policy guidelines and tools that have practical
                                        relevance.
                                       Participation in AFI's Global Policy Forum (GPF): The GPF is regarded as the leading global knowledge exchange
                                        event on financial inclusion policymaking. Most sessions are hosted by members who share ‘on the ground’
                                        experiences.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                       Peer Learning Initiative with Standard Setting Bodies (SSBs): This will provide opportunities for Jordan to
                                        participate in shaping and influencing the global agenda through knowledge sharing with SSBs, which can have
                                        a significant impact on how the global financial system helps or hinders financial inclusion.
                                       Sub-component 2.2: Organizing technical workshops on priority areas that would support Jordan meet its
                                        Maya Declaration commitments. This could potentially include the following topics: Development of Digital
                                        Financial Services; Building and Analyzing Financial Inclusion Data; Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy;
                                        Cross Border Remittances; Anti-Money Laundering/Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT).
                                       Sub-component 2.3: Supporting the sharing of experience learned on regulatory sandboxes[1], accelerators
                                        and hubs from across the World. This sub-component will cover the expenses related to study tours, training
                                        and workshops.

                                   Component 3: Establishing regulatory sandbox to facilitate the development and adoption of innovative
                                        financial technology (US$350,000).

                                   CBJ is seeking to leverage RegTech[1] approaches to enhance the effectiveness of its regulatory and
                                    supervisory arrangements and, ultimately, facilitate the adoption of innovative financial technology.
                                    Supporting the development of eKYC as well would enhance financial inclusion and make it easier particularly
                                    for women due to mobility and other factors[2]. In addition, eKYC will be an effective inclusive tool by building
                                    an up-to-date database which would also include refugees. This will ensure higher integrity standards in the
                                    financial system and will provide the regulator with enhanced monitoring tools. Eventually, it will allow the
                                    implementation of efficient and risk-based AML/CTF.
                                   This component will assist the government in establishing a regulatory sandbox to better understand the
                                    appropriate regulatory environment required to leverage new FinTech without stifling innovation or risking
                                    over-regulation. This component will finance the following subcomponents:
                                   Sub-component 3.1: Establishing the internal processes and procedures for regulatory sandbox. In order to
                                    establish a regulatory sandbox, this sub-component will provide TA to help the authorities define and develop
                                    a high level framework that provide guidelines for eligibility requirements and the process for applying to
                                    conduct a pilot in the sandbox; the process of reviewing and approving the pilot, specifications on how pilots
                                    can be conducted, the process for monitoring and finally the process for evaluating the outcomes.

                                   Sub-component 3.2: Working with banks in Jordan to establish a FinTech lab. This will serve as the technical

                         Apr 05, 2017                                                                                                           Page 4 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Promoting Financial Inclusion Policies and Regulations in Jordan ( P163719 )



                                        infrastructure for piloting and testing new technology approaches including distributed ledger[1], digital Ids
                                        and Application Program Interfaces (API). Capacity building and TA will be provided to design the FinTech
                                        Program, including (but not limited to) guidelines for applicants and programming, process for applications and
                                        conducting pilots, etc. In addition, this component will design and finance core shared infrastructures that will
                                        enable new entrants and developers to pilot FinTech innovations. This may include, for instance, establishing
                                        basic technology infrastructures like Distributive Ledger implementation, common API infrastructure, available
                                        interfaces that can be integrated into government systems, etc. TA will also include developing a platform to
                                        connect innovators with support to design pilots, share core infrastructure and access to required resources.

                                        Sub-component 3.3: Financing small-scale pilots in the area of FinTech. This component will provide TA to
                                        assess and identify particular FinTech (including RegTech) innovations that require specific pilots, and provide
                                        financing for these pilots to understand their effect prior to greater implementation.

                                        [1] Distributed ledger technology (DLT) refers to an emerging approach to recording and sharing data across
Public Disclosure Copy




                                        multiple data stores (or ledgers). DLTs allow for digital data to be replicated, shared and synchronized
                                        geographically across various market players, agencies and institutions.

                                   [1] RegTech" is using technology, particularly information technology, in the context of regulatory monitoring,
                                        reporting and compliance benefiting the finance industry. RegTech companies aim on finding solutions that
                                        address regulatory compliance challenges through technological innovation.

                                        [2] Use of e-KYC, particularly through block chain technologies, can increase access to finance for women by
                                        enabling them to gain access to financial services by establishing economic credentials for adults with limited
                                        identification and negotiating gender bias through digital ID platforms (particularly in areas where physical
                                        presence of male is required).

                           [1] In the information technology world, sandboxes are isolated environments used to test new or untrusted programs.
                           Similarly, regulatory sandboxes are ‘safe spaces’ in which businesses can test innovative products, services, business
                           models and delivery mechanisms without immediately incurring all of the normal regulatory burden of engaging in the
                           activity in question.




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          The project is limited to conducting analysis, providing training and capacity building and different TA activities. The
                          project will not involve any civil works that would cause any impacts on the environment. Therefore, the World Bank
                          Operational Policy 4.01 on Environmental Assessment does not apply. If project activities change, the Bank may
                          reassess the application of OP 4.01 and require further environmental assessment. From the social perspective,
                          significant positive impacts are expected as the TA is designed to strengthen social inclusion of women and
                          disadvantaged groups. At present, no land acquisition will be needed and OP 4.12 will not be triggered, however, if in
                          the future the financing would eventually lead to components that may entail land acquisition, a terms of reference for


                         Apr 05, 2017                                                                                                            Page 5 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Promoting Financial Inclusion Policies and Regulations in Jordan ( P163719 )



                          the preparation of a resettlement instrument might be required.




                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          The CBJ has implemented, and is currently implementing, several other World Bank projects, including microfinance
                          projects with an OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment classification of FI. The CBJ understands well the OP 4.01 EA
                          classification system and has the capacity to discern if there is a need to change EA category.




                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project               Triggered?                   Explanation (Optional)
                                                                                                      The project is limited to conducting
                                                                                                      analysis, providing training and capacity
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                 No                      building and different TA activities. The
                                                                                                      project is assessed to have no
                                                                                                      environmental impacts.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                         No
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                  No
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                             No
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11              No
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                       No
                                                                                                      As long as the project is limited to analysis
                                                                                                      and training, and no land acquisition is
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                 No
                                                                                                      expected to occur, therefore, no major
                                                                                                      social impacts are foreseen.
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                           No
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50      No
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60               No


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? Yes
                           SafeguardAppraisalStage
                           a) Tentative target date for disclosing the appraisal stage ISDS


                         Apr 05, 2017                                                                                                        Page 6 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Promoting Financial Inclusion Policies and Regulations in Jordan ( P163719 )



                           17-Apr-2017
                           b) Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                           The proposed project is classified as a Category C, as it is likely to have no adverse environmental and social impacts.
                           No environmental and social safeguards instrument other than the ISDS need to be prepared for this project



                           APPROVALS

                            Team Leader(s):                                    Ghada Ahmed Waheed Ismail

                           Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safeguards Advisor:                                Nina Chee                                         05-Apr-2017

                            Practice Manager/Manager:                          Jean Denis Pesme                                  05-Apr-2017


                          1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country

                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.




                         Apr 05, 2017                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 7
