INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSAI 175
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Apr-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Cameroon                   Project ID:  P144637
Project Name: Community Development Program Support Project-Phase III (P144637)
Task Team       Amadou Nchare
Leader(s):
Estimated       27-Apr-2015                Estimated    18-May-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSURR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (35%), General education sector
(20%), Health (20%), Water supply (20%), Other soci al services (5%)
Theme(s):       Rural services and infrastructure (35%), Participation and civic engagement
(20%), Municipal governance and institution building (20 %), Decentralization
(20%), Indigenous peoples (5%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
O
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     133.00            Total Bank Financing:   70.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         56.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                70.00
LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                         7.00
Total                                                                     133.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The development objective of phase 3 (PNDP III) is to strengthen local public finance management
Page 1 of 14


﻿and participatory development processes in communes for the delivery of quality and sustainable
social and economic infrastructure.
3. Project Description
The project has three components: (1) Local development support, (2) Decentralization support for
communes, (3) Coordination, management, monitoring and communication.
Component 1: Local development support
o        Under this component, the project will finance two subcomponents: (a) Local development
investments for communes; and (b) Targeted investments for the poorest and vulnerable populations.
Sub-component 1.1: Local development investments for communes
Sub-component 1.1 will support communes in promoting socio-economic growth through the
financing of strategic local development investments, for communes in eight regions (Center, South,
West, North-West, South-West, Littoral, Adamaoua and North). Under this component, funds would
be transferred to communes to finance priority investments identified in their communal
development plans in consultation and participation of communities. Communes would be fully
responsible for the selection and implementation of subprojects in a participatory manner. The
mechanism of transfer of funds into the accounts of communes will be detailed in the project
implementation manual (PIM). Regarding social infrastructures sub-projects will support mainly
health, education, water and sanitation. Sub-projects on economic investments will focus on
productive investments such as the construction/rehabilitation of rural markets, communities' storage
facilities, rural roads, small bridges, culverts, small scale irrigation schemes for grassroots
communities. These social and productive infrastructures are intended to improve the agricultural
production environment and to provide favorable conditions for the diversification of economic
activities through the development of agricultural and non-farm activities by the grassroots
communities.
The aforementioned social and economic investments will empower the poor to take advantage
employment and income and opportunities created by the expansion and diversification of economic
activities and therefore to improve rural livelihood, and to achieve the twin goals of shared prosperity
an extreme poverty reduction in Cameroon.
In addition, the preparation of CDPs for the 31 additional district communes and related activities
will be funded. Multidisciplinary teams comprising representatives of the decentralized units of
technical ministries or Local Service providers (LSP) will assist communes to prepare/update
communal development plans through a participatory approach. The decentralized services of
sectoral ministries will also be closely involved in the planning process to ensure that CDPs and
subprojects comply with national standards and policies and that the quality of investment is
adequate. Communes will also benefit from support to adapt the CDPs to Program Budget in
Cameroon. The municipal council of every commune will be responsible for approving the PCD and
its transmission to the divisional officer for administrative validation. Communes covered will also
receive support to develop their Annual Investment Plans and to update their Medium Term
Expenditure Framework (MTEF).
To ensure equity, the project authorities will allocate funds to communes annually, using criteria
agreed upon beforehand. The annual allocation is determined in accordance with the following
criteria: the demographics of the population, the poverty level of the commune (administrative
account, Household Survey-ECAM-II, 2007), the existing allocation system from the government,
and the size of the commune. The allocation will cover the following: (a) expenditures for CDP
Page 2 of 14


﻿preparation activities: (i) LSP contracts and the travel expenses of multidisciplinary sectoral teams
for the preparation of the CDPs for the new communes and for the updating of CDPs of communes
covered in the two previous phases.; (ii) technical and environmental studies related to the design of
feasibility studies of CDP subprojects; (iii) payment of salaries of selected newly recruited commune
O
support staff on a gradually declining scale; (iv) partial payment for those meetings of the Municipal
Council that examine and approve development plans and subprojects, and for the sessions of the
commune procurement commissions (for a maximum period of two years); (b) expenditures for
implementation of CDP-subprojects for 360 communes, including quality control, (c) the production
of a quarterly information newsletter of the commune; (d) the payment of financial expenses related
to the management ofjoint accounts and; (e) the establishment of a functional mechanism for
operation and maintenance. The commune will be notified of its allocated amount well ahead of time
to allow it to be integrated into its budget. Depending on the allocation for the implementation of the
CDP-subprojects, the commune executive board will prepare an annual investment plan in
accordance with the investment priorities of the commune (including the priority subprojects to be
financed under the project).
The allocation to communes will be released in three steps. The first payment will cover hundred
percent of (a) as described above, while the second and third payments will cover 60 percent and 40
percent of (b), (c) and (d) respectively. The provision of the third payment will be subject to approval
of the implementation progress report of the subprojects. The conditions for providing the grants and
the eligibility criteria for subprojects will be described in detail in the project's implementation
manual.
Funds will henceforth be transferred from the project's Designated Account directly to a commune
account, opened at a local bank for this purpose. This account will be operated jointly by the mayor
of the commune, the "Receveur Municipal", and the PNDP regional coordinator, requiring the
signatures of all three. To ensure adequate financial management and disbursement arrangements are
in place for the communes, a public accountant "receveur municipal" will be designated/recruited to
ensure the adequate bookkeeping of accounts and prepare financial reports needed for the monitoring
of the communes activities. Transfers of the funds to communes will not be made unless and until the
said accountant has been identified and trained. In any case, these transfers of cash will be accounted
for by appropriate supporting documents as to record in the project's accounting books the expenses
incurred and determine the cash balance held in the communes accounts. A close planning of
a        activities will be maintained to ensure that before the project closing date, due attention ought to be
made when transferring the resources to the communes' accounts to identify and finance only
activities that could be completed on due time. The commune's budget summary, the technical and
financial project execution reports, as well as the expenditure statements on the communal joint
account will be posted on the commune's information board and civil society's NGOs involved in
budget transparency and accountability website and made available to the public for transparency
and good governance at the local level. Beneficiary communes would have to contribute 0 percent to
15 percent (depending on the type of micro-project), and deposit these funds in a bank account set up
by the commune specifically for this purpose.
Sub-component 1.2: Targeted investments for the poorest and vulnerable populations
The objective of this sub-component is to strengthen the level and quality of socio-economic
infrastructure in the Far North and East regions. It will increase the access of the rural poor to
essential physical assets and social services and thereby creating environment for economi c and
social activities in these regions. Indeed, these regions are the most affected by poverty with the
highest levels of poverty incidence in Cameroon (INS, 2013). The incidence of chronic poverty
Page 3 of 14


﻿stands at 67 percent in the Far North region and 52.6 percent in the Eastern Region. Compared to
other localities, the people living in rural areas in these regions have very limited access to social
infrastructure in the areas of health, water and sanitation, education and economic infrastructure.
The Far north is also a region affected by the influence of Boko Haram. This situation may lead to
O
Q)        increase of the poverty rates, the displacement of people, food insecurity and lack of access to basic
social services. It was estimated that there were in 2013 about 8,128 Nigerian refugees but only
5,289 are registered by UNHCR. Moreover, the Far North hosts the most popular tourist destinations,
including the Waza National Park.
In the Eastern region, there is a massive influx of refugees from the Central African Republic. The
Eastern region recorded 90,000 refugees in 2014 which are distributed in 205 villages (UNHCR,
2014). This situation may also lead to: (i) environmental issues related to greater pressure on natural
resources and, (ii) conflicts with local people for the use of available resources (water, health,
education, hygiene and sanitation and housing).
Therefore, providing targeted support to these regions meets several strategic objectives such as; (i)
target the poorest; (ii) develop social infrastructure with the objective to provide with minimum basic
services to refugees' camps, contributing to control dissemination of sickness and epidemics such as
malaria, cholera, etc.; (iii) provide economic infrastructure to support agriculture production which is
basic to reduce the impact of food insecurity and; (v) help to support other industries such as tourism,
which are somehow sources of local employment.
Financially, the total amount of the grant will be divided as follows: US$ 20 million for the far North
and 10 million for the Eastern Region. Funding principles will be 100 percent grants of the
investments costs.
The menu of sub-projects will include: (i) social infrastructures mainly on health, education, water
and sanitation areas, etc.; (ii) economic or productive investments such as the construction/
rehabilitation of rural markets, communities' storage facilities, rural roads, small bridges, culverts,
small scale irrigation schemes for grassroots communities, etc...
Investments will be identified in consultation with communities in the communal development plans
(CDPs), and appraised according to technical, financial, social, economic, institutional, and
a         environmental criteria set out in the PIM. Generally, communes/communities will be responsible for
all phases of the subproject, including preparation of the proposal, contracting, implementation, and
operation and maintenance. As needed, local service providers will provide support.
Component 2: decentralization support for communes
This component will seek to facilitate the sustainability of the PNDP's benefits and to strengthen the
capacity of institutions that support the decentralization process. It will also provide assistance for
the implementation of capacity building activities for communes and other stakeholders, such as
Local Service Providers (LSPs), multidisciplinary teams of the sectoral ministries and Technical
Services Providers (TSPs) to enable them to assume an effective role as promoters of local
development. This component has three sub-components: (i) institutional support to the
decentralization process, (ii) capacity building of stakeholders in the decentralization process, and
(iii) local public financial management system.
Sub-component 2.1: Institutional support to the decentralization process
Page 4 of 14


﻿The efficiency of the use of funds provided by the various parties (the State, the private sector, and
the civil society) to local governments, in particular to the rural communes, depends on the
successful implementation of the decentralization process. This component would make it possible
to: (i) further improve the legal and regulatory framework through specific activities and studies and
O
Q)       improve implementation of the project at the communes and inter-communes levels, (ii) help
buildthe case for decentralization (e.g., by using the M&E data on land use planning proactively to
inform the public about the benefits of decentralization), and (iii) improve budget management to
increase performance of local tax collection for a sustained decentralization funding mechanism.
The project will support specific studies and the preparation of draft decrees for the implementation
of decentralization laws mentioned. It will also finance workshops for the finalization of the decrees,
including relevant consultancy services for the workshops and dissemination of the enacted laws and
decrees. It will also help to finance and support: (a) a study on the defmition of a planning
methodology at regional level; (b) a study on the definition of a planning methodology for urban
communities and district communes; (c) study on the establishment of a local public service for
communes; (d) a study on the sustainability strategy of the program benefits. Furthermore, the
subcomponent will finance the acquisition of small cartography equipment and consultant services
required for the mapping of communes. The project will also finance study tours on decentralization
and local development for the National Council of Decentralization and the Mayors' Association. In
addition, this subcomponent will finance and support the: (a) the finalization of the national
decentralization strategy, (b) alignment of municipal budgets with program budget nomenclature, (c)
improvement of civil registration system (document's archiving), (d) inter-municipal coordination
and (e) evaluation of the progress of decentralization process in Cameroon. Finally, the project will
assist the Government to establish technical and financial information systems to improve budgetary
and accounting performance and financial accountability in each participant communes. It will scale
up deployment of the financial management information system f or local authorities (SIM-ba) tested
in the second phase in many communes covered.
In order to pool efforts to support the decentralization process in Cameroon, the project will also put
an emphasis on collaboration and synergy with all the organizations that are responsible for driving
the process of decentralization in Cameroon, including: (i) the National Council for Decentralization
(CND) chaired by the Prime Minister, with a view to improving the legislative and regulatory
framework for decentralization; (ii) the Inter-ministerial Committee for Local Services (CISL),
chaired by the Minister of Territorial Administration and Decentralization, to facilitate the exercise
a        of the powers transferred to local governments; (iii) the National Committee of Local Finance
(CONAFIL), chaired by the Minister of Territorial Administration and Decentralization; (iv) the
Divisional Committees of Local Finance (CODEFIL), chaired by the Divisional Officer (Prefet) for
improving collection and securing local taxes; (v) the technical Monitoring Committees of the
physical and financial execution of the Public Investment established by Decree No. 2013/7987 of 13
September 2013, chaired by the mayor and; (vi) the United Councils and Cities of Cameroon
(Association des Communes et Villes du Cameroun-CVUC) in order to harmonize and systematize
existing experiences of citizen control at the local level.
Sub-component 2.2: Capacity building
Strengthening the operational capacities of communes. The actual responsibilities transferred to
communes by the decentralization law require development of new capacities in order to ensure, on
the one hand, the understanding and adopting their new roles and efficient accomplishment of their
missions, and, on the other hand, the right aptitude and adequate capabilities to assume
responsibilities for the accountable management of local investments. The Project will join forces
with the Training Center of the Municipal Administration "CEFAM (Centre de Formation de
Page 5 of 14


﻿l'Administration Municipale)", and under this component would make it possible to inform and train
the members of the commune councils and committees attached to it, including civil society in how
to efficiently play their role, providing them with the tools necessary for managing the local
governance institutions, for establishing an environment for local economic development and
O
promoting public-private partnerships.
Under this sub-component, several capacity-building activities will be carried out, such as: (i)
financing the development of a manual on the local economy, (ii) strengthening communal project
ownership, (iii) promotion of nationwide competitions for local governments on best practices on
CDPs and on enhancing good governance and transparency, (iv) acq uisition of computer equipment
for communes that did not benefited from these facilities in the second phase, (v) building capacity
of the communal council in monitoring environmental and social impact of subprojects and, (vi)
enhancing social accountability and civil society engagement, (vii) updating and dissemination of
standard technical designs for constructing basic socio-economic infrastructure, (viii) training of the
stakeholders on topics related to the local economy, (ix) promotion of inter-communal and
decentralized cooperation and, (x) defining and supporting the communes in the implementation of a
sustainable mechanism of Maintenance and management of infrastructures
To ensure that the investments financed are well maintained for lasting and sustainable results, this
subcomponent will support capacity building of communes to sustain the project's benefits through
the development and implementation of an operation and maintenance (O&M) plans of socio-
economic infrastructures with clear responsibilities and clear financing sources for O&M activities.
The functioning of O&M organizations will be closely monitored during project implementation.
Furthermore, for effective implementation of activities related to the development of the local
economy, the program will reinforce the capacity of communes in land management. Indeed, it will
continue its support for improving the methodological aspects for preparing the land use and
Management plans experimented during phase 2 of the program, and for the extension and scale up
of these plans to the national level, in consultation with key sectoral ministries. Moreover, a
geographical information system will be developed to support the Plans that will be prepared, and the
project will reinforce the capacity of local authorities in understanding and ownership of the
legislative and regulatory framework on land issues in Cameroon.
Capacity building for local stakeholders. This activity aims at strengthening and enhancing the skills
a        of the participants so that they can effectively assist the municipalities in the decentralization process
namely: local elected officials (parliament, municipal councils), communal staff, multidisciplinary
teams, administrative authorities, and local services providers. Workshops will be organized to
inform all stakeholders about the objectives and strategy of the project and to equip ordinary citizens
to participate in planning, implementing, and monitoring local development actions. To facilitate
such capacity building, the project will finance technical assistance for training of local service
providers and multidisciplinary teams to improve their quality of service. Furthermore, the project
will promote cooperation among the Project Coordination Units, the decentralized offices of the
Ministry of Environment, Nature Conservation and Sustainable Development (MINEPDED), and
other relevant sector ministries, and will assist in the organization of an environmental training
program for members of Municipal Councils, divisional administrative staff, parliamentarians and
project staff. Finally, exchange visits will be organized for stakeholders of decentralization. A
capacity building plan will be elaborated prior to the implementation of these activities.
Sub-component 2.3: Local public financial management system
The deepening of the decentralization appears as a way to improve the performance of service
Page 6 of 14


﻿delivery to citizens; it implies the achievement of a certain number of conditions. The transfer of
resources involves that local communes have strengthened their management capacity. For this
purpose, the existence of a minimum following set of skills revolve around four blocks of
competences appears crucial: (i) budget management capabilities, financial and accounting, (ii)
capacity in terms of proc urement, (iii) human resources management, (iv) the ability to drive the
business community in a transparent and accountable manner. Thus, part of the financing proceeds
will be allocated to activities aiming at improving local public financial management.
Under this subcomponent, the following activities will be undertaken:
a)     Scaling up of the implementation of local IFMIS (SIMBA) at district communes (31) and
remaining rural communes (276). During PNDP II, 53 out of 329 rural communes benefited from the
setting up of the information management system (SIMBA) which has improved the production of
commune financial information. The phase III of PNDP will support intense and sustainable capacity
building and technical assistance activities aiming at improving communes' staff skills in the
ownership and the use of the IFMIS with support from the Directorate of Treasury.
b) Effective external scrutiny of local accounts: The external scrutiny of local financial accounts is
ensured by the "Chambre des comptes". The introduction of SIMBA at local level and the production
of local accounts with the latter constitute an improvement that will impact the role of the "Chambre
des comptes" which is not endowed with adequate skills. The project will fill this gap by financing
capacity building sessions for auditors at the "Chambre des comptes" to gain the required skills to
understand SIMBA and to audit the communes' accounts. The project will also finance workshops to
be organized by the "Chambre des comptes" to the attention of local public accountants and Mayors
to expose various weaknesses identified during their controls and increase awareness. The last one
held in 2011 demonstrated its pedagogical value and impacts positively the quality of financial
reports submitted by the Communes.
Component 3: Coordination, management, monitoring and communication
This component will facilitate: (i) administrative, technical, and financial management of the project;
(ii) coordination among all institutional partners to ensure efficient support to communes for local
development; (iii) effective contractual arrangements with communes, sectoral ministries, and TSPs/
private-sector operators, NGOs (TSPs), including the acquisition of the equipment required for
project implementing; (iv) monitoring and evaluation of the performance and the financial,
environmental, and social impact of the project (including developing monitoring scorecards to
a        assess satisfaction of the beneficiaries with services provided by communes); and (v) development of
communication activities to publicize and disseminate project implementation tools and results, local
development potential and best practices. The National council for decentralization (NCD) will be a
member of the project's national steering committee. Compared to NCD, PNDP will position itself as
a major support tools to communes in the implementation of the powers transferred by central
government. At the end of this final phase, local development responsibilities would be totally
transferred to communes.
The integrated financial management software will be upgraded with additional tools to enable
permanent access to information in the accounting system of the regions for analysis and ensure
timely synchronized consolidation of accounts.
Under this component, the project will finance the : (i) the rehabilitation of office spaces; (ii) the
purchase of office equipment and vehicles; (iii) training of the staff of the project's National
Coordination Unit (NCU) and the Regional Coordination Units (RCUs); (iv) various audits
(technical, procurement, and financial management audits), (v) consultant services, including the
preparation and publishing of manuals, establishment of an electronic library; and (vi) monitoring
Page 7 of 14


﻿and evaluation of the implementation of environmental and social mitigation measures. Also, it will
support program's statutory supervisory and coordination organs meetings as well as the operating
costs of NCU and RCUs.
O
)         Based on the experience of phases 1 and 2 of the program, an effective grievance redress mechanism
(GRM) has been developed and will be used by the project team during the implementation to
address complaints of all stakeholders on project activities in a timely manner.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented in the rural areas of all ten regions of the country.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (GENDR)
Lucienne M. M'Baipor (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         This policy is triggered due to the activities that will be
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               financed under Component 1- Local Development
Support-.Social infrastructures, construction/rehabilitation
of rural markets, communities' storage facilities, rural
roads, bridges, culverts, small scale irrigation schemes for
grassroots communities. While minimal to moderate in
terms of impact, these activities will result to
environmental and social impacts that will need to be
adequately handled. PNDP phase 2 ESMF has been
revised and disclosed in Cameroon and at the Bank's
Infoshop on March 26, 2015.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          The activities funded under this project will not be
4.04                                undertaken in the areas where Natural habitats will be
threatened. The ESMF clearly excludes all subprojects
that could have negative impacts
Forests OP/BP 4.36      Yes         This policy is triggered as the project is likely to finance
small scale reforestation activities, based on communes'
demand
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes         While the project will not finance the purchase of
pesticides, the Project activities under component 1 may
induce the increase of pesticides use in the communities'
storages facilities. A PMP has been prepared, consulted
and disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop.
Physical Cultural       Yes         The project will finance some activities under the Local
Resources OP/BP 4.11                development Plan that may consist of land excavations.
The ESMF includes procedures for addressing physical
cultural resources encountered during project
implementation.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes         This policy is triggered with respect to the pygmy
BP 4.10
Page 8 of 14


﻿communities living primarily in the Southern and Eastern
regions as well as in other parts of the country. The IPP
from PNDP Phase 2 has been updated, consulted upon
and disclosed.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes        This policy is triggered as the project is likely to finance
OP/BP 4.12                          activities that could lead to Involuntary Resettlement.
Voluntary land contribution might be expected from
targeted beneficiaries as is sometimes the case with
community-driven interventions. For this reason, the RPF
might need to include special provisions for land
acquisition; and accepting and recording such voluntary
contributions. The RPF from PNDP Phase 2 has been
updated, consulted upon and disclosed.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No          The project does not involve the construction of dams.
4.37
Projects on International  Yes      This policy is triggered because the project is likely to
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                support rehabilitation of irrigation schemes in the North
and Far North of Cameroon close to Chad and Niger
watershed basins. Even the technical evaluation confirms
that negative impacts against mentioned international
waterways are limited, the Bank has advised the Borrower
to proceed with notification to riparian. By letter dated
January 30, 2015 addressed to the governments of Chad,
Niger, and Nigeria through the Lake Chad Basin
Commission and the Niger River Authority the Minister
of Economy, Planning and Regional Development
notified the riparian countries. The responses are still
pending.
0
Projects in Disputed    No          N/A
Areas OP/BP 7.60
0
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project will be implemented in the five agro-ecological zones of the country. These agro-
ecological zone presented below:
Agro-ecological zones                        Regions                     Area (km2)
Sudano sahelien                            North and Far North       100353
Guinea high savannah                    Adamaoua and East
(Mbam and Lom and Djerem divisions)      123 077
Highlands                                West and North West   31 192
Moist forests with mono modal rainfall  Littoral and South West         45 658
Page 9 of 14


﻿Moist forests with bimodal rainfall              Center, South and East             165
770
O
Q)          As the project will finance both social infrastructures (health, education, water and sanitation) and
economic investments (construction/rehabilitation of rural markets, communities' storage
facilities, rural roads, small bridges, culverts, small scale irrigation schemes for grassroots
communities), potential negative environmental and social impacts of these sub-projects are likely
to include: (i) solid and liquid wastes, ineffective medical waste management, water and soil
pollution due to construction activities, increase of use of pesticides and herbicides; (ii) forest
degradation and deforestation, loss of flora and fauna; (iii) soil erosion and silting due to the
rehabilitation of water management structures for irrigated schemes, as well as to poor agricultural
practices; (iv) pressures on natural resources as the population increases in those areas that have
access to water; (v) social conflict due to reduction in land available; (vi) HIV/AIDS expansion,
increase in the incidence of malaria and bilharzias due to increase in the surface of water
management structures; pesticide poisoning due to the unsafe application and management of
pesticides and herbicides by untrained personnel, exposure to dust and noise of the population near
construction sites.
Despite this list of potential impacts, any large scale and significant impacts are not anticipated.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The potential most important indirect impact could be the increase pressure in natural resources by
local communities after improvement of social infrastructures such as rural roads and storage
facilities.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
To minimize or avoid adverse impacts, the project will capitalize the lessons learnt during the two
first phases. For all subprojects, an alternative comparative analysis will be carried out based on
the environmental and social screening of several options.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The implementation arrangements for the relevant safeguards instruments are fully integrated with
the overall implementation arrangements of the Project. The Environmental and Social
institutional arrangement of PNDP II will be maintained. It is composed with (i) A Senior
environmental and social specialist and an Assistant Environmental and Social Specialist at the
central level (ii) 10 environmental and social specialists in the ten regional offices of the project.
External consultants will be hired to carry out specific environmental and social studies including
bi- annual environmental and social audits.
The Ministry of Economy, Planning and regional Development, through the Project implementing
Unit, has the ultimate responsibility for the Project's compliance with Cameroonian legislation and
Bank safeguards guidelines. The PIU will coordinate closely with the ministries involved in the
Project, notably Ministry of Environment, Ministry of Social Affairs, and the Ministry in Charge
of Land and Domain.
In addition the Bank team will systematically include Environmental and social safeguard
Page 10 of 14


﻿members during the project support missions. Relevant environmental and social safeguards
capacity building sessions will be organized by the PIU and when needed by the Bank safeguards
specialists during the support missions.
O
Q)          To ensure that potential negative environmental and social impacts of future sub-projects are
identified and appropriately mitigated, the Borrower has updated the existing Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared during phase 2. The ESMF includes clear
procedures required for identification and protection of cultural property from theft and treatment
of discovered artifacts; these will be included in standard bidding documents (SBD). Each SP's
ESIA/ESMP will provide specific procedures for handling "chance finds" during implementation.
The Borrower customizes the pest management plan (PMP) of Agriculture Investment and Market
Development Project (P143417) approved in 2014. The PMP reflect measures that need to be
taken during the project implementation (storage facilities; protective gear for pesticide
application; safe handling and disposal of packaging materials; and relevant training).This
customized document was disclosed in Cameroon ( March 25, 2015) and at Infoshop (March 26,
2015).
The Borrower has updated the Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) and the RPF prepared under phase
2. These documents were disclosed in Cameroon on March 25, 2015 and at InfoShop on March
26, 2015.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders involved in this project are: mayors of the 360 communes involved in the
project, communities based organizations, civil society, as well as relevant public services.
Extensive public consultations were carried out during the update process of the ESMF, the RPF
and the IPAP. The consultation process will continue throughout Project implementation. The
Bank team and the Project Implementation Unit will ensure that the same consultation process will
be maintained for the specific safeguards instruments as needed.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              25-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           26-Mar-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              25-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           26-Mar-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Page 11 of 14


﻿Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                               25-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                            26-Mar-2015
"In country" Disclosure
O
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?            Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                               25-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                            26-Mar-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X] No [  ]   NA [   ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Q)         Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ x] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Is a separate PMP required?                             Yes[X] No[       ]   NA [   ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a     Yes [ X] No [    ]   NA [   ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [X] No [  ]   NA [   ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Page 12 of 14


﻿Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Ifthe whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
a          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [ X] No [  ]   NA [   ]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
does it include provisions for certification system?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?  Yes [ X] No [    ]   NA [  ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes      No     ]   NA   X
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                 Yes       No        NA    X
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes[X]  No[  ]  NA
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Page 13 of 14


﻿Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No[   ]NA []
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
O
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Amadou Nchare
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (SA)           Date: 24-Apr-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Jorge A. Munoz (PMGR)                Date: 06-May-2015
Manager:
Page 14 of 14


