INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR15469
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Oct-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Oct-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Tanzania                    Project ID:  P085752
Project Name: Tanzania Agricultural Sector Development Project (PO85752)
Task Team       Abel Lufafa
Leader(s):
Estimated        14-Feb-2006                Estimated    15-Jun-2006
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFA13                        Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (35%), Agricultural extension
and research (27%), Irrigation and drainage (21%), Ag ro-industry, marketing,
and trade (9%), General public administration sector (8%)
Theme:          Rural services and infrastructure (29%), Rural policies and institutions (29%),
Other rural development (14%), Nutrition and food se curity (14%), Export
development and competitiveness (14%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
U         Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                   No
Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     216.50             Total Bank Financing:   155.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                8.00
International Development Association (IDA)                     155.00
International Fund for Agriculture Development                   36.00
Bilateral Agencies (unidentified)                                17.50
Total                                                           216.50
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
Page 1 of 8


﻿2. Current Project Development Objectives
The Project Development Objectives of ASDP are to (i) enable farmers to have better access to and
use of agricultural knowledge, technologies, marketing systems , and
infrastructure; and (ii) promote agricultural private investment based on
an improved regulatory and policy environment". The proposed additional financin
g (AF) would foster achievement of these two objectives.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
The Project Development Objectives of ASDP are to (i) enable farmers to have better access to and
use of agricultural knowledge, technologies, marketing systems , and
infrastructure; and (ii) promote agricultural private investment based on
an improved regulatory and policy environment". The proposed additional financin
g (AF) would foster achievement of these two objectives.
3. Project Description
Project Components:
Component 1. Local Level Support: This component aims to improve the capacity of Local
Government Authorities (LGAs) to plan, support, and coordinate agricultural services and
investments in a more efficient, participatory and sustainable manner.
Component 2. National Level Support: This component focuses on improving the responsiveness and
quality of agricultural research and extension services improvement in sector policy framework;
carrying out preparatory work and investment in national level irrigation through public-private
partnerships; stimulating agricultural markets and private sector development; improving food
security and sector coordination.
Component 3. Support to Big Results Now: This component supports the Government programs
under the BRN initiative. This includes support to collective warehouse-based maize marketing
schemes and to rehabilitation of rice irrigation schemes.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The ASDP is implemented in 132 districts throughout mainland Tanzania. This AF will support
implementation of project activities in all districts which are crit              ical
for achievement of key project targets and allow smooth overlap to the seco
nd phase program. Salient physical features of ASDP with implications for safegu
ards include the utilization of surface water resources for irrigation developme
nt and potential increase in fertilizers and pesticides usage. Many of the water
resources are riparian lakes and rivers, although some are solely national reso
urces. Irrigation investments to be financed by the proposed AF will focus on co
mpleting existing irrigation schemes rather than developing new schemes, and wil
1 involve limited additional usage of fertilizers and pesticides. Specific locat
ions of schemes to be supported under this AF will be identified in consultation
with the government and LGAs during DADP planning for FY14.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Jane A. N. Kibbassa (GENDR)
Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (GSURR)
Page 2 of 8


﻿6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
O
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
a         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    Yes
4.37
Projects on International  Yes
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Project's environmental and social impacts are associated with implementing subprojects in
the District Agricultural Development Programs (DADPs). Many of t
he adverse impacts from DADPs investments will continue to be of low intensity,
minor, site-specific, and relatively straightforward for the beneficiaries to ma
nage, assisted and primarily monitored by their local institutions. For district
a           s that manage many and relatively larger irrigation schemes, the potential impac
ts may become more significant, intense, and widespread. Activities under this A
F are a continuation of the on-going activities of the original project and are
not expected to generate additional negative environmental or social impacts.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Tanzania's National Environment Policy identifies several critical environmental problems facing
the country: land degradation; lack of accessible good quality
water for urban and rural inhabitants; environmental pollution (such as water co
ntamination); the loss of biodiversity, habitat, and wetlands; the deterioration
of aquatic systems; and deforestation. During the preparation of the original p
roject, the immediate and root causes of these problems were reviewed and it is
concluded that this AF will not aggravate the situation.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Page 3 of 8


﻿N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
For the original project, the Government of Tanzania prepared and disclosed an Environmental
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to meet the World Bank's and
the government's own requirements. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was a
1so prepared and disclosed in compliance with the Tanzanian laws and the World B
ank OP 4.12. The ESMF and RPF were re-disclosed again in March 2010 and Septembe
r 2011 for the purpose of the second Additional Financing (Cr. 4740-TA) and PHRD
Grant (TF0 11170), respectively.
Review of implementation of ESMF: The MTR and subsequent reviews noted slow follow-up of
ESMF processes. Efforts to improve compliancy (outlined below) have sta
rted yielding positive results. The May 2012 safeguards assessment showed that a
wareness on environmental and social safeguards is increasing and environmental
issues have been adequately mainstreamed in planning of DADPs for 2012/13. For e
xample, screening for environmental and social safeguards was done for all subpr
ojects in a sample of DADPs reviewed. The DADPs have also included Environmental
Management Plans and budgets. Nonetheless, in irrigation schemes and local infr
astructures, implementation of mitigation measures is still weak.
To strengthen and improve implementation of the ESMF and other safeguards requirements,
several actions have been implemented by the Government since the MTR. P  rinciples for
ESMP, RAPs and ESIAs have been incorporated into the training modu  les and District
Agricultural Development Plans guidelines. The ESMF and RPF doc uments have been distributed
to all districts and training on application of ESM  F/RPF principles is in progress. The LGAs
have appointed District Environmental  Management Officers (DEMOs) responsible for
coordination and supervision of loca  1 investments to ensure integration of safeguards issues in
subprojects. The DEM  Os have been trained on application of ESMF/RPF principles, and the
need to carr  y out ESIAs and preparation of ESMPs and RAPs for specific subprojects. As
menti   oned previously, most of the civil works so far have focused on rehabilitation o  f
existing irrigation systems and few new irrigation subprojects which required preliminary ESIAs.
In addition, an environmental and social safeguard condition has been included as one of the
performance criteria in the LGDG performance ass                   essment framework
for receiving top-up grants.
A retrospective environmental and social safeguards audit of selected ASDP investments will be
carried out in FY13 to reconfirm that safeguards procedures have               been
followed and the extent to which mitigation measures based on ESMF/RPF have
been implemented. ESMF, RPF and IPMP documents will continue to be the basis fo
r the preparation of the specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), Environmenta
1 and Social Impact Assessment (ESIAs) and/or Environmental and Social Managemen
t Plans (ESMPs), as need arises.
Environmental Management (OP4.0 1): Under the original project as well as the additional
financing credits, the environmental management of irrigation will be un
dertaken at the subproject and national levels: (a) At subproject level: Irrigat
ion within subprojects will be managed through the ESMF in all districts. As sta
Page 4 of 8


﻿ted, ESMF processes have been included in DADP guidelines, and the ESMF and RPF
have been distributed to all districts; and (b) For national strategic environme ntal management:
The Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) for th e national irrigation master
plan and the national irrigation policy was complet           ed in May 2011. The
O
)           SESA identifies potentially adverse environmental and social           impacts
emanating from the implementation of the national irrigation masterplan         /
policy and provides strategic guidance on how to minimize and mitigate those im  pacts
when implementing irrigation development projects/programs in the sector.
Pest Management (OP 4.09): The GoT has prepared an Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP),
to ensure the desired management of the use of these inputs is achiev  ed (effective
since 2006 under the original project). Government's performance i
n implementing the original IPMP was reviewed in 2009. The government prepared a
n Integrated Pest Management Capacity Building Plan, which has been integrated i nto the
capacity-building framework of ASDP to ensure that the IPMP is implement ed effectively and
remains sustainable beyond the life of ASDP.
Safety of Dams (OP4.37): Irrigation infrastructure may include small dams and dykes. To comply
with OP4.37, the government has integrated dam safety requirement  s into the ESMF for
situations where it may apply.
Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP 4.12): In accordance with the Bank's safeguard policies and
procedures, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared f or the original ASDP credit
and disclosed in the country and infoShop on March 2       5, 2010. As the nature of the
works to be financed under the AF will not change, the existing RPF for the initial project will
also apply for the activities sup      ported by the AF and will be the bases for the
preparation of the sub-projects s  pecific RAPs, if need arises. Since the implementation of
the ASDP started none           of the sub-project required the preparation of the
Resettlement Action Plan (RA    P). Nonetheless, to ensure that the principles of the RPF were
followed, the imm           inent environmental and social safeguards audit of selected ASDP
investments wil           1 reconfirm whether safeguards procedures have been followed and
the extent to w  hich mitigation measures based on RPF have been implemented. The study will
obta            in more detailed and site-specific information about the impacts of project acti
0          vities, including information on whether there is need for site specific RAPs. I  n the
event that there will be land acquisition or/and resettlement, sub-project  specific
resettlement action plan will be prepared and executed in line with t he World Bank and
Government policies as guided by the RPF.
International Waterways (OP7.50): This AF, like the original project and previous additional
fmancings (Cr 4639-TA and Cr. 4740-TA), triggers the safeguard pol icy on international
waterways. However, activities under this AF will not invol            ve expansion of
irrigation investments to new area but will focus on completion           of existing/
ongoing schemes. Thus, riparian notification is not required.
Cumulative impacts: No later than three months before project closing, the Government of
Tanzania has agreed to complete a Cumulative Impact Assessment (CIA). I       n
documenting the cumulative impacts of this operation, the government will gain     a
better understanding of the broad effectiveness of its various safeguard plan  s and
measures (such as the SEA, IPMP, and ESMF). The CIA for ASDP will be done
Page 5 of 8


﻿jointly with the Accelerated Food Security Project (AFSP).
Capacity assessments: With regard to the government's capacity to plan and implement safeguard
measures, substantial progress has been made over the years in a            number
O
of Bank-funded operations in the agricultural sector, such as the Partici
patory Agricultural Development and Empowerment Project (PADEP) and ASDP. At the
Ministry level, a fully fledged unit has been established to coordinate and sup  ervise
environmental and social management issue in the agriculture sector. Neve rtheless, institutional
and technical capacity for environmental and social mana              gement at the
district and lower levels could be improved. This deficiency is be          ing
addressed in detail in the individual plans and reports noted above. Some tr
aining is already funded under the original project. These plans have undertaken
substantial assessments of capacity in the key implementing institution, and th
ey will develop plans to address any gaps.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the farming communities that will develop and receive support for their
District Agricultural Development Plans. They include individua                    1
farmers, farmer associations and groups, agribusiness dealers, national resear
ch and extension service providers, national and local institutions such as wate
r boards, customs agents, and others who are linked to the plan in question. The
process of preparing and/or reviewing the development plans and related documen
ts is continuous and requires meaningful participatory consultation. The on-goin
g training on the ESMF and RPF for the NFT, DFTs, and WFTs in conjunction with t
he incorporation of ESMF processes into DADP guidelines, will increase awareness
and capacity for managing environmental issues related to district development
plans. During the planning process the respective stakeholders are consulted to
ensure that the plans are relevant and responsive to their needs. The preparatio
n of the site specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and R
APs, if required, will also be done in consultation with the communities and a s
ummary of the ESIAs and RAPs will be distributed among the affected communities
in Kiswahili. Once completed, the ESIA reports and RAPs will be disclosed in Kis wahili in
Tanzania and at the World Bank InfoShop. The reports will be available at the district level and in
the offices of the relevant agencies.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              05-Aug-2005
Date of submission to InfoShop                           11 -Aug-2005
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Tanzania                                                 15-Jul-2005
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              05-Aug-2005
Page 6 of 8


﻿Date of submission to InfoShop                            10-Aug-2005
"In country" Disclosure
Tanzania                                                  15-Jul-2005
O
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
a
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?            Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                               05-Aug-2005
Date of submission to InfoShop                            10-Aug-2005
"In country" Disclosure
Tanzania                                                  15-Jul-2005
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
report?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
Is a separate PMP required?                             Yes [  ] No [    ]   NA [   ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a     Yes [  ] No [    ]   NA [   ]
O
Q)         safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?           Yes [  ] No [X]     TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [  ] No [X]  TBD [  ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                    Yes [  ] No [    ]   NA [ X]
Page 7 of 8


﻿Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X
Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?   Yes [  ]  No [  ]   NA [ X
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [  ]  No [   ]  NA [ X
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                  Yes [  ]  No [  ]   NA [ X]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
O
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
O          the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Abel Lufafa
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Mark E. Cackler (PMGR)               Date: 26-Oct-2015
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


