                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA16725
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Apr-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-May-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Africa                              Project ID:    P154807
                            Project Name:      Regional Disease Surveillance Systems Enhancement (REDISSE) (P154807)
                            Task Team          John Paul Clark,Bleoue Nicaise Ehoue,Hadia Nazem Samaha
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          01-Apr-2016                         Estimated   27-Jun-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GHN07                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Health (50%), Other social services (30%), Animal production (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Other communicable diseases (40%), Health system performance (40%), Rural
                                              services and infrastructure (15%), Rural policies and inst itutions (5%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     242.32           Total Bank Financing:                    230.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                              0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                   210.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                      20.00
                              CANADA Canadian International Development Agency
                                                                                                                              12.32
                              (CIDA)
                              Total                                                                                         242.32
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objectives of the Project are: (a) to strengthen national and regional cross-sectoral capacity for


                                                                         Page 1 of 9
                         collaborative disease surveillance and epidemic preparedness in West Africa; and (b) in the event of
                         an eligible crisis or emergency, to provide immediate and effective response to said eligible crisis or
                         emergency.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Project Description
                         The REDISSE project design incorporates a shift from a paradigm grounded in crisis response to one
                         that embraces a disaster risk reduction approach and better risk management. It does so by building
                         support for the animal health and human health systems, and the required linkages at country and
                         regional level to manage infectious disease threats. As such the project will comprise 5 components
                         as follows: (1) Surveillance and Information Systems; (2) Strengthening Laboratory Capacity; (3)
                         Preparedness and Emergency Response; (4) Human Resource Management for Effective Disease
                         Surveillance and Outbreak Preparedness; and (5) Institutional Capacity Building for Project
                         Management and Coordination.

                         The project will promote partnership with the private sector to improve areas of known weaknesses
                         in the provision of public goods across all project activities.

                         Component 1: Surveillance and Information Systems. Total costs including contingencies US$62.32
                         million equivalent of which US$50 IDA Credit and US$12.32 million MDTF

                         The first component will support the enhancement of national surveillance and reporting systems and
                         their interoperability at the different tiers of the health systems. This component will support national
                         and regional efforts in the surveillance of priority diseases (including emerging, re-emerging and
                         endemic diseases) and the timely reporting of human public health and animal health emergencies in
                         line with the IHR (2005) and the OIE Terrestrial Animal Health code. Based on in-depth disease
                         surveillance assessments that will be carried out during the first months of implementation, activities
                         under this component will support (i) the establishment of appropriate linkages between national
                         animal health and human health surveillance information systems, and between national systems to
                         regional/international disease surveillance and reporting systems; (ii) cross-border collaboration in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         surveillance (including active/event-based, passive and syndromic surveillance) for the early
                         detection of cases; (iii) timely reporting by community-level surveillance agents as well as district
                         health and veterinary facilities, and minimization of turnaround time from specimen collection to
                         laboratory confirmation and reporting; (iv) the use of surveillance data for risk analysis (assessment,
                         management and communication) to implement appropriate outbreaks prevention and control
                         interventions across the sub-region

                         Component 1 will have three sub-components.

                         Sub-Component 1.1 Support coordinated community-level surveillance systems and processes across
                         the animal and human health sectors. Total costs including contingencies US$27 million equivalent
                         of which US$18 million IDA Credit and US$10 million MDTF.

                         Sub-Component 1.2 Develop capacity for interoperable surveillance and reporting systems. Total
                         costs including contingencies US$20 million IDA Credit equivalent.

                         Sub-Component 1.3 Establish an early warning system for infectious disease trends prediction. Total
                         costs including contingencies US$14 million equivalent of which US$12million IDA Credit and US
                         $2.32 million MDTF.



                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         Component 2: Strengthening Labor atory Capacity. Total costs including contingencies US$58
                         million IDA Credit equivalent.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The objective of this component is to establish networks of efficient, high quality, accessible public
                         health, veterin ary and private laboratories for the diagnosis of infectious human and animal diseases,
                         and to establish a regional networking platform to improve collaboration for laboratory investigation.
                         The project seeks to address critical laboratory system weakness systems weaknesses across
                         countries, fostering cross-country and cross-sectoral (at national and regional levels) collaboration. It
                         aims to do this through effective public health and animal health laboratory networks which would
                         follow regionally harmonized policies, strategies, and protocols, aligned with internationally
                         recognized practices, to ensure prompt and high quality results. This component is divided into three
                         sub-components.

                         Sub-Component 2.1 Review, upgrade and network laboratory facilities. Total costs including
                         contingencies US$28 million IDA Credit equivalent.

                         Sub-Component 2.2 Improve data management and specimen management. Total costs including
                         contingencies US$12 million IDA Credit equivalent.

                         Sub-Component 2.3 Enhance regional reference laboratory networking functions. Total costs
                         including contingencies US$18 million IDA Credit equivalent.

                         Component 3: Preparedness and Emergency Response. Total costs including contingencies US$34
                         million IDA Credit equivalent

                         This component will support national and regional efforts to enhance infectious disease outbreak
                         preparedness and response capacity. Activities under this component will support the (i) updating
                         and/or development of cross-sectoral emergency preparedness and response plans (national and
                         regional) for priority diseases, and ensuring their integration into the broader national all-hazards
Public Disclosure Copy




                         disaster risk management framework; (ii) regular testing, assessment, and improvements of plans;
                         (iii) expansion of the health system surge capacity including the allocation and utilization of existing
                         pre-identified structures and resources (at the national and regional level) for emergency response,
                         infection prevention and control (IPC). Component 3 will be made up of two sub-components:

                         Sub-Component 3.1 Enhance cross-sectoral coordination and collaboration for preparedness and
                         response. Total costs including contingencies US$16 million IDA Credit equivalent.

                         Sub-Component 3.2 Strengthen Capacity for emergency response. Total costs including
                         contingencies US$18 million IDA Credit equivalent.

                         Sub-Component 3.3 US$0 Component for emergency response.
                         Component 4: Human resource management for effective disease surveillance and epidemic
                         preparedness. Total costs including contingencies US$47 million IDA Credit equivalent.

                         Component 4 is cross-cutting given that animal and human health workers form the backbone of
                         Disease Surveillance (Component 1), Laboratories (Component 2) and Preparedness and Response
                         (Component 3). Effective human resource management aims at bringing the right people with the
                         right skills to the right place at the right time. This component will include two sub-components.



                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                         Sub-Component 4.1 Health Workforce mapping, planning and recruitment. Total costs including
                         contingencies US$25 million IDA Credit equivalent.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-Component 4.2 Enhance Health Workforce training, motivation and retention. Total costs
                         including contingencies US$22 million IDA Credit equivalent.

                         Component 5: Institutional Capacity Building, Project Management, Coordination and Advocacy.
                         Total costs including contingencies US$41 million equivalent of which US$20 million in IDA Grant
                         and US21 million in IDA Credit.

                         This component focuses on all aspects related to project management. It includes fiduciary aspects
                         (financial management and procurement), M&E, knowledge generation and management,
                         communication, and management (capacity building, monitoring and evaluation) of social and
                         environmental safeguard mitigation measures. It also provides for critical cross-cutting institutional
                         support, meeting capacity-building and training needs identified in the five countries and at WAHO
                         and RAHC on top of specific technical capacity-building activities undertaken within the four
                         technical components. It will support the routine assessment of critical animal health and human
                         health capacities of national systems using reference tools (such as OIE PVS and JEE) to identify
                         weaknesses and monitor progress. This component will build on, and complement other projects and
                         initiatives such as the WARDS project (which has been supporting the development of the
                         institutional capacity of WAHO), EAPHLN, GHSA and EPT2 and other discrete activities to foster
                         the harmonization of a functional regional disease surveillance and response network in the
                         ECOWAS region.

                         Support will also be provided for the establishment of national and regional One Health coordination
                         platforms for the purpose of developing synergies, joint planning, implementation and
                         communication. Strategies will be adopted for generating evidence to be used to advocate for
                         increased and sustained financing for disease surveillance and preparedness from domestic sources
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 5 will include two sub-components:
                         Sub-component 5.1 Project coordination, fiduciary management, monitoring and evaluation, data
                         generation, and knowledge management. Total costs including contingencies US$30 million
                         equivalent of which US$15 IDA Grant and US$15 IDA Credit.

                         Sub-component 5.2 Institutional support, capacity building, advocacy, and communication. Total
                         costs including contingencies US$11 million equivalent of which US$5 IDA Grant and US$6 IDA
                         Credit
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is being prepared as a series of projects (SOP) and the first phase will target five our of
                         the 15 ECOWAS countries. These will be Senegal, Guinea, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, and Liberia.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Abou Gueye (GSU01)
                         Amos Abu (GEN07)
                         Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSU01)
                         Salamata Bal (GSU01)


                                                                       Page 4 of 9
                         Upulee Iresha Dasanayake (AFCF1)

                         6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental            Yes        The proposed project has been classified as a category B
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01               since its foreseen net social and environmental risks and
                                                             impacts of the proposed project are expected to be
                                                             positive and mostly site specific since it will generate
                                                             environmentally and socially sound laboratory
                                                             technologies and safe and secure disposal of its generated
                                                             waste. ESMFs have been prepared and disclosed in each
                                                             country and at the InfoShop. These ESMFs are based on
                                                             instruments used in ongoing health and agriculture
                                                             projects and include measures to deal with rehabilitation/
                                                             construction of facilities, as well as animal waste.
                                                             National medical waste management plans for each
                                                             country have been disclosed in-country and at the
                                                             InfoShop. During project implementation, each borrower
                                                             will prepare Environmental and Social Management Plans
                                                             and/or Waste Management Plans (WMPs). These will be
                                                             consulted upon and disclosed in country, at ECOWAS/
                                                             WAHO, and at the InfoShop prior to the commencement
                                                             of project activities. The environmental safeguards
                                                             instruments will include an assessment of existing and
                                                             potential environmental and social risks and impacts
                                                             associated with the proposed project activities, and
                                                             propose appropriate mitigation measures.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No         The project will not affect natural habitats.
                         4.04
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No         The projects does not involve forests or forestry activities.

                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes         The surveillance, monitoring and containment of diseases
                                                             including zoonosis could lead to increased use of
                                                             chemicals, reagents, and pesticides with potential negative
                                                             impacts and risks on the environment and human health.
                                                             Given the situation-driven nature of the project, the extent
                                                             of such an increased use cannot be known in advance,
                                                             borrowers will each prepare Integrated Pest and Vector
                                                             Management Plans (IPVMPs) to identify the potential
                                                             risks and ways to adequately mitigate them. These
                                                             documents will greatly build on existing PMPs developed
                                                             for the Bank-funded projects in the respective beneficiary
                                                             countries. The IPVMPs have been publicly disclosed on
                                                             the regional implementing agency (ECOWAS/WAHO)
                                                             website (and thereafter in each individual participating
                                                             country) and at the InfoShop.
                         Physical Cultural        No         The project does not involve or affect Physical Cultural
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11                Resources.


                                                               Page 5 of 9
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/   No               There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
                            BP 4.10
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement No               As the majority of project activities are expected to take
                            OP/BP 4.12                                place in existing government owned facilities on
                                                                      government-owned land, the project will not involve land
                                                                      acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement or
                                                                      restriction of access to resources or sources of livelihoods
                                                                      of populations. Therefore, OP 4.12 (Involuntary
                                                                      Resettlement) is not triggered for this project, and the
                                                                      project will not finance activities that would trigger the
                                                                      policy.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No            The implementation of the project will not entail the
                            4.37                                      construction of new dams neither will any of the project
                                                                      activities rely on the performance of an existing dam or a
                                                                      dam under construction.
                            Projects on International   No            This project will not involve extraction of water from any
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      international waterways (any river, canal, lake, pond or
                                                                      similar body of water that forms a boundary between, or
                                                                      any river or body of surface water that flows through, two
                                                                      or more states, whether Bank members or not). In
                                                                      addition, the REDISSE project will not affect any
                                                                      tributary or other body of surface water that is a
                                                                      component of any waterway described above.
                            Projects in Disputed        No            The REDISSE project will not be located in Disputed
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                          Areas as defined by OP/BP 7.60.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The activities proposed under the REDISSE project are not expected to induce any long term or
                              irreversible environmental or social impacts. The project is expected to have overall positive
                              environmental and social impacts through its support to surveillance, monitoring and containment
                              of diseases including zoonosis. To mitigate any adverse impacts related to project activities, two
                              Bank safeguards policies have been triggered for the project, namely: Environmental Assessment
                              (OP/BP 4.01) and Pest Management (OP 4.09). ESMFs have been prepared and disclosed in each
                              country and at the InfoShop. National medical waste management plans for each country have
                              been disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop. Integrated Pest and Vector Management Plans for
                              each country have also been disclosed in each country and at the InfoShop. During project
                              implementation, ESMPs and/or Waste Management Plans (for managing animal and other waste)
                              will be prepared, consulted upon and disclosed prior to the commencement of project activities.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              No long term environmental or social impacts are anticipated as a result of project activities.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse


                                                                        Page 6 of 9
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The respective Borrowers have each and collectively benefited from other (past and ongoing) IDA
                           projects which provided/are providing relatively sufficient capacity for understanding and
                           applying safeguard policies. The Bank’s involvement in the health sector has been significant and
                           the clients have overtime shown relatively sufficient capacity and good will in implementing
                           World Bank funded projects. Nonetheless, to ensure timely and successful processing and
                           implementation of this regional operation, the World Bank Group safeguards specialists will
                           provide advice and support to the relevant institutions in each country, as well as ECOWAS/
                           WAHO, to help strengthen technical capacity, including in the respective national environmental
                           (and social) agencies.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The main beneficiaries of REDISSE will be the overall population of ECOWAS countries with
                           Guinea, Liberia, Nigeria, Senegal and Sierra Leone during the first phase. The proposed project is
                           expected to benefit over 215 million people (12.3 million in Guinea; 4.4 in Liberia 177.5 in
                           Nigeria, 14.7 in Senegal and 6.3 in Sierra Leone) whose livelihoods may be affected by diseases.
                           Secondary beneficiaries include service providers (both public and private), as well as national and
                           regional institutions involved in human and animal health. WAHO will be a major institutional
                           beneficiary of this project, alongside the Regional Animal Health Center (RAHC) (Centre
                           Régional de Santé Animale-CRSA, based in Bamako) as well as RCDC and other regional
                           technical partners. Hence population of the region will also benefit from the strengthened regional
                           capacity to prevent, detect and react promptly to sanitary events of importance.

                           Design and preparation of REDISSE have been deeply grounded in an inclusive public
Public Disclosure Copy




                           consultation and participation style. Series of meetings have been held in Dakar (December, 2015
                           and March, 2016) and in each individual country (January, 2016) that offered a platform for open
                           discussions and experience gathering to better frame the design and preparation of REDISSE.
                           Support by ECOWAS as the regional entity to coordinate the program, especially through one of
                           its branches (WAHO), adds a plausible weight in the consultative and inclusive coordination
                           approach REDISSE is built on. Likewise, preparation, validation and public disclosure of the
                           safeguards instruments has been done and will be done to ensure broad public engagement (taking
                           into account women, youth, elderly, disabled and vulnerable groups) through ownership and social
                           accountability mechanism that altogether are foreseen to foster a sustainable development path.
                           Since consultation and participation is an iterative process, the same trend will be maintained
                           throughout the lifecycle of REDISSE
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         28-Apr-2016
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      29-Apr-2016
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Guinea                                                           27-Apr-2016
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Liberia                                                          27-Apr-2016
                           Comments:
                           Nigeria                                                          26-Apr-2016
                           Comments:
                           Sierra Leone                                                     29-Apr-2016
                           Comments:
                           Senegal                                                          26-Apr-2016
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      28-Apr-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   29-Apr-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Guinea                                                           27-Apr-2016
                           Comments:
                           Liberia                                                          27-Apr-2016
                           Comments:
                           Nigeria                                                          26-Apr-2016
                           Comments:
                           Sierra Leone                                                     29-Apr-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                           Senegal                                                          26-Apr-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management


                                                                   Page 8 of 9
                             Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                             in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                             Management Specialist?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: John Paul Clark,Bleoue Nicaise Ehoue,Hadia Nazem Samaha
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)               Date: 05-May-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Sybille Crystal (PMGR)                Date: 05-May-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 9 of 9
