                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSR14100
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jun-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Jun-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Pakistan                                     Project ID:           P124268
                            Project Name:       MDTF-Economic Revitalization of KP and FATA (P124268)
                            Task Team           Kiran Afzal
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated                                                        Estimated   15-Aug-2011
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GTCDR                                        Lending     Emergency Recovery Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:             General industry and trade sector (73%), Sub-national government
                                                administration (17%), General information and communications sector (5%),
                                                General finance sector (5%)
                            Theme:              Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (45%), Rural non-farm income
                                                generation (35%), Other Private Sector Development (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                         Yes
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        20.00           Total Bank Financing:                                             0.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                               0.00
                              MDTF for Crisi Affected Areas of NWFP/FATA/Balochistan                                                20.00
                              Total                                                                                                 20.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           To support the Government of Pakistan in the economic recovery and revitalization of the crisis


                                                                                  Page 1 of 6
                         affected areas of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) province and Federall                                      y
                         Administered Tribal Areas (FATA), by creating sustainable employment opportuni
                         ties through rehabilitation of Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs), investment m
Public Disclosure Copy




                         obilization, and institutional capacity building.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         To support the Government of Pakistan in the economic recovery and revitalization of the crisis
                         affected areas of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) province and Federall                                      y
                         Administered Tribal Areas (FATA), by creating sustainable employment opportuni
                         ties through rehabilitation of Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs), investment m
                         obilization, and institutional capacity building.
                          3. Project Description
                         Component 1: SME Development (US$ 14 million). This component includes a matching grants
                         program with technical assistance to support SMEs that have been adversely affected by the ongoing
                         crisis in order to enhance their productive capacity and restore lost employment. This component will
                         also promote economic empowerment of women by assigning priority to eligible enterprises owned
                         and managed by women. Three types of support will be provided under this component:
                         (i)       SME Rehabilitation: Matching grants to SMEs whose businesses have been affected due to
                         direct damage to their buildings, machinery, equipment and stocks;
                         (ii)      SME Up-gradation: Matching grants to SMEs to improve their productive capacity; and
                         (iii)     Business Development Services (BDS): Matching grants to SMEs in areas such as
                         accounting, financial and legal services, market development, project management etc.

                         Component 2: Attracting Investments from the Diaspora (US$ 2 million). The main objective of this
                         component is to mobilize private investment to jumpstart the rehabilitation of businesses and
                         reconstruction of infrastructure, thereby creating employment. There are two main activities under
                         this component:
                         (i)     Pre-Feasibility for a Private/Public Sector Diaspora Bond for SMEs; and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (ii)    Outreach Programs for Mobilizing Diaspora Investment

                         Component 3: Institutional Building to Foster Investment and Implement Regulatory Reforms (US$
                         4 million). This component will support capacity building of both KP and FATA governments to
                         improve the business climate and attract investment to the region. This will be accomplished through:
                          (i)    Capacity building of governments of KP and FATA
                          (ii)   Development of a Public-Private Dialogue mechanism to promote reforms;
                          (iii)  Institutionalizing investment promotion; and
                          (iv)   Implementation Support

                         The SME Development component is being implemented by the KP office of Small and Medium
                         Enterprise Development Authority (SMEDA), and the implementation of the second and third
                         components will is being carried out by the Project Management Units (PMU) of the Government of
                         Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (GoKP) and FATA.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Much like the original Project, the extended Project will also be implemented in the crisis-affected
                         areas of KP and FATA. The SMEs to be supported through the Project are mostly located in the
                         built-up areas, except the ones involved in mining activities, which may be located in the hilly areas.


                                                                       Page 2 of 6
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Javaid Afzal (GENDR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Salma Omar (GSURR)

                            6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental               Yes
                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
                            Pest Management OP 4.09     No
                            Physical Cultural           No
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    No
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                The Project is undergoing a level 2 restructuring which involves an extension in the Project
                              closing date. This is a 4 month no-cost extension and entails no changes to components, Project
                              Development Objective (PDO), or to the EA category of the Project. It also doesn’t trigger any
                              additional safeguards policy (other than OP 4.01 that was triggered for the original Project as
                              well). With this change, the Project will now close on October 31, 2015, instead of the original
                              closing date of June 30, 2015. Much like the original Project, the rehabilitation and reconstruction
                              activities under the restructured Project will be carried out on the land already owned by the SMEs
                              within the existing premises. No land will be acquired under the Project therefore social
                              safeguards policies will not be triggered. The construction activities at, and operation of, the SMEs
                              to be supported by the Project under its Component 1 may potentially cause negative
                              environmental and /or social impacts. The nature and significance of these negative impacts will
                              depend primarily upon the type, size, and location of these SMEs, however these impacts are
                              likely to be mostly localized, low to moderate in severity, and reversible and temporary in nature.
                              Therefore, the extended Project is also assessed to be a Category B Project much like the original
                              Project, in accordance with the OP 4.01.




                                                                         Page 3 of 6
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            The indirect and/or long term impacts could be associated with the expansion of the existing and/
Public Disclosure Copy




                           or proliferation of similar SMEs in the area. However on the basis of the works carried out during
                           the original Project, no significant indirect and or long term impacts are likely to take place
                           primarily due to the small size of the SMEs.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            No alternatives have been considered.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            The Project was processed as an Emergency operation under OP 8.0. The task team, therefore,
                           prepared an umbrella document for MDTF, though the Environmental and Social Screening and
                           Assessment Framework (ESSAF), which defines the environmental assessment requirements, the
                           planning approach and requirements for assessing and mitigating adverse social impacts. The
                           implementing agencies both in KP and FATA are responsible for compliance with requirements as
                           set out in the ESSAF. To assess the nature and significance of the potentially negative
                           environmental and social impacts, and to develop appropriate mitigation measures for these
                           impacts, the Project also prepared an environmental and social management plan (ESMP), which
                           includes procedures for carrying out environmental and social impact assessment and detailed
                           mitigation measures for each type of subproject (e.g., rehabilitation of an SME or clusters of
                           SMEs of similar type). The ESMP for the original Project is under implementation. The same
                           ESMP will be used for the restructured Project since there is no change in the Project components.

                          For the original Project, KP and FATAs Project Management Units (PMUs) had designated a
                          senior officer as their respective Environmental and Social Focal Point (ESFP), to ensure the
                          effective implementation of ESMP during the Project implementation, and to coordinate with the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Bank and other stakeholders, such as Environmental Protection Agencies (EPAs), on matters
                          relevant to environmental management. Capacity building of these ESFPs and other related project
                          personnel (such as the field officers), as well as awareness raising of the remaining Project and
                          SMEDA staff was also done for better management of environmental aspects of the Project,
                          particularly the effective implementation of ESMP. The same arrangements will continue for the
                          restructured project.

                          The Project has been implementing the ESMP with performance rating of ‘Satisfactory’. It has
                          engaged an environmental specialist on a short-term consultancy basis. The specialist assists the
                          Project in ESMP implementation, conducts safeguard trainings (including awareness of and
                          trainings to women beneficiaries), accompanies the Project staff for the field visits, and also assists
                          the Project in preparing ESMP progress reports. The Project carries out safeguard screening at the
                          scheme identification stage, incorporates appropriate mitigation/enhancement measures in the
                          scheme designs, and also carries out safeguard monitoring of the ongoing schemes. Similar
                          arrangements will continue for the extended duration of the Project.

                          The key lesson learned based upon the experience of implementing ESMP for the original Project
                          is the importance of ESMP monitoring during the scheme implementation. With the help of
                          frequent and regular field visits, the ESMP compliance can be improved significantly. Therefore,
                          it will be ensured that regular monitoring visits are carried out during the Project’s extension as


                                                                      Page 4 of 6
                           well.

                           Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM). A comprehensive GRM was put in place for the original
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Project. So far 210 grievances have been received from both FATA and KP area, out of which 75
                           grievances have been addressed, while 135 grievances are in process for remedial actions. Most of
                           the remaining grievances relate to delayed payments to the SMEs. The same GRM will continue
                           to be used for the Project after its extension.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             SMEs, Department of Industries (KP), FATA Secretariat, Small and Medium Enterprise
                           Development Authority (SMEDA), women owners of SMEs, KP EPA and local NGOs are some
                           of the key stakeholders of this Project. The ESSAF was disclosed locally by the implementing
                           agencies on the respective websites on December 15, 2010, and was also placed in the InfoShop
                           on January 10, 2011. The ESSAF defines the consultation and disclosure requirements that the
                           Project will need to fulfill for each individual environmental assessment during the Project
                           implementation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       13-Dec-2010
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    10-Jan-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive       ////
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?



                                                                    Page 5 of 6
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Kiran Afzal
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                       Date: 26-Jun-2015
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Esperanza Lasagabaster (PMGR)                 Date: 26-Jun-2015
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 6 of 6
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
