                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC16068

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-May-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Western Africa                  Project ID:      P158363
                            Project Name:        West African Medicines Regulatory Harmonization
                            Team Leader(s):      Aissatou Diack,Andreas Seiter
                            Estimated Date       31-Oct-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GHN07                           Lending          IPF
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 3                              Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              Pharmaceutical Governance Fund                                                                  3
                            Environment        C - Not Required
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To improve the availability of quality and safe medicines and vaccines in the Economic Community
                           of West African States pharmaceutical market by harmonizing registration systems, improving
                           efficiency and enhancing transparency in medicines and vaccines registration.
                           C. Project Description
                           Over the past five years, discussions on medicines regulatory harmonization have been taking place
                           within African regional political structures and among various development partners. The
                           consultative process will continue to be utilized to inform the detailed project design, which will
                           enhance the capacities of the NMRAs of ECOWAS member countries for efficient and effective
                           medicines registration processes via a collaborative regional approach that builds on the successes in
                           Eastern Africa.
                           The grant will be financed by the multi-donor trust fund managed by the HNP GP. The project will
                           be implemented by WAHO (West African Health Organization), which is in the best position for
                           coordinating between WAEMU and the 15 NMRAs. The trust fund has already provided funding for
                           WHO (for technical assistance provided to NMRAs within the context of the AMRH project to the
                           East African Community) and NEPAD (capacity building for the technical and governance bodies
                           created under AMRH, M&E support and troubleshooting of potential institutional bottlenecks that
                           need higher level political intervention. Ongoing support from these two partners is expected and
                           funding will be assured either from the Trust Fund or through direct financing from Gates
                           Foundation or other donors. Gates Foundation has shown a very high commitment to the AMRH
                           project and has been providing direct funding support to other partners and work streams in parallel
Public Disclosure Copy




                           to our trust fund.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The ongoing operation will be implemented within the fifteen ECOWAS member countries namely
                           Benin, Burkina Faso, Capo Verde, Cote d➢❨ Ivoire, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea Bissau,
                           Liberia, Mali, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, and Togo.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Borrower is WAHO but the project will be implemented by each ECOWAS member country.
                           Given that, the evaluation of safeguard management was based on the institutional capacity of each
                           member country of the ECOWAS. Having say that, most member countries have benefitted from
                           other IDA projects which provided sufficient capacity for understanding and applying safeguard
                           policies. That means the implementing countries have adequate institutional and legal framework
                           that would ensure satisfactory compliance with World Bank safeguard Policies. In particular, the
                           Bank➢❨ s involvement in the health sector has been significant and the clients have shown sufficient
                           capacity and goodwill in implementing World Bank funded projects.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        No               The project aims to improve the condition of the
                           BP 4.01                                              pharmaceutical market in the Economic
                                                                                Community of West African States by
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                harmonizing medicines registration systems,
                                                                                improving efficiency and enhancing
                                                                                transparency in medicines registration. To
                                                                                achieve that activities expected to be supported
                                                                                by the project are: training, meetings, joint
                                                                                regulatory inspections and dossier evaluations,
                                                                                inter-regional study tours and workshops,
                                                                                mentoring initiatives, consultant support and
                                                                                capacity buildings. Consequently, no civil
                                                                                works or activities will be undertaken within
                                                                                this operation which are associated with any
                                                                                adverse environmental impact. Taking this into
                                                                                account, the policy is not triggered and no
                                                                                environmental safeguard instrument is required
                                                                                because no adverse impacts are expected. Only
                                                                                best practices will be applied during the project
                                                                                implementation.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               The project is not expected to impact critical
                                                                                natural habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No             The project is not expected to have substantial
                                                                              impacts on Forests in the participating countries.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No             The project does not involve pest management.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No             The project activities are not expected to
                           BP 4.11                                            infringe or impact any social and cultural
                                                                              artifacts in the region.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No             There are no Indigenous Peoples as defined by
                                                                              the World Bank in any member country of the
                                                                              ECOWAS
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No             The project will not include any involuntary
                           4.12                                               resettlement, land acquisition or restriction of
                                                                              access to resources.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No             The implementation of the project will not entail
                                                                              the construction of new dam neither will any of
                                                                              the project activities rely on the performance of
                                                                              an existing dam or a dam under construction
                                                                              (DUC) that draw directly from a reservoir
                                                                              controlled by an existing dam or a DUC;
                                                                              diversion dams or hydraulic structures
                                                                              downstream from an existing dam or a DUC,
                                                                              where failure of the upstream dam could cause
                                                                              extensive damage to or failure of the new Bank-
                                                                              funded structure.
                           Projects on International           No             This project will not involve extraction of water
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                               from any international waterways (any river,
                                                                              canal, lake, or similar body of water that forms a
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              boundary between, or any river or body of
                                                                              surface water that flows through, two or more
                                                                              states, whether Bank members or not). In
                                                                              addition, the project will not impact any
                                                                              tributary or other body of surface water that is a
                                                                              component of any waterway described above.
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                The project will not be located in Disputed
                           7.60                                               Areas as defined by OP/BP 7.60.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                             Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):             Name: Aissatou Diack,Andreas Seiter
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:         Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)                        Date: 16-May-2016
                           Practice Manager/           Name: Trina S. Haque (PMGR)                       Date: 17-Jun-2016
                           Manager:
                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                         affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
