                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA13057
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-May-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-May-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Myanmar                            Project ID:    P152936
                            Project Name:      National Electrification Project (P152936)
                            Task Team          Dejan R. Ostojic,Xiaoping Wang
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          03-Jun-2015                        Estimated   30-Jul-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEEDR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        567.00                 Total Bank Financing: 400.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        167.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               400.00
                              Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified)                                           0.00
                              Total                                                                                     567.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           19.     The project development objective is to help increase access to electricity in Myanmar.
                            3. Project Description
                           The Project has four components.


                                                                       Page 1 of 14
                         Component 1: Grid extension (IDA $300 million). This component will extend the power
                         distribution network and connect the closest communities and households in line with the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Government’s National Electrification Plan. IDA finance will support expansion of distribution
                         substations and the procurement and supply of goods for targets of: (a) around 12,900 miles of power
                         distribution lines and transformers in more than 6,300 locations; and (b) connections and meters for
                         around 750,000 households, 11,600 health clinics, schools and other community buildings, and
                         132,000 public street lights. The Government and communities will co-fund the cost of installation
                         and related services.

                         Component 2: Off-grid electrification (IDA $80 million). This component targets communities
                         located far beyond the existing national grid and unlikely to receive grid access in the next 10 or
                         more years. IDA finance will cover partial costs to procure goods and services for: (i) solar
                         photovoltaic devices or systems for a target of 456,500 households; (ii) mini-grids to serve some
                         35,500 households; and (iii) electricity connections for 11,400 health clinics, schools and other
                         community buildings, and 19,000 public street lights.

                         By targeting remote areas, the IDA support is designed to complement and coordinate with IFC’s
                         proposed Lighting Myanmar Program of advisory services to help develop the commercial market
                         for solar photovoltaic devices and kits in central Myanmar. IFC will finance, appraise and approve its
                         proposed program in parallel to preparation of the National Electrification Project, both as integral
                         aspects of the WBG JIP.

                         Component 3: Technical assistance and project management (IDA $20 million). This component will
                         help to: (a) strengthen institutional capacity to implement both grid and offgrid components of the
                         National Electrification Plan at all levels of implementation; (b) improve related policy and
                         regulation; (c) develop an integrated framework for electrification planning, results monitoring and
                         impact evaluation with geographic information system; (d) secure technical advice and consulting
                         services on standards, technology assessment and technical design, economic and financial analysis,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         environmental and social impact management, procurement and financial management; and (e)
                         manage the Project.

                         Component 4: Contingent emergency response (IDA $0). This component, with an initial allocation
                         of zero, is part of the IDA Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM) in Myanmar. The IDA IRM
                         allows reallocation of a portion of undisbursed balances of IDA-financed investment projects for
                         recovery and reconstruction support following a formal request from Government in the event of an
                         eligible emergency. Eligible uses of, and implementation arrangements and operational procedures
                         for the IDA IRM are outlined in the Myanmar IDA IRM Contingent Emergency Response
                         Implementation Plan (CERIP) being developed, which will serve as the operational manual for this
                         component.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The geographical scope of the Project is national and it is expected that project implementation will
                         eventually include all 64 districts covering all Regions and States in Myanmar. Specific investments
                         will be identified during project implementation and from a safeguard perspective the Project is
                         operating within a framework approach. Both urban, peri-urban and rural areas will be included and
                         areas with a diverse population groups will be covered, including many areas with ethnic minorities.



                                                                      Page 2 of 14
                         Using a least-cost approach, the Project has identified initial target areas for both the grid and off-
                         grid components. Based on the initial lists, the district engineers of MOEP and MLFRD (District
                         PMOs) will identify priority investments needed in each district. In addition to the least cost
Public Disclosure Copy




                         principle, the proposed priorities at the district level will take into account other criteria, such as
                         imminent risk of power shortage in the district and potential congestion of the upstream substation in
                         supplying more residential customers, and environmental and social criteria such as the presence of
                         health and education facilities, affordability and the inclusion of ethnic minorities, vulnerable and
                         poor people through explicit selection criteria. The priority investments (‘subprojects’) by district
                         will be aggregated at the Union level after consultations with the district and the state/ regional
                         authorities to ensure a strong support and ownership of the electrification program at all levels. Off-
                         grid subprojects will be demand-driven and will only take place where community members wish
                         and support such subprojects, which will involve some upfront cash contributions, agreement to
                         receive training and willingness to take responsibility for O&M. Selection criteria will also involve
                         equity concerns among different types of infrastructure projects with government support (i.e. one
                         village receiving roads this year may not receive support for electrification or water supply), etc. The
                         ESMF describes these selection criteria and the Operational Manuals will provide additional details.

                         Specific investment proposals for subprojects for funding from the Project will be submitted,
                         screened and designed during project implementation. As a commitment in relation to the Thaton
                         Power Station supported by the Bank-financed Myanmar Electric Power Project, Thaton District and
                         the villages near the power station will be prioritized for rural electrification under the NEP. Since
                         the upgrading of the power station will not be completed until 2017, the design of the rural
                         electrification investments in the area will not be prepared until during project implementation. Site-
                         specific preparation of subprojects and consultations for Thaton, and all other sites, will therefore be
                         undertaken during project implementation following the Environmental and Social Management
                         Framework (ESMF) that has been prepared for the Project. The ESMF provides provisions the
                         identification, preparation and implementation of site-specific safeguards instruments on a subproject
                         by subproject basis.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         During the preparation of the Project and the ESMF, potential environmental and social impacts and
                         risks were assessed through site visits to typical investments eligible for project financing. A Poverty
                         and Social Impact Assessment (PSIA) was undertaken in two phases. The first phase (PSIA1)
                         focused on generating an overall understanding of access to electricity (barriers to access in rural and
                         urban areas and for poor and marginalized households in particular), uses of electricity, quality of
                         service and affordability of new tariffs of April 2014. The PSIA phase 1 report was finalized in
                         December 2014. The second phase took place from January to April 2015 and provided more in
                         depth inputs to the design of subsidy schemes/tariff structure and additional information to inform
                         the design of the Project and the ESMF.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Ana Nunez Sanchez (GENDR)
                         Charlotte Alice Cantor Bisley (GSURR)
                         Frank Van Woerden (GENDR)
                         Phyu Phyu Aye (GEEDR)
                         Svend Jensby (OPSOR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)



                                                                      Page 3 of 14
                         Environmental           Yes   The project will invest substantially in grid roll-out
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01         through the purchase of equipment including for MV-
                                                       substations (expansion of existing substations and to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       built), MV/LV transformers, MV and LV lines, household
                                                       connections, meters, and off-grid systems including solar
                                                       PV systems, mini-hydropower, wind, diesel and hybrid
                                                       systems. Environmental impacts for grid extensions are
                                                       related to works at substations and the installation of
                                                       power lines, which for instance may require safe disposal
                                                       of construction and other waste and some clearance of
                                                       vegetation. These substations are small and impacts are
                                                       expected to be limited. Off-grid investments could include
                                                       systems based on diesel generators, wind turbines and
                                                       small scale hydropower expected not to exceed 1 MW.
                                                       Possible impacts related for instance to fuel usage and
                                                       installation of turbines in water streams requiring
                                                       (environmental) control measures, but investments will
                                                       not go beyond village level schemes (in principle less than
                                                       1 MW) and potential impacts are expected to be limited,
                                                       localized with few impacts considered as irreversible and
                                                       mitigation measures can be designed as part of the
                                                       safeguard instruments to minimize and mitigate impacts
                                                       during project implementation. In view of this, the project
                                                       has been given a Category B classification under OP4.01.

                                                       Project preparation has focused on building the capacity
                                                       with the Project counterparts to implement the Project
                                                       with dedicated staff, the required capacity --also based on
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       support of experienced consultants-- and a strong
                                                       safeguard framework with mechanisms and procedures to
                                                       screen, assess, plan and monitor the implementation of
                                                       subprojects. This capacity will also be required to support
                                                       applicants with the efficient preparation of proposals for
                                                       subprojects, also with the help of specialized consultants.

                                                       The implementation stage of the Project will also include
                                                       the design of subprojects based on approved application
                                                       for subprojects. Given this need to establish institutional
                                                       arrangements and build implementation capacity first, all
                                                       subprojects and equipment purchases will be determined
                                                       during project implementation and thus framework
                                                       arrangements are required for the modalities of selection
                                                       and implementation of equipment purchases and
                                                       implementation of subprojects. This framework approach
                                                       includes an Environmental and Social Management
                                                       Framework (ESMF), including a Resettlement Policy
                                                       Framework and an Indigenous Peoples Planning



                                                        Page 4 of 14
                         Framework. The ESMF provides guidelines for screening
                         of all subprojects and all project activities including
                         procurement of goods that would result in investments,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         determination of requirements for assessment and
                         preparation of further documentation in accordance with
                         the World Bank safeguards policies including site-specific
                         environmental and social management plans (ESMPs) and
                         the implementation and monitoring of these ESMPs (if
                         needed, the ESMPs will include a Resettlement Action
                         Plan and Indigenous Peoples Plan as described below).
                         The ESMF includes selection criteria to make sure that no
                         subproject will be developed with potential impacts that
                         could require Category A qualification as these would fall
                         beyond the intended scope of the project with limited
                         scale subprojects and capacity would not be in place
                         within the PMOs to prepare and implement Category A
                         subprojects. The ESMF further includes procedures to
                         identify possible environmental impacts for each type of
                         subproject (nine categories of possible subprojects have
                         been pre-identified) and screen for the potential scope of
                         this impacts, ranging from not-applicable to insignificant
                         to significant. Based on the screening outcome and further
                         analytical work when a specific subproject is being
                         prepared, different types of safeguard instruments are
                         available. These are (1) standard Environmental Codes of
                         Practice (ECoP), standardized safeguard measures for
                         subprojects with no specific or only insignificant impacts;
                         (2) standardized ESMP templates, for subprojects with no
Public Disclosure Copy




                         significant impacts and that are highly repetitive, such as
                         grid extensions; and (3) tailored ESMP or ESIA for
                         subprojects with significant impacts. The ESMF also
                         includes guidance on health and safety issues to be
                         followed during project implementation based on the
                         World Bank Group’s Environmental, Health and Safety
                         (EHS) Guidelines for Power Transmission and
                         Distribution and including provisions for beneficiaries
                         and worker health and safety.

                         Given the current lack of capacity with the implementing
                         agencies and other parties that are expected to implement
                         the project and investments in sub-projects, a
                         comprehensive safeguards capacity building program will
                         be required to prepare designated PMO staff and others
                         for project implementation and experienced consultants
                         will be supporting preparation of safeguards documents,
                         their review and the monitoring of subproject
                         implementation. This training program started in January



                          Page 5 of 14
                                                        2015 to prepare project counterparts and staff already
                                                        during project implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        In view of the expected gradually increasing skills with
                                                        the implementing parties and the PMO staff that are the
                                                        core of this, the review by the Bank of safeguard
                                                        screening results, prepared safeguard instruments and
                                                        supervision of implementing subprojects will also have a
                                                        staged approaches, with first subprojects being reviewed
                                                        and provided no-objection by the Bank on an individual
                                                        and pre-review basis. After the first stage and proven
                                                        skills with implementing agencies, a less demanding
                                                        regime can be adopted based on post-review and spot
                                                        checking for most subprojects.

                                                        In addition to sub-projects that are implemented by ESE
                                                        and YESB, it is expected that part of the subprojects’
                                                        investments to be funded by the Project will be
                                                        implemented by private investors / operators and local
                                                        communities. Since the Project in principle will only
                                                        finance the purchase of goods, the ESMF procedures will
                                                        consider that these investments will be matched with
                                                        funding from investors and local communities, as
                                                        applicable. All project funded activities, including the
                                                        sub-project that are implemented by private parties, will
                                                        be required to comply with the World Bank Safeguard
                                                        Policies and the Project’s ESMF.
                                                        IFC will not finance any subprojects. The IFC advisory
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        services that are mentioned in the PAD relate to general
                                                        support to the private solar system sector in Myanmar, but
                                                        will not extend to direct support of subprojects or
                                                        activities under the NEP.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   Significant impacts on natural habitats are not expected.
                         4.04                           However as specific subprojects and their locations are
                                                        yet to be determined further information may be needed
                                                        during implementation to ascertain specific impacts. The
                                                        ESMF provides specific screening provisions to
                                                        determine if natural habitats are an issue, as well as what
                                                        environmental instrument is needed.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    Some vegetation clearance will be required for the
                                                        construction of MV/LV and household connection, but
                                                        this would be limited and highly localized and would not
                                                        affect any forestry activities nor require triggering of
                                                        OP4.36.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     Myanmar has no practice of pesticide use for maintenance
                                                        of cleared power line corridors



                                                         Page 6 of 14
                         Physical Cultural        Yes   The policy is triggered to the project as PCRs may be
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           present in subproject sites. Since the exact locations of
                                                        subprojects are not known at this moment, a guideline for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        identification of physical cultural resources and
                                                        determination of the suitability of the subprojects from the
                                                        perspective of PCR is provided in the ESMF. The ESMF
                                                        also includes "Chance Find" procedures for protection of
                                                        cultural property and contracts for subcontractors will
                                                        include “Chance Find” procedures.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   The project is expected to be country-wide and cover all
                         BP 4.10                        States and Regions, including areas with ethnic minorities
                                                        who are covered by OP 4.10. Ethnic minorities in
                                                        Myanmar live mainly, however not exclusively, in the
                                                        seven States (Kayah, Kayin, Kachin, Chin, Mon, Rakhine,
                                                        and Shan). Ethnic minority communities would benefit
                                                        from project activities. However, the project also presents
                                                        risks and challenges concerning ethnic minorities,
                                                        particularly in terms of ensuring that they will receive
                                                        appropriate benefits. Investing in distribution networks
                                                        and off-grid electrification in conflict or post-conflict
                                                        areas where ethnic minority organizations provide parallel
                                                        social services and community infrastructure also poses
                                                        risks that require a good consultation and project
                                                        management approach. Since specific project sites will
                                                        not be identified during project preparation, an Indigenous
                                                        Peoples Planning Framework has been prepared as part of
                                                        the ESMF to provide guidance on the screening and
                                                        planning process for sub-projects, including requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        for site-specific social assessment and consultations and
                                                        the preparation of site-specific Indigenous Peoples Plans
                                                        to address particular issues concerning ethnic minorities.
                                                        The ESMF and IPPF was informed by the PSIA and
                                                        consultations undertaken during project preparation
                                                        following requirement for social impact assessment under
                                                        OP 4.01 and 4.10.

                                                        Rural electrification of the villages near the Thaton Power
                                                        Station in Mon State supported by the Bank-financed
                                                        Myanmar Electric Power Project will be prioritized for
                                                        inclusion in the National Electrification Program. The
                                                        villages are inhabited mainly by ethnic minorities.
                                                        However, as the upgrading of the power plant will not be
                                                        completed until 2017 the project design cannot be
                                                        prepared until project implementation. An Indigenous
                                                        Peoples Plan for Thaton, and other sub-projects in areas
                                                        with ethnic minorities, will be prepared during project
                                                        implementation once site-specific information will



                                                         Page 7 of 14
                                                           become available with the investment proposals.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes      Since specific project investments are not known by
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.12                        appraisal, it is not possible to rule out that some
                                                           subprojects would involve involuntary resettlement in the
                                                           form of land acquisition or loss of other assets. The
                                                           project will finance distribution networks, including
                                                           expansion of existing Medium Voltage (MV) substations
                                                           and construction of new MV substations, (ii) construction
                                                           of new MV lines, Low Voltage (LV) lines and MV/LV
                                                           transformers. These investments have a minimal footprint,
                                                           normally follow existing right-of-way and have some
                                                           flexibility in terms of specific location to avoid land
                                                           acquisition or loss of property. However, some land
                                                           acquisition or loss of assets may be needed for some
                                                           subprojects, particular in cases where new substations will
                                                           be financed. Off-grid investments, such as mini-hydro
                                                           systems may also have minor impacts. Potential impacts
                                                           and risks in this regard were assessed during project
                                                           preparation as part of the PSIA. The PSIA also assessed
                                                           typical arrangements for village based compensation for
                                                           loss of assets or voluntary donations of land for rural
                                                           electrification infrastructure undertaken by village
                                                           cooperatives and other private sector entities. Based on
                                                           this analysis, a Resettlement Policy Framework was
                                                           prepared as part of the ESMF to provide guidance on the
                                                           screening and planning process for subprojects
                                                           concerning involuntary resettlement impacts. The RPF
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           also includes a protocol for voluntary land donations.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP        Yes   The policy is triggered as the Project interventions may
                         4.37                              include infrastructure covered by the policy’s definition of
                                                           small dams. The ESMF includes provisions to ensure that
                                                           such infrastructure is built using generic dam safety
                                                           measures designed by a qualified engineer. The
                                                           environmental and social impact assessment for the
                                                           subproject will assess potential impacts and mitigation
                                                           measures. Structures with of significant adverse impacts
                                                           due to potential failure of the structure to local
                                                           communities and assets will not be eligible for financing
                                                           as such infrastructure would be beyond the scope of the
                                                           project and the PMOs would not have adequate capacity
                                                           to manage dam safety issues. Similarly, large dams will
                                                           also be screened out as this is outside the scope of the
                                                           project and beyond capacity of the PMOs to manage.
                         Projects on International   No    The project interventions are in nature and in scale not
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50              expected to cause any drainage or discharges to surface
                                                           waters, nor entail any significant usage of surface water



                                                            Page 8 of 14
                                                                       for cooling or other purposes, that would affect
                                                                       international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed        No             The project interventions are not in disputed areas and
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                           will be wholly within the borders of Myanmar.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Through improved access to electricity in urban and rural areas across the country the Project will
                              benefit an estimated 6 million people by supporting connections to the grid for around 750,000
                              households and supporting off-grid investments for around 490,000 households. Project benefits
                              include: reduced costs of electricity (e.g. by reducing connection costs); enhanced well-being by
                              providing electricity for lighting and other household needs, street lighting, telecommunications
                              and entertainment; improved cooking practices and indoor environment (through reduced use of
                              charcoal and firewood for cooking); and enhanced income-generation opportunities and
                              productivity. Furthermore, to maximize developmental impacts the grid component will prioritize
                              connections for health clinics and schools, particularly in poor and vulnerable areas, and the off-
                              grid component will directly benefit the poor and vulnerable households by targeting those who
                              reside outside the reach of the power grid. The Project is also expected to improve the
                              participation of community members in decision-making processes surrounding electricity and
                              strengthen the capacity of Village Electrification Committees.

                             The PSIA and project preparation assessed potential safeguard impacts and risks. The PSIA
                             assessed the key issues and constraints concerning access to electricity (barriers to access in rural
                             and urban areas and for poor and marginalized households in particular), uses of electricity,
                             quality of services and affordability of new tariffs put in place in 2014. It also assessed potential
Public Disclosure Copy




                             social impacts and risks in accordance with the Bank’s safeguard policies (OP 4.01, 4.10 and 4.12)
                             to inform the preparation of the ESMF.

                             The project will invest in grid roll-out through the purchase of equipment including for MV-
                             substations (expansion of existing substations and to be built), MV/LV transformers, MV and LV
                             lines, household connections, meters, and off-grid systems including solar PV systems, mini-
                             hydropower, wind, diesel and hybrid systems. Environmental impacts for grid extensions are
                             related to works at substations and the installation of power lines, which for instance may require
                             safe disposal of construction and other waste. These substations are small and impacts are
                             expected to be limited. Off-grid investments could include systems based on diesel generators,
                             wind turbines and small scale hydropower expected not to exceed 1 MW. Possible impacts related
                             for instance to fuel usage and installation of turbines in water streams would require
                             environmental control measures but investments will not go beyond village level schemes (in
                             principle less than 1 MW) and potential impacts are expected to be limited.

                             The Bank’s Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) safeguard
                             policies are triggered. Adverse impacts, however, are expected to be minor and far outweighed by
                             the Project’s positive impacts. The type of investments supported by the Project generally have
                             small footprints, normally follow existing right-of-way and have some flexibility in terms of
                             specific location to avoid land acquisition. However, some land acquisition or loss of assets such


                                                                        Page 9 of 14
                          as trees and standing crops, cannot be ruled out, for instance in relation to expansion of existing
                          and construction of new Medium Voltage (MV) substations, construction of new MV lines, Low
                          Voltage (LV) lines, and off-grid investments such as mini-hydro systems.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Project includes strengthening of institutional capacity to implement the National
                           Electrification Plan and technical assistance to improve policy and regulatory framework related to
                           electrification (Component 3). These TA activities would not have direct adverse safeguard
                           impacts; they will not lead to the completion of technical or engineering designs, or other outputs
                           in preparation for the construction of physical infrastructure or other activities with potentially
                           significant physical impacts. However, advice on policies may have implications concerning
                           environmental and social aspects relevant to the Bank’s safeguard policies, and provide an
                           opportunity to integrate environmental and social objectives in policy advice. Bank-financed TA
                           activities with safeguard implications will provide advice consistent with the Bank’s safeguard
                           policies following the Interim Guidelines on the Application of Safeguard Policies to Technical
                           Assistance (TA) Activities in Bank-Financed Projects and Trust Funds Administered by the Bank.
                           Moreover, component 3 will provide capacity building for implementing agencies concerning
                           environmental and social concerns. Both aspects of TA related safeguard issues are included in the
                           ESMF.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           No adverse indirect or long term environmental or social impacts are anticipated from project
                           investments, while these are expected to provide positive effects on project beneficiaries and may
                           reduce pollution from fuel-wood used for cooking and candles used for lighting.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           No alternatives were assessed during project preparation as subprojects will not be identified until
                           project implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Project triggers the Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP 4.04),
                           Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11), Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) and Indigenous
                           Peoples (OP 4.10).

                          Since specific project sites will not be identified during project preparation, specific safeguard
                          impacts cannot be determined until project implementation. An ESMF has been prepared to screen
                          for and address any safeguard issues for specific investments and subprojects. The ESMF prepared
                          for the Project to address OP 4.01, 4.04 and 4.11 (and 4.12 and 4.10), including for screening
                          subproject applications to both assess significance of potential impacts and to identify which
                          safeguards instruments are required to further investigate potential impacts, identify mitigation
                          measures, conduct consultations and prepare environmental management and monitoring
                          requirements as needed. The ESMF for environmental impacts differentiates –depending on
                          significance of potential impacts— for subprojects between full ESIA, ESMP or application of the
                          standardized Environmental Code of Practice (ECoP). The ESMF also includes procedures for the
                          monitoring of subprojects’ compliance with the prepared safeguards instruments.

                          The ESMF includes an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework and a Resettlement Policy
                          Framework to address OP 4.10 and 4.12 requirements respectively, including provisions for


                                                                    Page 10 of 14
                           preparing site-specific Resettlement Plans and Indigenous Peoples Plans when needed. As a
                           commitment in relation to the Thaton Power Station supported by the Bank-financed Myanmar
                           Electric Power Project, Thaton District and the villages near the power station will be prioritized
Public Disclosure Copy




                           for rural electrification under the National Electrification Project. The upgrading of the power
                           station is scheduled to be completed in 2017 and the design of the rural electrification investments
                           in the area will be prepared during implementation. This includes the development of an IPP
                           following the requirements of the ESMF and its IPPF.

                           The institutional capacity of the two implementing Ministries, MOEP and MLFRD, is low for all
                           aspects of the electrification program, including capacity to implement and monitor safeguard
                           requirements. Also, ESE (and to a less degree YESB) will require significant institutional
                           strengthening in order to cope with the required doubling of electrification rate envisaged under
                           the project. Capacity building at the state/ regional/ district levels is necessary as well, since they
                           will have important roles in project implementation including monitoring. Currently, government
                           offices at these levels have no capacity to coordinate electrification activities and have no
                           experience concerning safeguards. Both the MOEP and DRD PMOs have assigned the human
                           resources for carrying out safeguard and operational standards-related activities at a national level.
                           However, the background and experience of government staff is mostly focused on engineering,
                           and needs to be expanded to environmental and social management. Basic training on regulatory
                           requirements, environmental and social impacts, and environmental and social assessment and
                           management has started under project preparation and will need to be further extended to improve
                           the capability of relevant MOEP / DRD engineers and experts in carrying out their responsibilities
                           under the proposed Project.

                           The PMO safeguard staff has received on-the-job training during the preparation of the ESMF
                           from international and national safeguard consultants and Bank staff. The Project’s Technical
                           Assistance component includes capacity building to implement the Bank’s safeguard policies and
                           the ESMF includes a capacity building plan. The capacity building will draw lessons from the on-
                           going Bank projects in MOEP (Myanmar Electric Power Project) and MLFRD (CDD project).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The project is national in scope sand includes a broad set of settings, including rural and urban an
                           including public, private and community investments. As a result the key stakeholders are many,
                           including: implementing agencies and other government agencies at national, state/region, district
                           and township levels, the private sector, civil society organizations and local communities and
                           project beneficiaries, which includes diverse social groups such as the many different ethnic
                           groups, religious groups as well as different generational and gender groups.

                           Project preparation included a number of public consultations and field visits to solicit views and
                           feedback from this broad set of stakeholders described above. The PSIA included consultations
                           with civil society, government, and some business stakeholders. This focused on obtaining insights
                           into the potential social impacts and risks of proposed project activities.

                           The PSIA and consultations considered particular issues and risks concerning ethnic minorities, in
                           accordance with the requirements of OP 4.10, and engaged with civil society stakeholders focused
                           on issues associated with land, gender and natural resources governance.
                           Field visits were made to eight villages across northern Chin State (Falam, Hakha) and southern
                           Shan State (Taunggyi, Yatsauk), four villages per state, and included observation of examples of


                                                                      Page 11 of 14
                           the type of infrastructure eligible for project financing.

                           Discussions were held with communities that have different experiences of the electrification
Public Disclosure Copy




                           process; for example, those that: currently receive electricity services through mini-hydro power
                           plants (government-funded and community-funded) and solar home systems; were recently
                           connected to the grid; and also a village that did not currently have access to government-funded
                           electrification programs. In Shan State, the ethnic composition across the four villages visited was
                           Bamar, Danu, Pa-O and Nepali. Chin, Shan, Pa-O and Danu speakers joined the field research
                           team, as needed, to assist in facilitating meaningful engagement at village level.

                           The draft ESMF and Preliminary PSIA for ESMF Input were disclosed in-country on May 5,
                           2015. Public consultations took place in Mandalay, Thuanggyi and Yangon in the period May 14
                           to May 18, 2015. Subsequent to the public consultations the ESMF and PSIA were revised and
                           disclosed in-country and in the Bank’s InfoShop.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        08-Apr-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     28-May-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        00000000
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Myanmar                                                            05-May-2015
                           Comments: In country disclosure of the draft ESMF (including IPPF and RPF) has taken place
                                         on May 5 at DRD’s website and May 7 on MOEP’s website. Subsequent to the
                                         public consultations the instruments were revised and disclosed in-country and at the
                                         Bank’s InfoShop.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        08-Apr-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     28-May-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Myanmar                                                            05-May-2015
                           Comments: In country disclosure of the draft ESMF (including IPPF and RPF) has taken place
                                         on May 5 at DRD’s website and May 7 on MOEP’s website. Subsequent to the
                                         public consultations the instruments were revised and disclosed in-country and at the
                                         Bank’s InfoShop.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        08-Apr-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     28-May-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Myanmar                                                            05-May-2015
                           Comments: In country disclosure of the draft ESMF (including IPPF and RPF) has taken place
                                         on May 5 at DRD’s website and May 7 on MOEP’s website. Subsequent to the
                                         public consultations the instruments were revised and disclosed in-country and at the
                                         Bank’s InfoShop.

                                                                       Page 12 of 14
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information



                                                                    Page 13 of 14
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Dejan R. Ostojic,Xiaoping Wang
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                             Date: 28-May-2015
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Julia M. Fraser (PMGR)                        Date: 28-May-2015
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 14 of 14
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
