                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC17016

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Jan-2017
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Jan-2017
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Cote d'Ivoire                   Project ID:      P151324
                            Project Name:      CI-Infarstructure for Urban Delop. and Competitiv. of second. cities (P151324)
                            Task Team          Maiko Miyake,Hatem Chahbani,Mahine Diop
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          06-Mar-2017                     Estimated        30-May-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTC07                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    150.00                     Total Bank Financing:       100.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           50.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 100.00
                              Total                                                                       150.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed PDO is to increase investments in key economic and social infrastructure and enhance
                           the business environment for private sector investment in the targeted secondary centers of Bouaké
                           and S. Pedro.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project has the following components: 1) enhancing the performance of economic
                           infrastructure; 2) supporting private sector development; 3) improving the enabling environment of
                           cities; and 4) project management.

                           Component 1: Enhancing the performance of economic infrastructure
                         Sub-component 1.1: Bouake
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project develops the urban section of the highway A3 dual carriageway and construction of two
                         heavyweight parking areas to the north and south entrances to the city of Bouake. The project will
                         also pave the urban road of Tolakouadiokro. The project financing the tarring of 4.5 kilometers in
                         2x1 lanes to GESTOCI (T03) to improve access to the hydrocarbon storage facility GESTOCI and
                         serve the dense residential area upstream from the national A3 and wholesale market of Bouake.

                         The project strengthens the management of MGB by improving the PPP arrangement. It is envisaged
                         that the Project will also finance the review of existing management structure of MGB with the view
                         to ensure better functioning and sustainability of the project investments. The government is seeking
                         strategic partnerships and / or PPP to finance and efficiently manage this infrastructure. The project
                         will finance a feasibility study to identify the best mode of PPP adapted to the conditions of the
                         wholesale market, whether it be a service contract, management contract, concession or lease. The
                         study to be made should also include a market localization strategy on the outskirts of the city to
                         allow not only to improve traffic flow in the center of the city, but to optimize the efficiency and
                         productivity of the market.

                         Sub-component 1.2: San Pedro

                         The Project will finance the strengthening of the road dedicated for the use of heavy trucks
                         (approximately 8 kilometers) in order to decongest the city center of San Pedro and divert traffic
                         bound to the port to this road, the upgrading and asphalting of the access road to the airport, which is
                         approximately 1 kilometer, and the construction of access roads to the tourist zone over a length of
                         about 6 kilometers. Finally, the project will also finance the construction of parking and rest areas of
                         trucks: The Project finances the construction of a parking area on 5ha of land in the port area. It is
                         expected that the area is secure and equipped with related equipment (toilets, restaurants,
                         weighbridge, etc.) and be managed by the private sector.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Support to Private Sector Development

                         The Project will finance support to entrepreneurs to encourage business growth in Bouake and San
                         Pedro. To do this, the entrepreneurship program will aim to increase the amount of entrepreneurial
                         activity and capacity of local entrepreneurial support organizations and also identify and build up a
                         select number of high-growth businesses, as well as support the visibility of these activities and
                         businesses. By identifying motivated entrepreneurs who can create the foundation of
                         entrepreneurship in Bouake and San Pedro, and strengthen their capacity to create and develop viable
                         activities, it is hoped that more small and medium businesses contribute to economic growth and
                         sustainable job creation and the dynamism of the private sector in the two cities. This will be
                         achieved through a structured support program that combines training, mentoring, technical and
                         financial assistance to help entrepreneurs transform and implement business ideas through bankable
                         business plans and business acceleration programs.

                         The entrepreneurship program has three distinct parts: (i)business start-up support, (ii) business
                         acceleration program and (iii) provision of shared equipment and facilities. The business start-up
                         support will begin with the deployment of an intensive training on entrepreneurship. This training
                         aims to help participants prepare a business plan and participate in a business plan competition,
                         which takes place each year during the implementation of the project. The winners of the business
                         plan competition, which will seek large private sector sponsorship, will receive mentoring and
                         coaching to refine their business plans, and in the end those among the selected will receive a small
                         grant to start their businesses. The acceleration program is dedicated to established SMEs in need of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         expert advice to help them grow their businesses, as well as access to capital. This will provide
                         longer term technical, management and marketing support (6-18 months) for a select number of high
                         potential businesses as well as access to early-stage patient capital up to $500K. Acceleration
                         program will seek to work with large Ivoirian corporates (for example in agro-processing). Finally,
                         the program will also support provision of shared equipment and facilities for the entrepreneurship
                         programs in each city, including physical space, access to stable energy, water and internet facilities.

                         The program will be managed by reputable private operators, which will also be made responsible to
                         build the capacity of local entities in providing the similar support beyond the project time horizon.
                         Given the critical importance of the delivery capacity of the program, yet relatively scarce
                         availability and quality of services of TA providers in Bouake and San Pedro today, the program will
                         be firmed out to ensure there will be visible impacts within the project life time. However, the
                         contracted firms will be strongly incentivized to build local capacity through carefully crafted
                         contracts, particularly beyond TA providers to also include local institutions such as universities and/
                         or technical training facilities where possible/feasible. The project will also explore the d eployment
                         of more than one firm to run these programs and build capacity in order to create the sense of
                         competition among the programs.

                         Component 3: Improving the enabling environment of cities

                         The project supports the provision of better administrative services for businesses in Bouake and San
                         Pedro. This includes business registration services, which is needed in order to qualify potential
                         investors to benefit specific fiscal incentives. Obtaining construction permit is another procedure to
                         be considered, as the volume of economic activities grows in these cities, so that investors and
                         contractors do not travel to Abidjan for the paper work. But this will also be discussed within the
                         context of de-centralization, as the construction permit is still handled by the central government. In
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Abidjan, the government of Cote d➢❨ Ivoire has already implemented an impressive reforms, and
                         there is no reason why the same expedited services cannot be provided to the residents of cities
                         outside Abidjan.

                         The project will also support the dialogue of stakeholders to improve the business climate in Bouake
                         and San Pedro. The dialogue should address the key concerns raised in the survey such as the lack of
                         transparency of tax obligation, licensing and inspection requirement. This will build on the
                         successful support provided by the World Bank Group to organize stakeholders, provide data and
                         analyses for constructive dialogues and advocacy, and follow up the implementation.

                         The project will also support the collection and dissemination of information for businesses and
                         residents. It is to gather information frequently requested by investors so that the investors are left
                         with more positive impression of the city. In addition, the city can improve the dissemination of
                         information related to economic activities through the existing website (with data access e-
                         government), training to economic development.

                         The project finances the rehabilitation of the City Hall as a host of all the business-oriented services
                         mentioned above. In order to improve the functioning of the city government, it is also proposed that
                         the project finances the rehabilitation of the City Hall. This will allow not only to gather the key city
                         services in one place and but also to provide a business center to inform and guide investors and
                         visitors.

                         It is proposed that the project finance a study on land valuation in the city. The objective of this study
Public Disclosure Copy




                         is to enable decision makers (mayors and state) to make the most of financial resources that could
                         generate requalification of all spaces in the city center due to inefficient occupation. Inefficient space
                         development has limited economic interest in the city.

                         The training will be conducted in order to strengthen their skills in managing competitive cities, but
                         also enable them to benefit from the best practices in terms of competitiveness of cities through
                         south-south exchange.

                         In order to make the city more attractive and enhance the city population, this activity will consist of
                         the development including green areas, etc.

                         Component 4: Project management

                         This component will include support to the project management in coherence with the fiduciary
                         standards of IDA-financed projects, as well as a strengthening of more general institutional
                         capacities. Taking into account the complexity and multi-dimensionality of the project (with multi-
                         sectoral interventions, public and private investments, the role of Central and local authorities)
                         effective institutional coordination is crucial to ensure an efficient implementation of the project. The
                         activities identified under this component would include the following:
                         -        Support to fiduciary management and coordination necessary for a proper execution of the
                         project;
                         -        Strengthening of institutional capacities and the establishment of a platform for collaboration
                         and strong cooperation with the private sector; and
                         -        Support to local and regional institutions.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The project locations are Bouake and San Pedro.

                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Recipient has several years of experience in applying and implementing World Bank projects.
                         There are considerable legal and institutional frameworks in the country to ensure compliance with
                         World Bank safeguards policies triggered by the proposed project. In Cote d'Ivoire, the Ministry of
                         Environment, and Sustainable Development (MINEDD) is responsible for setting policy guidelines
                         on environmental issues and ensuring compliance with national environmental standards. It has
                         different departments among which the National Agency of Environment (ANDE, Agence Nationale
                         de l'Environnement) in charge of environment safeguards compliance of all projects in the country.
                         The unit is relatively staffed and its capacities are acceptable. However, the Project will hire a
                         Senior social staff to enhance and to strength the capacity of the current team on overall social
                         related management. The project will also receive guidance from the Bank's environmental and
                         social specialists in the Project team.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         Abdoul Wahabi Seini (GSU01)
                         Abdoulaye Gadiere (GEN07)
                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies            Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment      Yes        The proposed project will fund the development and
                           OP/BP 4.01                               rehabilitation of urban infrastructure, such as roads
                                                                    and buildings in Bouake and San Pedro.
                                                                    All these activities may induce potential adverse
                                                                    impacts on environmental components. For some
                                                                    constructions, the specific locations are known, and
                                                                    for some, unknown. For those which exact locations
                                                                    are known such as the highway A3 dual carriageway
                                                                    and the construction of two heavyweight parking
                                                                    areas to the north and south entrances to the city of
                                                                    Bouake and the tarring of 4.5 kilometers in 2x1 lanes
                                                                    of the urban road of Tolakouadiokro, Environmental
                                                                    and Social Impact Assessments(ESIAs) will be
                                                                    prepared. This will also be the case in San-Pedro
                                                                    with the strengthening of the road dedicated for the
                                                                    use of heavy trucks (approximately 8 kilometers), the
                                                                    upgrading and asphalting of the access road to the
                                                                    airport, which is approximately 1 kilometer as well
                                                                    as the construction of a parking area on 5ha of land
                                                                    in the port area. The rest of investments for which
                                                                    exact locations are not known to date, an
                                                                    Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                                    (ESMF) will be developed. Once ESIAs and the
                                                                    ESMF prepared, they will be reviewed, consulted
                                                                    upon and disclosed both within Cote d➢❨ Ivoire and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    at the Infoshop prior the appraisal.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No         The project will not undertake any investments that
                                                                    may impact on natural habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36            No         It is not anticipated that forests will be impacted by
                                                                    the project.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes        The Sub-component A2 aims to strengthen the
                                                                    competitiveness of the targeted economic
                                                                    agglomeration, including: the development of high
                                                                    potential value chains (cashews, cereals, fruits and
                                                                    vegetables, cassava/yam).To achieve this, activities
                                                                    under this component may lead to the use of
                                                                    chemical products such as pesticides by
                                                                    beneficiaries. Consequently, an Integrated Pest
                                                                    Management Plan will be prepared, reviewed and
                                                                    disclosed both in Cote d?Ivoire and at the Infoshop
                                                                    prior the Appraisal.
                           Physical Cultural Resources   Yes        This policy is triggered because activities related to
                           OP/BP 4.11                               the construction of roads and the undertaking of
                                                                                                                        other civil works will induce excavations with
                                                                                                                        potential discoveries of physical cultural resources.
                                                                                                                        In order to anticipate and to be sure that all the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        precautions have been taken to protect and safeguard
                                                                                                                        physical cultural resources, the ESMF prepared in
                                                                                                                        line with the OP4.01 will include a section on how to
                                                                                                                        handle chance finds of cultural assets within the
                                                                                                                        project area.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    No                         There are no indigenous people as defined by the
                                 4.10                                                                                   policy in the project area
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                Yes                        As some planned activities will potentially expected
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                to lead to land acquisition or restriction of access to
                                                                                                                        sources of livelihood such as the highway A3 dual
                                                                                                                        carriageway and the construction parking areas in the
                                                                                                                        city of Bouake and the tarring of 4.5 kilometers in
                                                                                                                        2x1 lanes of the urban road of olakouadiokro,. In
                                                                                                                        San-Pedro with the strengthening of the road
                                                                                                                        dedicated for the use of heavy trucks (approximately
                                                                                                                        8 kilometers), the upgrading and asphalting of the
                                                                                                                        access road to the airport, the construction of a
                                                                                                                        parking area on 5ha of land in the port area. Those
                                                                                                                        activities therefore require the finalization of the
                                                                                                                        ongoing RAPs. However, for the rest of investments
                                                                                                                        for which exact locations are not known to date a
                                                                                                                        Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be
                                                                                                                        prepared for the activitis triggered by the OP 4.12 as
                                                                                                                        a due diligence. The Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                                                                        (RPF) consistent with OP 4.12 will be prepared by
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        the Borrower as well as the RAPs, reviewed and
                                                                                                                        cleared by the RSA and disclosed in-country and at
                                                                                                                        through the Bank external website prior to appraisal.
                                                                                                                        The RPF will be used as a guide to conduct specific
                                                                                                                        Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for other further
                                                                                                                        investments. All these reports will submitted to the
                                                                                                                        Bank for approval and disclosure prior to the
                                                                                                                        commencement of any civil works with lands related
                                                                                                                        issues.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         The project will not finance dams nor rely on dams.

                                 Projects on International      No                                                      The project is not expected to affect international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The project will not be located in a Disputed Area.
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 09-Feb-2017



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                             The borrower will prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and an Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP). In
                             addition to these three documents, the client will also prepare ESIAs and RAPs for investments for
                             which exact locations are known to date. These instruments once prepared, will be reviewed,
                             consulted upon and disclosed within the country by the Government of Cote d➢❨ Ivoire, and at
                             the World Bank➢❨ s Infoshop prior to project appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader(s): Name: Maiko Miyake,Hatem Chahbani,Mahine Diop
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)                   Date: 13-Jan-2017
                           Practice Manager/    Name: Rashmi Shankar (PMGR)                 Date: 14-Jan-2017
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
