                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA12474
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 31-Jan-2017
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 31-Jan-2017
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Tanzania                          Project ID:   P150937
                            Project Name:      Dar es Salaam Urban Transport Improvement Project (P150937)
                            Task Team          Yonas Eliesikia Mchomvu
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          09-Jan-2017              Estimated     08-Mar-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GTI01                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       450.80           Total Bank Financing:    425.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        25.80
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              425.00
                              Total                                                                                    450.80
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve transport mobility, accessibility, safety, and
                           quality of transport service delivery along the selected corridors in Dar es Salaam.
                            3. Project Description
                           1.     The project comprises the following three components.
                           (a)    Component A: Establishment of the Third and Fourth Phases of the Dar es Salaam BRT
                           System
                           (b)    Component B: Improvement of the Ubungo Intersection and Complementary Road Safety


                                                                      Page 1 of 11
                         Infrastructure for the BRT Phase 1 System
                         (c)      Component C: Institutional Strengthening and Reform, ICT Innovation, Safety Net, and
                         Transport Studies
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component A: Establishment of the Third and Fourth Phases of the Dar es Salaam BRT System
                         2.       This component will include five subcomponents.
                         Subcomponent 1: Establishment of BRT Phase 3 Infrastructure
                         3.       This subcomponent will support the development of physical infrastructure for the 23.6 km
                         BRT phase 3 trunk corridor. The phase 3 corridor starts at Posta within the Central Business District
                         (CBD) and passes along Maktaba Street, Bibi-Titi Street, and Nyerere Road past Julius Nyerere
                         International Airport (JNIA) to the Gongo la Mboto area. Another branch starts at the Kariakoo BRT
                         terminal along Uhuru Street to Buguruni and Nelson Mandela Road and joins Nyerere Road at the
                         TAZARA junction.
                         4.       The infrastructure will include the BRT trunk corridor, 3 terminals, 1 bus depot, 3 feeder-
                         transfer stations, 25 BRT stations; and 5 pedestrian crossing bridges. The BRT trunk corridor will
                         have a median exclusive lanes for buses with a lane in each direction and overtaking lanes at stations
                         and terminals. The trunk infrastructure will include five pedestrian crossing bridges at the Kisutu
                         market, at the Buguruni-Rozana feeder terminal, at the JNIA terminal, at Banana, and at Gongo la
                         Mboto. The two mixed traffic lanes will be reconstructed in both directions for the entire corridor
                         (currently only available between the CBD and the airport), and bicycle lanes and pedestrian
                         walkways will be constructed on both sides of the corridor at the outmost. The three terminals will be
                         constructed at the Kariakoo hub terminal where all BRT phases integrate, opposite the JNIA, and at
                         Gongo la Mboto. The project will also support the infrastructure for integrating the BRT corridor
                         with the TAZARA central railway station, the JNIA, and vegetable/petty traders markets along the
                         corridor. The BRT bus depot will be constructed at Gongo la Mboto, and the three feeder-transfer
                         stations will be located at Jet Club, Banana, and the Buguruni Rozana area. Park-and-ride facilities
                         for private car owners are planned to be supported near the Jet Club feeder-transfer station and at the
                         Gongo la Mboto terminal. Also, the petty traders and vegetable markets at Kisutu, Mchikichini, and
                         Buguruni will be provided with a safe linkage to the BRT corridor.
                         Subcomponent 2: Establishment of BRT Phase 4 Infrastructure
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5.       The subcomponent will support the construction of the 25.9 km BRT phase 4 trunk corridor
                         infrastructure. The corridor runs from the Maktaba/Bibi Titi Road junction at the CBD (where it
                         connects with the BRT phase 3 corridor) through Ali Hassan Mwinyi Road to Morocco (existing
                         BRT phase 1 terminal). From Morocco, it continues to Mwenge and ends at Tegeta. The trunk
                         corridor has a branch at Mwenge connecting to the BRT phase 1 trunk route at the Ubungo terminal.
                         6.       The 16.6 km road section, out of 25.9 km along the BRT phase 4 trunk corridor, was recently
                         rehabilitated and provided with a reserve land at the median for BRT bus lanes. The recently
                         rehabilitated sections are Mwenge to Tegeta (12.7 km) and Mwenge to Ubungo (3.9 km). The two-
                         lane road section between Mwenge and Morocco was recently widened by adding two additional
                         lanes. The section is to be further rehabilitated as part of the BRT corridor.
                         Subcomponent 3: Preparation for Operation of the BRT System
                         7.       This subcomponent will support the development of a fare integration policy (between BRT
                         corridors and with other modes) and transaction advisory services for the selection of private sector
                         operators through Public Private Partnership (PPP) arrangements. The Transaction Advisers will
                         update the financial analysis for BRT phases 1, 2, 3, and 4 and design the operation arrangements
                         (including fare integration within the network) as different infrastructure phases are completed.
                         Procurement for the operation include (a) two trunk bus operators for BRT phase 3, (b) one trunk bus
                         operator for BRT phase 4, (c) scaling-up of the contract for operation of the fare collection system
                         and station management, and (d) scaling-up of the fund management contract. As part of their key
                         assignment, the Transaction Advisers will also help the existing Daladala (minibus) operators

                                                                      Page 2 of 11
                         establish companies, cooperative, or franchises in line with the sector transformation efforts by the
                         Surface and Marine Transport Regulatory Authority (SUMATRA). The design for operations will:
                         (a)      sensitize the local transport operators (trucks operators, up-country bus operators, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Daladala owners) to work with international bus manufacturers and bankers (local and international)
                         to participate in the bidding for operation of BRT trunk bus services; and
                         (b)      support transformation of the existing Daladala operators and help them establish a
                         company, cooperative, or franchise that can become one of the operators of the BRT phase 3 and 4
                         system.
                         Subcomponent 4: Upgrading of the Fare Collection System and Improving Traffic Management
                         along the BRT Corridors
                         8.       The project will support the design and scaling-up of the automated fare collection system
                         (AFCS), including the supply of smart cards and establishment of the intelligent transportation
                         system (ITS) covering the BRT trunk corridors. The standards for AFCS and ITS upgrade will ensure
                         an open and interoperable system with General Transit Feed Specification (GTFS) data format that
                         are fully accessible to the Government. The support will include construction of a DART traffic
                         control center at the Kariakoo terminal, installation of traffic control systems, the ITS, closed circuit
                         television systems within the BRT corridor, installation of the AFCS along BRT phases 3 and 4,
                         control center help desk, and linkage of the control center with the road safety database. The traffic
                         operations center (TOC) will collect all ITS and operators➢❨ data and become the key function for
                         collaboration with different entities. The ITS Master Plan will be prepared for the entire BRT system
                         that will also be consistent with the national one. The traffic operations center could be used to
                         monitor traffic conditions using cameras and other technology, providing traveler information on
                         road conditions and coordinating congestion management and incident response with different
                         agencies.
                         Subcomponent 5: Implementation Support for Integrated Transit-Oriented Development along the
                         BRT Corridors
                         9.       The subcomponent supports a series of implementation support activities to promote transit
                         and pedestrian-oriented land development, known as transit-oriented development (TOD) and
                         pedestrian-oriented development, respectively, as well as approaches for land value capture and tax
Public Disclosure Copy




                         increment financing to create a high-density commercial and residential center within the BRT
                         corridors. The activities will include
                         (a)      preparation of Integrated Land Use and Transport Plans for BRT phase 3 and 4 corridors, and
                         (b)      advisory and transaction support to guide the redevelopment of stations areas along the BRT
                         phase 1 corridor using PPP mechanisms.
                         10.      The principles of the Integrated Land Use and Transport Plans developed for the BRT phase
                         1 corridor will be applied to BRT phase 3 and 4 corridors. This will enable city authorities to manage
                         land use demand along the corridor in a manner that will increase BRT ridership and decrease traffic
                         congestion and sprawl while ensuring that an attractive and safe environment around transit stations
                         is developed.
                         Component B: Improvement of the Ubungo Intersection and Complementary Road Safety
                         Infrastructure for the BRT Phase 1 System
                         11.      The project will support two subcomponents.
                         Subcomponent 1: Upgrading the Safety of the Ubungo Intersection and Integration of the BRT
                         Corridor with Ubungo Up-country Bus Terminal
                         12.      This subcomponent will involve
                         (a)      construction of an interchange at the Ubungo intersection;
                         (b)      rehabilitation of the Ubungo up-country bus terminal; and
                         (c)      construction of a road linking the up-country bus terminal with the interchange for smooth
                         entrance and departure of buses to and from up-country.

                                                                      Page 3 of 11
                         Subcomponent 2: Road Safety Strengthening along the BRT Corridor and Kimara-Mbezi Feeder
                         Section
                         13.      This subcomponent will involve
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (a)      improvement of pedestrian and cyclists safety along the BRT phase 1 corridor by providing
                         respective exclusive lanes between Kibo and Kimara;
                         (b)      integration of the Kivukoni terminal with the ferry terminal for safe pedestrian and vehicle
                         movements;
                         (c)      improvement of infrastructure for enabling traffic flow (especially right-turning
                         intersections) along the BRT corridor and the Kimara-Mbezi feeder line; and
                         (d)      establishment of a performance-based maintenance contract for the BRT phase 1 corridor.
                         Component C: Institutional Strengthening and Reform, ICT Innovation, Safety Net, and Transport
                         Studies
                         14.      This component has seven subcomponents.
                         Subcomponent 1: Capacity Strengthening of Implementing Agencies
                         15.      This involves
                         (a)      capacity strengthening to the Tanzania National Roads Agency (TANROADS), including
                         technical assistance, equipment, training, and incremental operating costs;
                         (b)      capacity strengthening to DART including technical assistance for managing the BRT
                         system, equipment, training, and incremental operating costs; and
                         (c)      capacity strengthening to SUMATRA for development of mass transit regulations and
                         support to knowledge sharing with other mass transit regulators.
                         Subcomponent 2: Support to Restructuring of DART and Establishment of DUTA
                         16.      This involves
                         (a)      technical assistance for restructuring of DART; and
                         (b)      technical assistance, equipment, training, and initial operating costs for DUTA.
                         Subcomponent 3: Support to Road Safety Agencies
                         17.      This subcomponent will support the establishment of the Road Safety Authority (RSA) by
                         providing
                         (a)      technical assistance, equipment, training, and initial operating costs;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (b)      enhancement and further rollout of the road accident information system (RAIS); and
                         (c)      support to the Department of Road Safety and Environment of the Ministry of Works,
                         Transport, and Communication (MoWTC) to conduct a road safety audit and monitoring along the
                         BRT corridors in Dar es Salaam.
                         Subcomponent 4: Piloting of Safety Nets and Impact Evaluation
                         18.      This involves
                         (a)      design and implementation of a pilot program for providing public transport subsidy to the
                         urban poor
                         (b)      skills development (training) to Daladala drivers; and
                         (c)      design and implementation of impact evaluation (IE) programs for the development of the
                         Dar es Salaam BRT system.
                         Subcomponent 5: ICT Innovation and Open Data Pilot in the Public Transport Sys tem
                         19.      This involves
                         (a)      introduction of open data in public transport in Dar es Salaam City through information and
                         communication technology (ICT) innovation. The ICT innovation would include creation of public
                         transport maps using ➢❨ open transport➢❨ principles;
                         (b)      establishment of public bus service and bicycle routes;
                         (c)      creation of a mobile phone-based system for public transport passengers to provide feedback
                         on the quality of BRT services and enable the authorities to improve service delivery;
                         (d)      development of a gender-based violence reporting system (mobile phone based) to be

                                                                     Page 4 of 11
                         mapped to enable authorities take action; and
                         (e)      development of an accident mapping system along the BRT corridors for advocacy purposes.
                         Subcomponent 6: Improving Oversight Capacity of the MoWTC
Public Disclosure Copy




                         20.      This involves
                         (a)      supporting the training program of the MoWTC (Works) including long-term training
                         courses to low and mid-level professional staff; and
                         (b)      supporting the living allowances (stipend) to fresh graduate engineers to enable them to
                         participate in the Structured Engineers Apprenticeship Program (SEAP). The support of the SEAP
                         will be linked to the development and adoption of a sustainable funding mechanism by the Engineers
                         Registration Board (ERB).
                         Subcomponent 7: Transport Studies and BRT Communication Programs
                         21.      This will involve
                         (a)      updating of the conceptual design for the Dar es Salaam BRT system and detailed
                         engineering design of phases 5 and 6;
                         (b)      study for development of an analytical model for a fare subsidy policy in Dar es Salaam
                         City; and
                         (c)      support to communication programs for the preparation and operation of the Dar es Salaam
                         BRT system.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is located in the Central Business District of Dar es Salaam City, specifically intercepting
                         Ilala and Temeke, which are two among the three municipalities of Dar es Salaam region. The
                         proposed construction of a grade separated junction at the Ubungo intersection is within the BRT
                         Corridor along the central corridor serving all traffic into and out of Dar es Salaam and the
                         hinterland. Specifically BRT Phase 3 is designed to cover Nyerere road corridor from
                         Gongolamboto to Kariakoo, part of Uhuru Street (from Buguruni Traffic light to Kariakoo), part of
                         Mandela Road (From TAZARA Traffic light to Buguruni traffic light), Bibi Titi Road and Azikiwe
                         Street with a total of 23.6 km where it connects with other inward routes joining Kisarawe Town.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project area is characterized by developed residential buildings and high concentration of trade,
                         social services and manufacturing activities.

                         The proposed project will link other ongoing initiatives geared towards improvement of the Dar es
                         Salaam infrastructure and transport network. This project may link to other projects such as:
                         Kigamboni toll bridge (560m long) which is now completed to facilitate transport network of Dar es
                         Salaam City with the Kigamboni area; and Kisarawe Freight Station, which is expected to link with
                         other transport infrastructures including, proposed railway project, which is still under feasibility
                         study. These projects will not be conducted simultaneously, however BRT 3 project is expected to
                         link to the proposed BRT 2 financed by AfDB, Tanzania Zambia Railway Authority (TAZARA)
                         headquarters intersection flyover, which is financed by JICA, and BRT 4, which is also under
                         preparation to be financed by this project.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Jane A. N. Kibbassa (GEN01)
                         Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (GSU07)
                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes            The construction of 23.6 km (phase 3) and 25.9km (phase



                                                                      Page 5 of 11
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01          4) of BRT infrastructure through a major urban center
                                                        coupled, with the proposed construction of a grade
                                                        separated junction at the Ubungo intersection are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        envisaged to generate potential significant and adverse
                                                        environmental and social impacts to city dwellers.
                                                        Potential environmental impacts may include: traffic
                                                        disruption and access restrictions; noise, gaseous and dust
                                                        pollution, soil erosion and pollution of water sources from
                                                        borrow pits and quarries; and occupational hazards,
                                                        mainly during construction phase. The Client has
                                                        prepared an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                                                        (ESIA) and Environmental and Social Management Plan
                                                        (ESMP) for BRT phase 3 and Ubungo to guide mitigation
                                                        of identified and potential impacts during project
                                                        implementation. The Client has also prepared an
                                                        Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                        (ESMF) to guide preparation of appropriate safeguards
                                                        instruments specifically for future activities being
                                                        designed under the DUTP: (i) BRT phase 4; (ii)
                                                        complementary road safety infrastructure along the BRT
                                                        phase 1 corridor, and (iii) any additional activities, within
                                                        the DUTP components, arising from change of design.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No
                         4.04
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural        Yes   Triggering of the Physical Cultural Resources Policy:
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           Most of the works included under the DUTP involves
                                                        improvements within existing corridors therefore it is
                                                        unlikely to have effect on physical cultural sites of
                                                        national and international importance. However, it has
                                                        been decided to trigger Operational Policy (OP) and Bank
                                                        Procedure (BP) 4.11 to put in procedures for addressing
                                                        any chance-find of physical or cultural resource such as
                                                        burial and archaeological sites. The procedures will be
                                                        incorporated in the works contracts and, during project
                                                        implementation; the supervising engineers will ensure that
                                                        the contractor implements appropriate measures. The
                                                        measures include informing local authorities and the
                                                        Antiquities Department; and preparing an appropriate
                                                        mitigation plan, which will be approved before
                                                        commencing any works in that area, as provided in the
                                                        OP/PB 4.11.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No
                         BP 4.10


                                                         Page 6 of 11
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes               The construction of such major roads infrastructure will
                            OP/BP 4.12                                 require land and therefore a number of structures,
                                                                       businesses and households will be affected. The project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       has prepared two RAPs for (i) the Ubungo Intersection
                                                                       and (ii) the BRT 3. The project has also prepared a
                                                                       Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), which will apply
                                                                       to BRT Phases 3 & 4 and for the additional road safety
                                                                       infrastructure works under Phase 1. The RPF will also be
                                                                       applied in case of any physical works resulting from
                                                                       changes of design during implementation of the project.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Most of the impacts will be largely felt both just before and during the construction of the
                              infrastructure and these will include: displacement of people and properties including formal and
                              informal traders currently on the right of way (ROW) due to land acquisition; relocation of public
                              utilities infrastructure and disruption of services; poor air quality from dust and emissions around
                              the construction site and material hauling routes; increased noise pollution and vibrations due to
                              compaction at construction and quarry sites due to compaction; disruption of traffic and accidents,
Public Disclosure Copy




                              etc.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Construction of BRT3, BRT4 and Ubungo intersection will open up many opportunities to the
                              City especially along the project roads and other neighboring centers, Regions and Nation at large.
                              The BRT system will allow more vehicles to reach the city center within the short time, thus
                              commercial activities will be performed within short times and more benefits will be gained.
                              Roadwork activities will have offered some short-term employments to local community such as
                              construction laborers, security personnel, Contractors, Engineers, etc. Overall, the BRT project
                              will have great benefits economically and environmentally compared to current status of the City
                              transport system.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              In order to minimize negative impacts proposal for possible alternatives for accomplishing the
                              same objectives were considered both for construction of BRT 3 infrastructures and the Ubungo
                              intersection. In principle, these included an analysis of the location, timing, inputs, materials and
                              design as well as the do-nothing option. Since the proposed BRT project aims at using the existing
                              road corridor as much as possible. The key or preferred alternative was a design priority that
                              would fit the BRT lane within the existing and only available corridor for traffic from the central


                                                                        Page 7 of 11
                           business district to the airport. Therefore, modifications of the design have been considered to
                           minimize impacts on the existing environment. Geometric design has also been improved to
                           accommodate safety and stability measures.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Tanzanian Environmental Management law requires a full environmental and social impact
                           assessment (ESIA) for a project of this type and magnitude. The Ministry of Transport has in place
                           an Environmental Code of Practice for Road Works (2009), which defines environmental criteria
                           to be applied in Tanzania during feasibility, design, construction and operation of the road
                           infrastructure. Separate Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs), Environmental
                           and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) have been
                           prepared for BRT3 and Ubungo Intersection to identify, assess and mitigate the potential
                           environmental and social impacts The ESIA and Environmental and Social Management Plan
                           (ESMP) have been prepared by the implementing agency, TANROADS on the basis of the
                           environmental criteria as defined in the Code of Practice and the national EIA guidelines together
                           with the requirements of Bank's Safeguards policy on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01).
                           The final ESIAs for Ubungo and BRT3 were been publicly disclosed in country on January 20,
                           2015 and at the InfoShop on January 21, 2015, and October 24, 2016 respectively. In addition, the
                           Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared and provides
                           safeguards procedures for those activities for which detailed design will only be available during
                           implementation such as BRT phase 4 and DART traffic control center under Component A
                           (Subcomponents 2 and 4), and road safety infrastructure along BRT phase 1 under Component B
                           (Subcomponent 2). The ESMF was disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop on January 16, 2017.

                          The status of approval and disclosure of RAPs is as follows: (i) RAP for Ubungo intersection was
                          cleared by the Bank and disclosed both in-country and at the InfoShop on December 16, 2015, and
                          (ii) RAP for BRT phase 3 was cleared by the Bank on December 8, 2016 and disclosed in-country
                          and at the Infoshop on December 27, 2016. The project has also prepared a Resettlement Policy
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Framework (RPF) to provide guidance for the preparation of site specific resettlement or land
                          acquisition plans whatever is applicable for any land acquisition related to those activities for
                          which detailed design will only be available during implementation, such as BRT phase 4 and
                          DART traffic control center under Component A (Sub Components 2, 4) and road safety
                          infrastructure along BRT Phase 1 under Component B. The RPF was disclosed both in country
                          and at the Infoshop on January 16, 2017.

                          TANROADS and its Contractors envisage working in close cooperation with the sub-Wards,
                          Wards, Municipals, Regional and National level authorities within the construction corridor to
                          ensure that the BRT project is executed in a smooth manner. The structures for undertaking
                          various responsibilities during road pre-construction, construction and operation phases have been
                          presented as specified in the Environmental and Social Management Plans of the ESIAs. The costs
                          of various mitigation measures have been included in the total costs of the project in the Bills of
                          Quantities as specified in the Standard Specifications for Road works.

                          Institutional arrangements for environmental and social management are included in relevant
                          safeguards documents. Overall responsibility with the implementation of ESMPs and the RAPs is
                          with TANROADS. TANROADS has an experienced social and environmental unit being part of
                          its Directorate of Planning. This unit will be responsible for quarterly monitoring and reporting on
                          progress of the implementation of ESMP measures throughout the project period. The


                                                                    Page 8 of 11
                           Environmental and social management reports will be reported in the project progress reports.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The consultant conducted the public participation activities particularly during preparation of a
                           scoping report as well as the planning of the proposed project and preparation of the ESIA and
                           RAPs, involving the key potential Interested and Affected Parties (I & APs). The first consultation
                           was carried out in 2015 as part of the preparation of the initial ESIA. Issues and concerns raised in
                           2015 were reconfirmed as part of the current ESIA update, and measures to address these issues
                           have been incorporated into the ESMP and RAPs.

                           Consultation were done through public meetings. Firstly, the consultant identified organization,
                           groups and individuals considered to be regarded as ➢❨ stakeholders➢❨ . This identification was
                           based on each ones roles and their relevance in the proposed BRT roads development project.
                           Some of the stakeholders such as government authorities, district level, wards and sub-ward level
                           that might be impacted by or have interest in the project or exercise some influence on the project
                           were predetermined in 2015. However besides this TANROADS will prepare a stakeholders
                           engagement plan and a detailed stakeholders identification and analysis will be conducted to
                           include other emerging stakeholders and their roles and responsibilities in the project
                           implementation. Other key stakeholders including DART, SUMATRA and the Media will be
                           involved throughout during the project implementation. In addition to the consultations which
                           were done during project preparation, the public will be able to continue accessing safeguards
                           instruments, ESIA and Ubungo Intersection RAP, which have already been disclosed on
                           TANROADS website and the World Bank InfoShop. The final BRT3 RAP will be disclosed prior
                           to Appraisal.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       24-Oct-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    24-Oct-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive       27-Feb-2015
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Tanzania                                                          20-Jan-2015
                           Comments: 1. The ESIA for Ubungo flyover was received by the Bank and disclosed at the
                                         infoshop on January 21, 2015. The EA summary was distributed to EDs on February
                                         27, 2015.
                                         2. The ESIA for BRT phase 3 was received by the Bank and disclosed at the
                                         infoshop on October 24, 2016
                                         3. the ESMF for DUTP (BRT phase 4 and Road Safety infrastructure for BRT phase
                                         1 corridor) was cleared by the Bank on January 13, 2017 and disclosed in-country
                                         and at the InfoShop on January 16, 2017
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       27-Dec-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    27-Dec-2016




                                                                     Page 9 of 11
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Tanzania                                                          16-Dec-2015
                           Comments: 1. The RAP for Ubungo flyover was received by the Bank and disclosed on
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         December 16, 2015.
                                         2. The RAP for BRT phase 3 was cleared by the Bank on December 8, 2016 and
                                         disclosed in-country on December 19, 2016 and at the Infoshop on December 27,
                                         2016.
                                         3. The RPF for DUTP (BRT phase 4 and Road Safety infrastructure for BRT phase 1
                                         corridor) was cleared by the Bank on January 13, 2017 and disclosed in-country and
                                         at the InfoShop on January 16, 2017
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                          Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information




                                                                     Page 10 of 11
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Yonas Eliesikia Mchomvu
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (SA)                      Date: 31-Jan-2017
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Aurelio Menendez (PMGR)                       Date: 31-Jan-2017
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 11 of 11
