                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA15076
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Mar-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Burkina Faso                       Project ID:   P151832
                            Project Name:     Transport and Urban Infrastructure Development Project (P151832)
                            Task Team         Aguiratou Savadogo-Tinto
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         04-Apr-2016                        Estimated   13-Jun-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GSU19                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (55%), Sub-national government
                                              administration (25%), General water, sanitation and flood pr otection sector
                                              (10%), General public administration sector (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (55%), City-wide Infrastructure and Service
                                              Delivery (30%), Administrative and civil service refor m (10%), Urban services
                                              and housing for the poor (5%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     105.00           Total Bank Financing:                100.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         5.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                100.00
                              Total                                                                                    105.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to improve mobility and access to infrastructure in
                           targeted rural and urban areas.

                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                         3. Project Description
                         The project approach is to support geographically coordinated core interventions in five regions of
                         Burkina Faso and in Ouagadougou and thematic studies in the twelve regions. The project will create
Public Disclosure Copy




                         synergies between rural economic development, through improved transport connectivity and
                         support to increased export of agricultural produce, and urban development and economic growth in
                         five targeted regional capitals. These cities have been selected based on complementarity with
                         existing and emerging economic activities, as well as ongoing investments, in the Bagré Growth Pole
                         and in the regions immediately North and West of Ouagadougou. The project will thus strengthen
                         rural-urban linkages. In addition, the project provides capacity building to regional capitals to enable
                         them to manage rapid urbanization in terms of spatial planning and provision of key strategic urban
                         services with the aim of accommodating a rapidly growing population and supporting the growth of
                         economic activities. Finally, the project aims at supporting the improvement of urban transport
                         management in Ouagadougou given the link between improved mobility and productivity in the
                         nation's capital and most important urban agglomeration. All these activities would create temporary
                         and permanent jobs for the population in targeted zones.

                         In terms of connecting infrastructure and linking key rural and urban centers, the project would
                         finance the upgrading of the road Manga-Zabré to connect agricultural producers key markets and
                         facilitate Bagré zone production transfer to the main cities and Ghana. In addition, the project would
                         finance the technical studies of 40 culverts and 100 km to be executed under the labor intensive
                         approach (Haute Intensité de Main-d’Oeuvre or HIMO) funded by the Swiss cooperation.

                         In the 5 cities (2 in the Bagré zone and 3 in the core northern corridor), the project would finance the
                         upgrading of urban roads, storm water channels, marketplaces, bus terminals, and abattoirs. For
                         Ouagadougou, the project would continue support to urban transport sector including the AOTU
                         (Autorité Organisatrice des Transports Urbains), traffic scheme priority activities implementation
                         and a study for a dedicated public transport bus lane as a pilot.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project will be implemented with a spatial focus on the Bagré growth pole region and 5 regional
                         capital cities (Manga, Tenkodogo, Ouahigouya, Koudougou and Dédougou). In addition, the 12
                         regional capital cities (Ouahigouya, Koudougou, Dédougou,Tenkodogo, Manga, Dori, Kaya, Bobo-
                         Dioulasso, Gaoua, Banfora, Ziniaré and Fada N'gourma) will benefit from targeted technical
                         assistance support (training, equipment, specific studies if needed) in the areas of urban planning.
                         The main capital city, Ouagadougou, will benefit from support on urban transport activities.

                         Project components

                         Component A: Inter-urban and rural investments (IDA: US$53 million). This component will
                         contribute to improving connectivity in the five targeted areas. The component activities are entirely
                         funded by IDA funds. It includes four groups of activities:

                         i) Road upgrading works: (a) Upgrading of about 85 kilometers of the RN29 between Manga and
                         Zabré, (b) rehabilitating earth rural roads connecting production areas to the main road Manga-Zabré
                         (including Dindéogo-Zonsé). The feasibility of including internet connectivity is being studied in
                         connection with the road designs, to bring the beneficiary areas out of their "digital isolation"; (c)
                         ICT connectivity improvement for the agglomerations along the Manga-Zabré road (about US$0.60
                         million); (d) construction of 2 axle load control stations along with the road of Manga-Zabré; (about
                         US$0.600 million);


                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         ii) Feasibility studies and engineering design for: the rehabilitation of rural roads connecting
                         production areas to the main road Manga-Zabré;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         iii) Feasibility studies and engineering designs of: (a) 200 kilometers of rural roads in connection
                         with the selected cities hinterlands; (b) 100 kilometers of rural roads by labor-intensive construction
                         methods; and (c) of about 40 culverts. All these sub projects are subject to technical studies during
                         the preparation and during th e first year of implementation of the project;

                         iv) upgrading about 100 kilometers of existing rural unpaved roads by high labor-intensive methods;
                         and construction of about 40 culverts opening up production areas in the targeted zones. Both the
                         100km and the 40 culverts will be funded by the Swiss Development Cooperation (SDC) for CHF 7
                         million in a parallel co-financing.

                         Component B: Urban investments in targeted regional capitals (IDA: US$29.90 million). This
                         component will fund activities in all 12 regional capitals and in Ouagadougou, with physical
                         investments limited to the five targeted cities. Investments are based on the urban master plans
                         diagnosis and the Government's investment plan drawn from these master plans coupled with active
                         and iterative discussions with the municipalities during the identification and preparation process of
                         the project. All physical investments are subject to clarification of the relevant safeguards issues and
                         positive outcome of feasibility studies and will only be confirmed after effectiveness. The component
                         activities are entirely funded by IDA funds and include:

                         i) uUrban roads upgrading: (a) Koudougou; (b) Ouahigouya; (c) Tenkedogo; and (d) Manga;
                         ii) Urban environment: (a) Institutional support for the improvement of solid waste management in
                         some of the targeted project cities; and (b) construction of storm water drainage in Koudougou;
                         iii) Activity zones: rehabilitation of urban gardening zones in Manga and Ouahigouya;
                         iiv) Structuring urban facilities: (a) construction of bus stations in Dédougou and Manga; (b)
                         construction of a cattle market in Manga; (c) rehabilitation and upgrading of the abattoir in Manga;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and (d) (plus potentially a community hall in Manga).

                         Component C: Institutional support, sector reforms and governance (IDA: US$12.50 million
                         equivalent). This component is targeted towards activities that will contribute to improving the
                         operational capacity of ministries and municipalities involved in project implementation and to
                         further support reform to improve sectors competitiveness. The component activities are entirely
                         funded by IDA funds.

                         Sub-component C1: Ministry of Infrastructure (IDA: US$ 1.40million equivalent). This sub-
                         component supports the transport sector (Ministry of Infrastructure, General Secretariat, central,
                         regional and provincial directorates involved in the project) in the continuation and implementation
                         of sector reform.

                         Sub-component C2: Transport sector (IDA: US$0.60 million equivalent). This sub-component
                         supports the transport sector (Ministry of Transport Urban Mobility and Road Safety - MTUMRS,
                         General Secretariat, central, regional and provincial directorates involved in the project) for the
                         continuation and implementation of sector reforms.

                         Sub-component C3: Urban sector (IDA: US$10.50 million equivalent). This subcomponent will
                         provide technical assistance to line ministries and local governments to improve urban planning and

                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                         management for better access to urban infrastructure. The line ministries supported by the component
                         are the Ministry of Urban Planning and Housing (MUH), the Ministry of Territorial Administration,
                         Decentralization and Homeland Security (MATDSI), and the Local Governments (LGs). The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         component will also finance urban mobility in Ouagadougou: (i) feasibility study for implementation
                         of a system of bus rapid transport; (ii) support to operationalizing the Ouagadougou Urban Transport
                         Authority (Autorité Organisatrice du Transport Urbain – AOTU); and (iii) support to implementing
                         the traffic scheme for Ouagadougou).

                         Component D: Project management (GoBF: US$5 million equivalent)

                         1.       Component D1: Project management cost. This component will fund all costs related to
                         coordination and management of project activities as well as costs of monitoring and evalu ation of
                         project activities (about US$3.9million).

                         2.     Component D2: Implementation of social and environmental measures and communication:
                         The proposed project will finance implementation cost for the Environment and Social Impact
                         Assessment (ESIA)/Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and Resettlement Action
                         Plan (RAP) for the planned road and urban infrastructure works. It will finance also the costs for
                         environmental and social safeguards audits, and communication activities, (about US$1.1 million).

                         The component activities are entirely funded by the US$5 million GoBF counterpart funds.

                         Component E: Mitigating beneficiary's vulnerability to climatic changes (IDA: US$0 million)

                         This component is a "zero-dollar" Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC). It will
                         provide immediate response in the event of an eligible crisis or emergency, defined as an event that
                         has caused or is likely to imminently cause a major adverse economic and/or social impact associated
                         with natural or man-made crises or disasters. This component would contribute to avoid further
                         damage to or temporarily restore infrastructures, ensure business continuity, and enable early
Public Disclosure Copy




                         recovery and reconstruction. The details of the operational procedures, based on BP/OP 8.00 Rapid
                         Response to Emergencies and Crises, are provided in Annex 2. This component is included, in line
                         with the climate change screening to safeguard investments and avoid or minimize the effects of such
                         trigger events on project investments or other critical infrastructure.

                         Physical and price contingencies: An unallocated amount of US$2 million is provisioned to cover
                         any contingencies fees.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will implement specific targeted activities in the five regional capitals: Tenkodogo,
                         Manga, in the Bagré Growth pole zone, Ouahigouya, Koudougou and Dédougou in the north west
                         and central west zone of the country and thematic studies in the 12 regional capital cities including
                         the five cities (Ouahigouya, Koudougou, Dédougou,Tenkodogo, Manga, Dori, Kaya, Bobo, Gaoua,
                         Banfora, Ziniaré and Fada N'gourma) for cross cutting activities. Mobility activities will
                         implemented in the commune of Ouagadougou.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Abdoul Wahabi Seini (GSU01)
                         Abdoulaye Gadiere (GEN07)


                                                                      Page 4 of 9
                         6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental               Yes        The project is rated Environmental Assessment category
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                  B because potential environmental adverse impacts are
                                                                expected to be moderate, sites specific and manageable at
                                                                an acceptable level. Due to the fact that the exact
                                                                locations of possible investments are not yet known to
                                                                date, the relevant safeguard instruments to prepare is an
                                                                Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                                (ESMF). This document has been prepared reviewed by
                                                                the world bank consulted upon and disclosed in the
                                                                country on February 1, 2016 and March 22, 2016 and at
                                                                the Bank's Infoshop on March 24, 2016
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP      No         The project will not undertake any investments that may
                         4.04                                   impact on natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36          No         Rehabilitation and road construction will occur on
                                                                existing road sections. It is not anticipated that forests will
                                                                be impacted by the project.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No             The project will not address pest management or finance
                                                                the purchase of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural           Yes        In order to anticipate and to be sure that all the
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11                   precautions have been taken to protect and safeguard
                                                                physical cultural resources, addressing these concerns has
                                                                be included in the Physical Cultural Resources
                                                                Management Framework which has also been reviewed,
                                                                reviewed by the world bank consulted upon and disclosed
                                                                in the country on February 1, 2016 and March 22, 2016
                                                                and at the Bank's Infoshop on March 24, 2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No            There are no indigenous peoples in the project area.
                         BP 4.10
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes           This policy is applicable because the project investments
                         OP/BP 4.12                             may support interventions that could entail temporary
                                                                land taking or limiting access to land and other resources.
                                                                An RPF has been prepared, reviewed, reviewed by the
                                                                world bank consulted upon and disclosed in the country
                                                                on February 1, 2016 and March 22, 2016 and at the
                                                                Bank's Infoshop on March 24, 2016. Specific RAP will be
                                                                prepared and submitted to the Bank for approval prior the
                                                                commencement of civil works.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP        No         The project will not finance dams nor rely on dams.
                         4.37
                         Projects on International   No         The project is not expected to affect international
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   waterways.
                         Projects in Disputed        No         The project will not be located in a Disputed Area.
                         Areas OP/BP 7.60




                                                                  Page 5 of 9
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project will fund roads (urban and inter-urban) rehabilitation and upgrading (pavement of
                              existing roads). With regard to inter-urban roads, the project is planning to upgrade the road
                              Manga-Zabre around 85km which is a portion of a road section of 104 km from Manga-Zabre-
                              border of Ghana and some rural roads connecting to the main road (including Dindeogo-Zonse).
                              As for urban roads, some cities among the five (Manga, Tenkodogo, Koudougou, Ouahigouya and
                              Dédougou) will benefit from the upgrading or rehabilitation of existing roads and also some
                              infrastructures such as regional markets, warehouses, animal health facilities requested by the local
                              governments. The Suisse cooperation is funding the rehabilitation of about 100 km of rural roads
                              and 40 culverts for which IDA will fund the technical feasibility studies and environmental and
                              social assessment. These constructions due to the fact that they are site specific and using existing
                              roads, are unlikely to entail potential adverse impacts on the environment. The eventual impacts
                              are at limited scale and reversible.

                              The project is rated Environmental Assessment category B and triggers three environmental
                              safeguard policies namely: OP/PB4.01 on Environmental Assessment, OP/PB 4.11 on Physical
                              Cultural Resources and the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguard Policy (OP/PB 4.12). This
                              environmental rating was linked to the fact that the initial scope of the project was targeting major
                              investments in urban and inter urban areas, but these investments were substantially reduced due
                              to the shortage of money. The project cost is US$100 million and some major investments are no
                              longer in the scope (settlement of specific commercial zones, construction of landfill, and
                              construction of dry port).
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                              In the current PIDURMO’s scope, the roads to be upgraded are existing roads. The upgrading
                              works are expected to have limited and reversible adverse impacts on human populations and
                              vulnerable social groups. The potentially negative social impacts of activities carried out under the
                              Project are limited and site-specific. It is unlikely that the proposed activities will entail major
                              resettlement such as the relocation of dwellings. The proposed activities are likely to cause limited
                              temporary displacements and rarely resettlements. The potential temporary displacements are
                              mostly due to displacements composed of the temporary settlements along the roads composed of
                              small scale road side trading small shops usually illegally built along the roads. The probable
                              negative social impacts of activities carried out under the project are known and site specific
                              typical of such projects. Road construction is expected to have temporary adverse impacts on
                              commercial activities interruption for populations settled along the road in some agglomerations
                              but during the market days (every three days).
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              For the urban investments, one of the criteria in their final selection would be that there will not be
                              a need to relocate people. If despite the precaution taken, and for some reasons it was deemed
                              necessary to relocate people, an appropriated Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) would be prepared
                              and submitted to the World Bank for approval, prior to commencement of any of the planned road
                              works.


                                                                          Page 6 of 9
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), the Environmental and Social Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Framework ESMF and a Physical Cultural Resources Management Framework (PCRMF) were
                           prepared to address all issues related to impacts of investments. The three frameworks have been
                           reviewed by the Bank, cleared and have been disclosed in the country on February 1, 2016 and
                           March 22, 2016 and at the Bank's Infoshop on March 24, 2016.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Local communities and government, enterprises in charge of the works and supervision
                           consultants, line Ministries staff and CSOs participating in the project implementation and the
                           ministry in charge of environment as well as the national agency for environment assessment will
                           play a key role in the implementation of safeguards issues related to the project.

                           The Borrower has experience in managing World Bank operations and the safeguards aspects of
                           those operations. Also, the country has a legal and regulatory framework and an interest in
                           promoting safeguards The country strategy is coherent with this philosophy as it is part of the key
                           pillars of the country's Strategy for Accelerated Growth and Sustained Development for 2011–15
                           (Stratégie pour la Croissance Accélérée et le Développement Durable- SCADD). The Borrower's
                           institutional capacity for safeguard policies is acceptable on environmental side and effort will be
                           made to strengthen their capacity on social side especially with regard of the OP 4.12. The hosting
                           unit has implemented successive Bank infrastructure projects including safeguards issues. Also
                           this unit is staffed with a safeguard person whose role is to support the preparation for
                           environmental and social aspects. The Borrower has drafted and submitted for IDA clearance the
                           TORs of various safeguards instruments (including an ESMF, RPF, Physical Cultural Resource
                           Management Framework). In terms of institutions, the country has a national agency (Bureau
                           National des Evaluations Environnementales - BUNEE) that is in charge of environmental
                           assessments, the monitoring and control of project implementation at the national level. Although
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the Project coordination unit is already familiar with World Bank environment procedures, it is
                           planned that additional training sessions would be organized for staff on Bank safeguards policies
                           and an additional safeguards specialist with a strong social background will be hired to strength
                           the safeguards unit. This capacity building session will also involve local government, other line
                           Ministries staff and CSOs participating in the project implementation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        25-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     24-Mar-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Burkina Faso                                                       01-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        25-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     24-Mar-2016


                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Burkina Faso                                                     01-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                          60 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the   Yes [        ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [        ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies




                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Aguiratou Savadogo-Tinto
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                       Date: 05-Apr-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Maria Angelica Sotomayor Araujo               Date: 05-Apr-2016
                            Manager:                   (PMGR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
