INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA14508
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Aug-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Aug-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Pacific Islands             Project ID:  P152653
Project Name: Sustainable Energy Industry Development Project (P152653)
Task Team       Roberto Gabriel Aiello
Leader(s):
Estimated                                   Estimated    31-Aug-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEEO2                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Other Renewable Energy (75%), General energy sector (25%)
Theme(s):       Other environment and natural resources management (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       5.66             Total Bank Financing:     0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
O
Borrower                                                                      0.00
Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                  1.92
Energy Sector Management Assistance Program                                   3.47
Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery                           0.27
Total                                                                         5.66
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project development objective (PDO) is to increase the data availability and capacity in Pacific
Island power utilities to enhance their ability to incorporate and manage renewable energy
technologies and long-term disaster risk planning.
Page 1 of 8


﻿3. Project Description
The growth of sustainable energy technologies in the Pacific region has accelerated the need to fill
gaps in the establishment and adoption of training standards, installation and design guidelines for
renewable energy systems and the powers for the industry to provide self-regulation during this
period of rapid growth.
Successful quality driven and sustainable industries require a skilled workforce and appropriate
a         guidelines and standards that the industry applies. Together the Pacific Power Association (PPA) and
the Sustainable Energy Industry Association of the Pacific Islands (SEIAPI) have identified a suite of
activities to be implemented over the coming four years to support the creation of an enabling
environment for renewable energy investments in the Pacific Island Countries (PICs). The proposed
projects will increase the understanding and willingness of the PICs' utilities to accept renewable
energy systems through a greater understanding of the expected impacts on grid stability, load
forecasting as well as to facilitate better knowledge and data sharing. In addition, the project will also
lead to consistent competencies amongst practitioners in the field through development of standards
and the creation of certification pathways for practitioners to receive formal recognition of their
technical training.
A related matter is the ability for the sector to prepare for disaster and climate resilience. The
production and distribution infrastructure can be highly vulnerable to the impacts of natural hazards
and climate change. These impacts will have consequences for the design, construction, location and
operations of power infrastructure.
Overall, the project is expected to have a perpetual positive impact on the social and physical
environments in the Pacific. The Pacific has heavy reliance on generation from diesel fuel which is
an expensive finite resource and needs to be handled, shipped, stored/distributed all of which have
the potential to create substantive environmental harm, particularly in sensitive environments.
Analysis of renewable energy opportunities in the Pacific will seek to reduce these costs and
environmental risks.
This project has three components:
Component 1: Renewable Energy Resource Mapping Phase 1-3: This component will carry out a
resource-mapping assessment of solar and/or wind capacity across 10 PICs. The objective of this
component is to enhance awareness and knowledge of governments, utilities and the private sector
about the resource potential for renewable technologies (solar and/or wind), and to provide
governments with a spatial planning framework to guide investment in the Renewable Energy sector.
These resource maps will: (a) provide a detailed assessment for solar and potentially also wind and
other renewable energy resources in the islands; (b) increase the awareness and knowledge of
governments and other energy-sector players about renewable energy potential; (c) provide baseline
information for potential new public- and private-sector investment projects; and (d) serve as an
input for grid integration studies.
The above-mentioned Phases 1-3 of the resource mapping will be undertaken with support from the
Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP):
*      Phase 1 - Project inception, preliminary modeling and implementation planning: Project
inception and stakeholder engagement; preparation of an initial resource estimate at the country level
Page 2 of 8


﻿based on a mesoscale model using satellite and reanalysis data; preliminary validation using existing
ground-based data; preparations for the implementation of Phase 2;
*      Phase 2 - Ground-based data collection: Implementation of a ground-based measurement
O
U         campaign using high quality measurement devices, with real-time data transmission and reporting,
for the purpose of validating and improving the mesoscale model and generating reliable
benchmarking data;
 *    Phase 3 - Production of validated wind resource atlas: Prepare validated resource maps and
Atlas reports that describes the final outputs, methodology and process, and includes provision of the
final geographic information system (GIS) data.
The activity will ensure the sharing of knowledge about the current existing information and will
avoid duplication of data collection. Use of the ESMAP approach will make it possible to continue
with the next phases (phases 4 and 5) under a different project if additional funds become available
or if the funds alloc ated to phases 1-3 allow to cover additional scope in some islands.
Component 2: Technical Assistance: This component will carry out a program of activities designed
to increase capacity within the utilities in 10 PICs and PNG on planning for and management of the
integration of variable RE in their systems, data collection and management, and knowledge sharing
across jurisdictions. This program of activities will include: (i) acquisition of modeling software and
consultancy services for renewable energy integration and capacity building; (ii) development of an
online power benchmarking platform; (iii) development of Industry guidelines and competency
standards; (iv) training/workshops; (v) power utilities career development assessment plan; and (vi)
disaster-recovery and risk-reduction activities.
This component will complement Component 1 by providing training and workshops to power-sector
utility staff on technical skills related to renewable energy integration so that they can better use the
information that is obtained through the resource mapping component.
Component 3: Project Implementation Support. This component will carry out a program of activities
designed to enhance the capacity of PPA for overall project coordination, management and
monitoring.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
*        analysis (if known)
Component 1 (Phases 2 of the ESMAP process) comprises the temporary installation of wind
monitoring masts and solar monitoring equipment, but the proposed locations will not be known until
the desk-based research under Phase 1 has been completed. They may be located in 10 of the 11
countries. The installation of ground based measurement equipment under Phase 2 of the project is
expected to be on Government land but this may not always be the case (for example wind
monitoring will depend on the location of the wind resource). Custom or community land may be
required temporarily. The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been
prepared to inform site selection and the mitigation measures required at each site. Sensitive sites,
such as physical cultural resources, nests or productive gardens, can be avoided through the use of
the ESMF in the site selection process.
The ESMF also includes methods to identify and minimize impacts during installation, use and
decommissioning, and will include voluntary land donation protocols and consultation methods.
Potential impacts to be managed are: 1) minimizing vegetation clearance for mast installation and
Page 3 of 8


﻿associated track clearances; 2) ensuring land access is secured in accordance with OP4.12 and
OP4. 10; 3) avoiding nests, gardens, houses, sites of significance to local people and other physical
cultural resources etc.; and 4) ensuring affected parties are consulted and are fully informed of the
activity.
o
Technical Assistance activities under Components 1 and 2 will produce outputs, such as resource
maps and training materials, that will influence infrastructure planning and decision making in these
countries in future (not funded by this project). Technical Assistance will be guided by ToRs
approved by the Bank which will ensure safeguard issues are adequate addressed in activities.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Penelope Ruth Ferguson (GENDR)
Ross James Butler (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          Screening has identified low risk of environmental and
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                social impact, from the installation of wind monitoring
masts and solar monitoring equipment, and the indirect
implementation of recommendations from Component 1
and 2 (desk-based research and training). The ESMF
includes a 'Code of Practice' and a screening checklist to
avoid or manage impacts from the siting of the
equipment. PPA will ensure that all terms of reference for
technical assistance and studies carried out under the
Project are consistent with the WB's environmental and
social safeguards policies and requirements.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           The footprint of the infrastructure is very small and
4.04                                 through the desk top study any natural habitats can be
avoided in Component 1.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           The footprint of the equipment required in Component 1
is very small and will not adversely affect forested areas
or the use of forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          There is no pest management under this project.
Physical Cultural       Yes          The footprint of the equipment required for Component 1
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 is very small and physical cultural resources can be
avoided. Physical cultural resources will be screened as
part of site selection, hence the policy is triggered.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes          Because the project will apply to a number of Countries
BP 4.10                              where Indigenous Peoples reside and have strong
relationships with land, OP/BP 4.10 is proposed to be
triggered. For the Component 1 land requirements, it is
expected that Government land will generally be
available, and use of this land will be prioritized, but this
may not always be possible. Land acquisition will not be
required, but there will be some temporary use of land and
this will require either voluntary land donation or
Page 4 of 8


﻿temporary land lease or similar arrangement; some of this
land may be in areas used/inhabited/owned by indigenous
communities.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes        Under Component 1 there will be temporary use of land
OP/BP 4.12                           for wind monitoring masts and solar monitoring
equipment. Government land will be prioritized, but if
community or custom land is required, a process for
consultation and access agreements is required and this
will form part of the EMSF as described under 4.01.
PPA will ensure that all terms of reference for any
technical assistance or studies carried out under the
Project are consistent with the requirements of this policy.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           This project does not involve the construction of dams or
4.37                                 rely on the performance of an existing dam or a dam
under construction.
Projects on International  No        No studies or activities are proposed international waters.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No           No studies or activities are proposed in disputed areas.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There are no potential large scale, significant and / or irreversible impacts. The site selection and
installation of wind monitoring masts will require land, the location of which will be decided
during implementation. The footprint is small, and the location of the equipment is flexible to
avoid sensitive sites. Some site preparation such as tree trimming or vegetation removal may be
required.
O
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The work undertaken under Component 1 will produce recommendations which may result in
future renewable energy development in any or all of the 10 PIC's. Because of the influence this
project may have on future activities (not funded by this project), the Terms of Reference for the
consultant responsible for Component 1 will take into account of the World Bank safeguard
policies when making recommendations. Similarly, the training component will influence future
activities in the sector. The Terms of Reference for the consultant responsible for training under
Component 2 will take into account of the World Bank safeguard policies when preparing and
delivering materials.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
No project alternatives have been considered.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The PPA will be responsible for the implementation of the ESMF, preparing TOR's for
Page 5 of 8


﻿consultants that include safeguards clauses, and reviewing the consultants' outputs in relation to
the TORs and the ESMF. One of the consultants selected to support PPA under Component 3 will
require experience in donor safeguards to undertake this role. The World Bank safeguards
specialists will assist the PPA team by providing some initial training and assist with the review of
O
TOR, wind mast installation and Consultant's deliverables.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
O
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders and beneficiaries are the energy Ministries and utilities in the 11 countries.
They have received the ESMF and attended meetings where PPA presented the project and the
ESMF. During implementation the potentially affected people are those who will have a mast
installed on their land or neighbouring land. As part of the site screening process, the land owners,
occupiers and potentially affected neighbours will be consulted by the technical consultant and / or
the in-country utility. Consultation will be free, open and without coercion. Where land is owned
communally, the consultant and / or in-country utility carrying out the consultation will ensure that
women and young people have equal opportunity to understand the proposal and lease
arrangements.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              09-Jul-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           09-Jul-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Fiji                                                     09-Jul-2015
Comments: Also disclosed in Pacific Regional Data Repository 'PRDRSE4ALL'.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
0
U Date of receipt by the Bank 09-Jul-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           09-Jul-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Fiji                                                     09-Jul-2015
Comments: Incorporated in the ESMF.
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              09-Jul-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           09-Jul-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Fiji                                                     09-Jul-2015
Comments: Incorporated in the ESMF.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Page 6 of 8


﻿C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [  ] No [X]   NA [    ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Roberto Gabriel Aiello
Page 7 of 8


﻿Approved By
Practice Manager/    Name: Julia M. Fraser (PMGR)            Date: 11-Aug-2015
Manager:
P
Page 8 of 8


