INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA13582
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Dec-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Kiribati                   Project ID:  P153381
Parent       P128938
Project ID:
Project Name: Kiribati Aviation Investment Project Additional Financing (P153381)
Parent Project Pacific Aviation Investment - Kiribati (P128938)
Name:
Task Team       Pierre Graftieaux,Christopher R. Bennett
Leader(s):
Estimated       28-Dec-2015                Estimated    09-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIO2                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Aviation (85%), Public administration- Transportation (15%)
Theme(s):       Regional integration (20%), Trade facilitation and market access (20%), Climate
change (20%), Natural disaster management (20%), Adm inistrative and civil
service reform (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      14.33            Total Bank Financing:    7.10
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          1.88
IDA Grant                                                                   7.10
Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility Trust Fund                         5.35
Total                                                                      14.33
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Page 1 of 7


﻿Is this a         No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The project development objective is to improve operational safety and oversight of international
air transport infrastructure.
B. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
The project development objective is to improve operational safety and oversight of international
air transport and associated infrastructure.
3. Project Description
Component A: International Air Transport Infrastructure Investments (approx. US$8.91 million,
excluding contingencies)
*      Cassidy Airport (CXI): All investments for Cassidy are required to ensure that CXI will
again be nominated by airlines as an Extended Range Twin Engine Operations (ETOPS) alternate ,
and will be largely funded through the PRIF Trust Fund. The re-establishment of Cassidy as ETOPS
and the anticipated fees paid by the airlines for this service will provide a much needed revenue
source for the GoK, which will contribute to the sustainability of the aviation sector in Kiribati. The
additional financing will cover shortfalls for the following:
o      Terminal Building: Reconstruction of Cassidy Airport Terminal to reach compliance with
international standards and recommended practices. Given flights from CXI land on US soil, the
terminal must adhere to strict requirements of the US FAA and TSA in order for the flights to Hawaii
not to be discontinued. The requirement for full deplaning of passengers and rescreening was not
enforced at the time of appraisal, which resulted in a substantial increase in floor area required
compared with the current terminal, in addition to more sophisticated screening facilities.
o      Navigations Aids and Lighting: Navigation Aids such as a non-directional Beacon (NDB),
an automatic weather station (AWS), improved power supply, air traffic control equipment and
airfield ground lighting. Most of the cost increase compared to appraisal estimates was with CXI, due
to more stringent requirements around ETOPS for full Airfield Ground Lighting and Simple
Approach Lighting Systems, sufficient for Fiji Airways, Air New Zealand and Virgin to continue to
use CXI in an emergency and to hold this airport as an alternate. .
o      Communications Equipment: VSAT Communications Equipment for ground-to-ground
communications.
o      Combined Fire Tender and Maintenance Shelter: A shelter for storing fire tender vehicles
and to serve as a workshop for conducting maintenance activities. The structure will also include an
observatory deck for air traffic controllers.
*      Fire Tenders: A recent evaluation of the fire tenders at Bonriki and Cassidy Airport has
shown considerable deterioration in the existing fleet. In order to maintain the firefighting standards
at both Bonriki and Cassidy, four additional fire tenders will be required, two at each airport.
*      Seawall Extension at Runway End 27: The construction of this seawall, as per the detailed
coastal study prepared under the KAP-III Project in July 2014, will protect the runway from climate
Page 2 of 7


﻿effects and extend its operational life.
Component B: Sector Reform and Training (Approx. US$1.29 million, excluding contingencies)
*      Support to CAA and Line Ministries: The project will continue to provide support to CAA
and Line Ministries to improve management of aviation infrastructure and operations, and civil
aviation oversight. The project will hire a Technical Auditor to assist the MCTTD with project
implementation and the separation of regulatory functions from management and operational
functions.
*      Sustainability of Investments: Part of the responsibilities of the newly added Aviation
Advisor role will be to develop a number of revenue sources to provide a sustainable financing
source for the Aviation sector in addition to the safety and security levy which has already been
successfully implemented. These include airport service charges, CAA oversight fees, ETOPS and
flight information region revenues. A Civil Aviation Special Fund and disbursement framework have
already been established under the project. Beyond the airport management contract (2 years of
which will be financed by the grant), funds will directed to maintenance of infrastructure to ensure
safety/security and sustainability of the investments, with allocations earmarked for both the Civil
Aviation (regulatory) and Airport Services (operations) divisions. The project requires 50% of these
aviation revenues be allocated towards ensuring aviation safety and security and operations.
*      Pacific Aviation Safety Office (PASO) Safety and Security Oversight Costs: Through the
PRIF Grant, the project will finance PASO's services to Kiribati to ensure effective safety and
security oversight is maintained. This will transition to a sustainable funding mechanism using part
of the AU$5 departing international passenger safety and security levy.
*      Training: Ongoing training to address project support needs, as necessary. This will include
firemen training for example.
Component D: Project Support (Approx. US$1.12 million, excluding contingencies
*      Project Management and Support: The resources initially allocated for TFSU have proven to
be insufficient for project management. Fees have therefore been reviewed and revised. Taking into
account the revised fees and prolonged timeframe for project implementation, as well as the funding
shortfall created for TAL due to the cessation of TFSU services to Kiribati, additional resources will
be required.
*      The additional funds needed to cover the cost of TFSU services until December 2018 are
estimated at approximately US$910k, which will be included in the additional financing as a
separate, stand-alone category. The remainder of the grant amount will be divided into three more
categories [(1)(A), (1)(B) and (1)(C)], the amounts of which will approximately reflect the
disbursement estimates under the grant in respectively 2016, 2017 and 2018. Unless and until the
Association has received evidence satisfactory to the Association that all TFSU Costs incurred in
2016 (resp. 2017) have been paid by the Recipient in accordance with the Service Agreement, no
withdrawal shall be made from category (1)(B) (resp. (1)(C)). In case of ongoing late payments, then
the Service Agreement will be reviewed to introduce advance payments and/or penalty interest.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Aviation plays a vital economic and social role in Kiribati's development. There are two international
Page 3 of 7


﻿airports: Bonriki on South Tarawa (TRW) and Cassidy on Kiritimati Island (CXI) that serve as the
main links to the Gilbert and Line Island groups, respectively. The project's investments will take
place on or adjacent to the existing airport lands. The project will also resurface the road from
Cassidy airport to London on Kiritimati.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Nicholas John Valentine (GENDR)
Ross James Butler (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The project is Category B based on the screening criteria
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                provided in the Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) prepared for the Pacific Aviation
Investment Project. The potential environmental impacts
from the above interventions are mostly construction-
related, temporary in nature and can be addressed through
engineering design and by implementing sound
environmental management of construction and operation
activities. With the exception of the Cassidy-London road,
the area of influence is very limited as the civil works will
be carried out within the existing property boundaries of,
or on land directly adjacent to, the airports. In summary,
the main potential environmental impacts and
concerns identified include: (i) construction-related
nuisances such as noise, dust from construction and
exhaust emissions from machines; (ii) disturbance to local
traffic; (iii) construction workers' and community safety;
(iv) risks from the use and disposal of hazardous materials
such as used fuel and lubricants; (v) land clearance around
the boundary of the airport; (vi) solid waste and
wastewater management during construction and
operation.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         The land located in Bonriki airport in Kiribati is either
OP/BP 4.12                           government owned or government leased. Land leasing is
a common occurrence in Kiribati, given the lack of land
available in the country. Land leases are paid annually,
Page 4 of 7


﻿and are updated every three years. People in Kiribati are
generally well informed about the land lease process,
including grievance mechanisms in place. This was
confirmed by the World Bank-commissioned social due
diligence report. However, there is currently a dispute
regarding the land where the terminal is located, and
whether this is privately or government owned land. For
this reason OP4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement was
triggered.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The additional financing will support the scaling up of some physical interventions contemplated
in the original project design; specifically the coastal protection extension at Bonriki (Runway End
27). The anticipated environmental impacts are essentially the same. While the revised design for
the coastal protection involves a longer and more substantial structure, the installation will be
situated predominantly above the mean high water mark and will not impinge on any biological
resources. Mitigation measures for any potential impacts are readily incorporated in the
Construction Environmental Management Plan (CEMP).
The additional physical interventions at Cassidy Airport comprise new instrumentation and revised
construction standards. These interventions will not have any significant environmental
interactions.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The activities under the Additional Financing are not expected to result in indirect or long term
negative impacts. The coastal protection enhancement will increase aviation safety and climate
resilience, similarly, the interventions at Cassidy Airport will allow it to function as an alternate
airport for trans-Pacific Extended Range Twin Engine Operations (ETOPS).
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
There are no project alternatives as the investments are being made at the existing airports and
relocation of the airports is not feasible.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Construction EMP (CEMP) has been progressively amended in response to changing
circumstances (eg. revised arrangements for aggregate transport). The AF physical investments
can be readily managed through amendment to the existing CEMP. The Resettlement Policy
Page 5 of 7


﻿Framework (RPF) remains current and can be enacted should resettlement issues arise.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders under the AF are the same as those under the parent project.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                11-May-20 11
Date of submission to InfoShop                             15-Sep-2011
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Kiribati Region                                            25-Sep-2011
Comments: Available on MFED website http://www.mfed.gov.ki/projects/kiribati-aviation-
investment-proj ect-kaip
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                11-May-2011
Date of submission to InfoShop                             11-Jul-2011
"In country" Disclosure
Kiribati Region                                            25-Jul-2011
Comments: Available on MFED website http://www.mfed.gov.ki/projects/kiribati-aviation-
investment-proj ect-kaip
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ ] No [ X] NA [ ]
report?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?            Yes [  ]  No [ X ]  TBD [
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Page 6 of 7


﻿Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [  ]  No [ X]  TBD
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Pierre Graftieaux,Christopher R. Bennett
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Svend Jensby (SA)                    Date: 23-Dec-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: James A. Reichert (PMGR)             Date: 28-Dec-2015
Manager:
Page 7 of 7


