                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA12966
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-May-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-May-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Tonga                              Project ID:    P154840
                            Project Name:      Pacific Resilience Program (P154840)
                            Task Team          Denis Jean-Jacques Jordy,Michael Bonte-Grapentin
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          16-Mar-2015                        Estimated   19-Jun-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSURR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (30%), General
                                               water, sanitation and flood protection sector (70%)
                            Theme(s):          Climate change (40%), Natural disaster management (60%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:        16.76           Total Bank Financing:  10.50
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                            0.18
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                   8.25
                              IDA Grant                                                                                     2.25
                              Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery                                           1.50
                              Special Climate Change Fund                                                                   4.58
                              Total                                                                                        16.76
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the Project is to strengthen early warning, resilient investments and financial


                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                         protection of Tonga.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Pacific Resilience Program (PREP) will help PICs to: (i) strengthen early warning and
                         preparedness; (ii) create a framework for stronger and prioritized investments in resilience and
                         retrofitting of key-public assets to meet international recognized resilience standards; and (iii)
                         improve the post-disaster response capacity of the countries through strengthened financial resilience
                         to disaster events. The Program beneficiaries include communities in Tonga that are particularly
                         vulnerable to climate and disaster risk, government agencies in charge of disaster and climate
                         resilient planning and response, resilient investment and disaster risk financing, and regional
                         organizations that support efforts in climate and disaster risk management.

                         Economic instability in Tonga has been compounded significantly by a number of recent natural
                         disaster events, including Tropical Cyclone Ian (TCI), which struck the country in January 2014,
                         resulting in total damage and losses of approximately US$50 million (11% of annual GDP). The
                         impacts of such disasters have been significant, and given the extreme vulnerability of Tonga to
                         climate change and natural hazards, there is a risk that similar losses will be experienced in the
                         future. Catastrophic risk modeling indicates that Tonga is expected to incur, on average, US$15.5
                         million per year in losses due to earthquakes and tropical cyclones. In the next 50 years, Tonga has a
                         50 percent chance of experiencing a loss exceeding US$175 million and casualties higher than 440
                         people, and a 10 percent chance of experiencing a loss exceeding US$430 million and casualties
                         higher than 1,700 people. These estimates do not take climate change into account, which contributes
                         to key risks to loss of livelihoods, coastal settlements, infrastructure, ecosystem services and
                         economic stability. Mainstreaming climate and disaster resilience into development will help reduce
                         some of the shocks from climate and disaster risks.

                         Despite recent progress in Tonga in terms of national level plans and policy to respond to disaster
                         and climate risk, translating national climate change and DRM policy into sector policies and
                         resilient investments has been a significant challenge. The Ministry of Meteorology, Information,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Energy, Disaster Management, Climate Change and Communications in Tonga (MEIDECC) has an
                         overarching focus on, among other things, climate resilience and disaster risk management.
                         MEIDECC houses the following key institutions that are responsible for providing early warnings
                         and response to meteorological, hydrological and geophysical hazards: (i) The Tonga Meteorological
                         Department (TMS), which provides weather services, climate services, and is the national authority
                         for issuing meteorological and geophysical hazard warnings; and (ii) the National Emergency
                         Management Office (NEMO), responsible for managing emergency situations. The National
                         Resources Department (NRD), which is housed in the Ministry of Lands and Natural resources, is
                         responsible for earthquake monitoring, mapping, vulnerability assessments and other related
                         activities, along with a shared responsibility for hydrological and geophysical warning services with
                         TMS. The PREP will build synergies with existing initiatives which aim to minimize the impact of
                         climate change and natural hazards in Tonga. The four main components of the project are (1)
                         strengthening early warning and preparedness (2) risk reduction and resilient investments and (3)
                         disaster risk financing and (4) project and program management.

                         One specific sub-project proposed in Tonga includes re/construction and/or refurbishment of : (i) a
                         new combined Tonga Meteorological Department (TMD) and National Emergency Management
                         Office (NEMO) facility building to be located outside the tsunami inundation zone at Fua’amotu
                         airport within the Tonga Airports Limited (TAL) envelope; and (ii) NEMO’s Emergency Operations
                         Center/s (national and district level). Some of the other specific sub-projects under consideration in


                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                         Tonga with environmental management implications include:

                         •        installing real-time connectivity (GSM) to hydrology network and monitoring stations in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         target water catchments;
                         •        stockpiling of emergency goods and potential refurbishment of prepositioned supply hubs in
                         provinces/districts;
                         •        constructing, strengthening and/or expanding the reach of existing communications networks
                         (VHF/HF radio and mobile telecommunications); and
                         •        installing, connecting and/or refurbishing seismic monitoring stations with GPS and motion
                         sensors.
                         •        installing a dedicated fiber optic Communication link between Disaster Response agencies.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Kingdom of Tonga consists of 169 islands with a total population of around 120,000. The
                         country lies in the South Pacific and stretches over a distance of about 800 kilometers from north to
                         south, covering a total land area of 748 square kilometers with an Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ)
                         of about 700,000 square kilometers. Its small size, geographic dispersion and isolation, and limited
                         natural resources provide a narrow economic base. Agriculture, fishing and tourism account for most
                         export earnings and it has a high dependency on external aid (approximately 15 percent of Gross
                         National Income, GNI). Tonga was negatively impacted by the Global Economic Crisis through a
                         substantial and prolonged decline in remittances from Tongans living abroad and tourism, and price
                         spikes in imported food and fuel on which households are heavily dependent.

                         Specific locations for the instrumentation and monitoring equipment listed in Section 3 have not been
                         determined, however hydrological monitoring equipment will necessarily be sited adjacent to
                         drainage lines and seismic stations will likely be situated in upland locations. Government-owned
                         land will be preferentially chosen to site these monitoring stations.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Nicholas John Valentine (GSURR)
                         Ross James Butler (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            This policy is triggered because project-specific civil
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     works from sub-projects may generate negative
                                                                    environmental or social impacts. While these impacts are
                                                                    expected to be minor (eg. retrofitting of buildings,
                                                                    installation of monitoring stations) they will need to be
                                                                    appropriately managed. An ESMF is the key safeguard
                                                                    instrument and contains guidance on EMP preparation for
                                                                    specific activities.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP     Yes            Project activities are not expected to involve significant
                          4.04                                      loss or degradation of natural habitats, however this
                                                                    policy has been triggered as a precaution since specific
                                                                    sites are not yet known.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36         Yes            The project will not support any civil works that encroach
                                                                    or adversely impact upon forests. However this policy is


                                                                     Page 3 of 8
                                                              triggered as a precaution because limited incidental forest
                                                              clearing may occur for small-scale civil works to establish
                                                              new monitoring/communications infrastructure in rural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              areas or outer islands
                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No        The Project does not involve procurement or use of
                                                              pesticides.
                            Physical Cultural           Yes   The project is not expected to finance any large-scale civil
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11              works that could affect Physical Cultural Resources.
                                                              However building refurbishment may include retrofitting
                                                              of historical buildings, and civil works may involve
                                                              chance finds of historically or culturally important
                                                              resources.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      Yes   Based on prior country-level social analysis undertaken as
                            BP 4.10                           part of preparation of the Environmental and Social
                                                              Safeguard Procedures for the Pacific Island Countries, OP
                                                              4.10 is not typically triggered in Tonga. Indigenous
                                                              Peoples are defined by four characteristics: self-
                                                              identification as members of a cultural group, collective
                                                              attachment to habitats/territories, customary institutions,
                                                              and indigenous language. All four characteristics must be
                                                              present to trigger the policy.

                                                              In Tonga, virtually all of the population is ethnic Tongan
                                                              and there are no significant ethnic cleavages among them;
                                                              therefore, they do not self-identify as members of a
                                                              distinct indigenous cultural group within their own
                                                              country. Similarly there are no customary cultural,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              economic, social or political institutions that are separate
                                                              from the dominant society and culture. There also is no
                                                              indigenous language different from the official language
                                                              of the country.
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes      Although it is expected that the majority of project
                            OP/BP 4.12                        activities will be undertaken on state-owned or Crown
                                                              land, there is potential for certain project activities (e.g.
                                                              construction of monitoring stations) to encroach on
                                                              customary or private lands. A Resettlement Policy
                                                              Framework has been prepared to cover this eventuality.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues


                                                                Page 4 of 8
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           Component 1 of the project will involve minor work activities, such as the upgrade of existing
Public Disclosure Copy




                           infrastructure, in order to strengthen the Multi-Hazard Early Warning System in Tonga.
                           Component 2 of the project will finance will finance entry level climate and disaster resilient
                           investments such as retrofitting, refurbishing or rehabilitating of key public assets. The retrofitted
                           assets will meet internationally accepted building standards for resilience, with a particular focus
                           on strengthening school buildings. Environment and social impacts from these activities would be
                           only minor and the types of mitigation measures are well-known and proven. Component 3 of the
                           project involves financing and insurance schemes and thus has no significant impacts on the
                           environment. Similarly, Component 4 of the project involves administration and monitoring
                           mechanisms and thus has no tangible environmental impact however this potential impact should
                           be avoided or minimised by following the provisions of the ESMF.

                           The overall environmental impact of the Program is expected to be positive, and none of the
                           eligible investments on the menu of options include activities that would generate significant risk
                           or irreversible adverse environmental/social impacts. The main environmental and/or social
                           impacts for eligible activities would be minor impacts from the construction and rehabilitation of
                           small-scale infrastructure (e.g. buildings for national disaster management or meteorological
                           offices). The scale and likelihood of adverse impacts arising from these activities is limited, and
                           the types of mitigation activities are well-known and proven. An ESMF will ensure that any
                           potential adverse environmental impacts that are generated as a result of the project are identified,
                           and appropriate safeguard instruments are prepared to avoid, minimize, mitigate and, in such cases
                           where there are residual impacts, offset there impacts.

                           An ESMF will ensure that any potential adverse environmental impacts that are generated as a
                           result of the project are identified, and appropriate safeguard instruments are prepared to avoid,
                           minimize, mitigate and, in such cases where there are residual impacts, offset there impacts. No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are anticipated.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The proposed activities under the PREP are likely to have widespread positive indirect and long
                           term impacts. Strengthened early warning, resilient investment planning and financial protection
                           capacity in Tonga will allow increased ability to prevent impacts from, and respond to, disaster
                           events. Tonga will undertake specific activities to contribute towards their increased climate
                           resilience thereby mitigating residual social and environmental impacts, and enhancing recovery,
                           from natural disasters.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Activities specific to Tonga within the four project components will be implemented by a relevant
                           entity within Tonga’s Ministry of Finance and National Planning, with input from the Ministry of
                           Environment, Energy, Climate Change, Disaster Management, Meteorology, Information and
                           Communications (MEECCDMMIC). There is relatively weak implementation capacity for some
                           of the implementation agencies in the Phase I countries, in particular due to limited human


                                                                       Page 5 of 8
                           resources. This risk will be mitigated through the participation of the Secretariat of the Pacific
                           Community (SPC) in the Program. Tonga’s Country Level Coordinator will also be supported by
                           the Regional Project Management and Coordination Unit (PRMCU). In addition, prior to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           commencement of Project Implementation, the PREP will provide funds for social and
                           environmental safeguards support and oversight as needed. The ESMF will be the main instrument
                           for Tonga to screen subprojects for potential environmental impacts. Adherence to the screening
                           procedures and development and implementation of relevant safeguard instruments (eg. ESMPs
                           and RAPs) will allow Tonga to implement required measures.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Consultation with key stakeholders took place in Nuku’alofa from 27th-28th December 2014. A
                           second consultation session took place on the 11th February 2015 with the draft ESMF. The
                           purpose of the public consultations was to gather stakeholder input and feedback into subproject
                           development and design, and discuss the effectiveness of mitigation measures. Consultation
                           sessions involved specific outreach measures, tailored to the needs of vulnerable groups such as
                           women, children and the elderly.
                           Two-way mechanisms for ongoing consultation may be necessary throughout the life of the
                           project, to disclose information and seek feedback. Consultation with relevant government
                           officials, the business community, and civil society (NGOs etc) will assist in providing a different
                           perspectives and needs, and provoke discussion on practical alternatives relevant to the local
                           context. IAs will establish dedicated channels for information dissemination to ensure consistent
                           communication at national, subnational and local levels for the Program duration.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        24-Feb-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     02-Mar-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        00000000
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Tonga                                                              05-Mar-2015
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        24-Feb-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     02-Mar-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Tonga                                                              05-Mar-2015
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        24-Feb-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     02-Mar-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Tonga                                                              05-Mar-2015
                           Comments:


                                                                     Page 6 of 8
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?


                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Denis Jean-Jacques Jordy,Michael Bonte-Grapentin
                            Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Practice Manager/    Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)                Date: 27-May-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
