                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSR18250
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Dec-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Dec-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Russian Federation                           Project ID:           P123923
                            Project Name:       RUSSIA FOREST FIRE RESPONSE PROJECT (P123923)
                            Task Team           Andrew Michael Mitchell
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           12-Dec-2011             Estimated     20-Sep-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEN03                     Lending       Specific Investment Loan
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                       No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       121.26           Total Bank Financing:      40.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                                Financing Source                                                  Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                              81.26
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                 40.00
                              Total                                                                                                121.26
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives


                            3. Project Description
                           The project has three components: (1) enhancing forest fire prevention, management and control; (2)
                           building forestry and Protected Area (PA) management capacity; and (3) project management. There
                           are two implementing agencies for the project: the Federal Forest Agency (FFA), which covers the
                           extensive forest area in five pilot regions, and the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment


                                                                                  Page 1 of 7
                         (MNRE), which implements the project in Protected Areas. A total of 25 Protected Areas are
                         included in the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project Development Objective is to improve forest fire prevention and suppression in select
                         forest ecosystems, including targeted protected areas, and to enhance forest management in pilot
                         regions Specifically, the Project will support the Russian Government strengthen the capacity for
                         forest fire monitoring and response as well as enhance the capacity for forest and PA management.
                         Furthermore, the project will contribute to raising public awareness of forest fire and fire prevention
                         in and around Protected Areas.

                         It is expected that project investments will lead to a decrease in the area of forest fires. Fires which
                         do occur will be better controlled (and hence reduced in extent and severity) as they will be detected
                         sooner, response time will be reduced due to better communications, fire-fighting capacity in terms
                         of equipment and trained personnel will have been increased, and interagency and interregional fire-
                         fighting coordination and cooperation will be enhanced.

                         Component 1: Enhancing Forest Fire Prevention, Management and Control. This component aims
                         to improve the effectiveness of forest fire prevention and management by (i) developing a forest fire
                         management system in Protected Areas (PAs) (ii) enhancing fire prediction and early detection
                         systems; (iii) modernizing fire-fighting systems and means; and (iv) provision of fire-fighting and
                         communications equipment. Additionally public awareness activities and training/education
                         activities will be implemented by MNRE in and around or for selected PAs and their staff.

                         Component 2: Building Forestry and PA Management Capacity. This component will increase
                         forest management capacity in the Pilot Regions through (i) improvement in forest protection
                         monitoring (i.e. from pests and diseases as a result of forest fires, and monitoring pest outbreaks that
                         increase the fire risk through creating areas of dry flammable material) and (ii) targeted investments
                         to improve forest regeneration and restoration. In the Protected Areas this component will also: (i)
                         improve the planning and institutional framework for forest fire management; (ii) draft regulations
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and guidelines on fire management in PAs; and (iii) develop an integrated forest fire management
                         information system for PAs.

                         Component 3: Project Management. A Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will work with FFA, and
                         MNRE to coordinate all project activities, goods, and consultants➢❨ services for project
                         implementation, supervise and monitor project activities, and report regularly to FFA and MNRE.

                         Overall the project will finance: preparing guidelines documents; conducting analytical studies;
                         hiring consultants; organizing adequate training for the staff of the selected and participating in the
                         project Protected Areas; designing policy documents such as Forest Fire Management Strategy for
                         federal PAs and Program for recovery of natural landscapes in federal PAs being increasingly
                         exposed to human-induced change; preparing a Program for inventory of PAs and for conducting
                         their monitoring; and purchasing fire prevention and combating equipment.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         As mentioned above, project interventions will focus on 5 pilot regions and in particular in:
                         Khabarovsk Kray, Komi Republic, Krasnoyarsk Kray, Moscow Oblast, and Voronez Oblast and 25
                         targeted Protected Areas: (Meshcherskiy National Park ➢❨ NP, Okskiy Nature Reserve ➢❨ NR,
                         and Meshchera NP in the Central Federal Okrug; Bastak NR, Bureinskiy NR, Zeiskiy NR, Anyuiskiy


                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                           NP, Bolonskiy NR, Bolshekhekhtsirsky NR, Shantarskie Ostrova NP, and Komsomolskiy NR in Far
                           East Federal Okrug; Stolby NR, Sayano-Shushenskiy NR, Shushenskiy Bor NP, Azas NR,
                           Ubsunurskaya Kotlovina (Ubsunur Hollow) NR, and Alkhanay NP in the Siberian Federal Okrug;
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Kerzhensky NR, Buzulukskiy Bor NP, Bolshaya Kokshaga NR, Mari Chodra NP, Mordovskiy NR,
                           Smolnyi NP, Samarskaya Luka NP and Zhigulevskiy NR in Volga Federal Okrug) which have been
                           selected according to geographic, economic, and environmental criteria. As specified above no
                           investments on the ground will be financed under the restructured project. Purchasing of fire
                           prevention equipment and the TA activities that would involve training as well as designing Fire
                           Prevention Action Plans will be done some of PAs, to be selected during the project implementation.
                           The policy documents to be prepared would be at the national or regional level and would include
                           most the valuable PAs most exposed to human impacts, also to be selected at the initial stage of the
                           project implementation.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Aimonchok Tashieva (GSU03)
                           Arcadii Capcelea (GEN03)

                            6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental               Yes
                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      Yes
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          Yes
                            Pest Management OP 4.09     Yes
                            Physical Cultural           No
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      Yes
Public Disclosure Copy




                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    No
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               As the restructured project will support only Technical Assistance and supply of equipment and
                              as no physical works on the ground are envisaged, the potential impacts are indirect. If policy
                              documents (e.g. forest fire prevention strategies and action plans, or the Program for recovery of
                              natural landscapes in federal PAs) are not well designed and do not take into consideration the


                                                                        Page 3 of 7
                          biodiversity conservation issues or other relevant environmental requirements, there may be the
                          potential for loss of biodiversity, degradation of natural resources, and environmental and health
                          hazards as the result of pest management activities, soil degradation, water pollution, etc. when
Public Disclosure Copy




                          implemented.

                           Taking into account these potential impacts the project triggers a series of WB OPs: OP 4.01:
                           Environmental Assessment; OP 4.04: Natural Habitats; OP/BP 4.36: Forests; OP 4.09: Pest
                           Management; OP 4.10: Indigenous Peoples; and World Bank policy on access to information➢❨
                           July 2013.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            Long term positive indirect impacts on improving forest and PAs management as well as on
                           preventing forest fires are anticipated as the result of designing and implementing relevant policy
                           documents specified above.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            To address the potential indirect impacts of the policy documents to be prepared, the MNRE will
                           prepare the SESAF document. The main scope of the document is to ensure that all drafts of
                           related policy (strategies, regulations), programs, and plans (PPP) documents are prepared
                           following the Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) process. The SESAF will ensure that
                           SEA requirements are followed appropriately and consistently. Taking into account SESAF
                           provisions the PPPs will be assessed from environmental and social points of view, and mitigation,
                           monitoring, and supervision activities will be proposed for each supported policy document to
                           make management of the forests and protected areas less impacted by forest fires and more
Public Disclosure Copy




                           sustainable. This also will help the client to prepare documents that are consistent with both
                           National and World Bank safeguards policies.

                          MNRE has staff experienced both in environmental protection issues in the forestry sector, and
                          with the EIA process both according to Russian Federal legislation and the World Bank's policies.
                          MNRE, FFA and the Project Implementations Unit (PIU) actively contributed to the preparation of
                          the general Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for the initial project which was judged by
                          the Bank team to be of satisfactory quality. As the project hasn➢❨ t implemented any activities
                          that could trigger safeguards issues to date, it is not possible to assess its performance in this
                          regard. The WB team and the MNRE have agreed the WB Environmental and Social Specialists
                          will provide, when needed, training and guidance on applying the provisions of the SESAF during
                          the SEA of the forestry policy documents.

                          In accordance with the Bank➢❨ s OP 4.10 on Indigenous People, an early review was undertaken
                          to screen for the presence of Indigenous Peoples in the areas of initial project implementation and
                          to assess potential impacts of the project on those communities. Initial screening of the Indigenous
                          People presence was held for all 13 federally protected areas where MNRE would implement
                          project activities, and the 5 pilot regions selected by FFA. The social assessment confirmed the
                          presence of indigenous people in forest areas in one of the five project-supported pilot regions:
                          Khabarovski Krai. Indigenous People Process Framework was prepared to ensure the project will


                                                                     Page 4 of 7
                           maximize the benefits and mitigate potential risks to those communities. The purpose of the IPPF
                           was to safeguard the dignity, rights, economies, and cultures of Indigenous Peoples, and ensure
                           that the project is able to gain broad community support in areas where IP reside. The Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           activities would have provided mainly positive impacts, but no relevant activities impacting IPs
                           have taken place yet.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The draft SESAF document will be disclosed in the country on the PIU website for its virtual
                           consultation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      16-Nov-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-Dec-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Russian Federation                                               00000000
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      21-Nov-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-Dec-2011
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Russian Federation                                               00000000
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      16-Nov-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-Dec-2011
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Russian Federation                                               00000000
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
                          report?



                                                                    Page 5 of 7
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?



                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Andrew Michael Mitchell
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nina Chee (SA)                               Date: 05-Dec-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Valerie Hickey (PMGR)                       Date: 11-Dec-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 7 of 7
