INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC12582
2    Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Apr-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         India                      Project ID:   P148775
Project Name:    National Waterways Development Project (P148775)
Task Team        Arnab Bandyopadhyay,Charles Kunaka
Leader(s):
Estimated        08-Feb-2016                Estimated     26-May-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Ports, waterways and shipping (90%), General industry and trade sector (10%)
Theme(s):        Trade facilitation and market access (30%), Other rural development (50%),
Other environment and natural resources management (20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     600.00             Total Bank Financing:   200.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                        400.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development           200.00
0          Total                                                          600.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The PDO for the project is to enhance the transport capacity and reliability of National waterway 1
and augment institutional capacity for the development and management of India's inland waterway
transport system.
C. Project Description
The World Bank has received a request from the Government of India (GOI) in December 2014 for a


﻿loan assistance of USD 200 million, including project preparatory technical assistance and limited
investments, for the Haldia to Varanasi stretch of NW-1. Based on current estimates, it is estimated
that the total project cost for the Haldia-Varanasi stretch could be about USD 600 million. Once the
feasibility and preliminary detailed engineering studies are undertaken, it would be possible to arrive
O
at a more accurate estimation. Pending the outcome of the study, the earlier estimate and project
structure is being maintained.
The project envisages two components, namely: (i) Improving the Navigability of NW-I (Haldia to
Varanasi) at an estimated cost of USD 565 million; and (ii) Market Development and Institutional
Strengthening at an estimated cost of USD 30 million. The description and sub-components/elements
of the components are given below.
Component 1: Improving the Navigability of NW-I (Haldia to Varanasi) (Estimated Cost US$ 565
million): This component would be divided into the following sub-components:
i.    River Works (including implementation of EMPs and RAP, as required)
a)    Preparation and Technical Assistance (Estimated Cost US$ 10 million)
i)    Upfront Surveys, including digital terrain modeling (using airborne LiDAR) for
environmental and flood monitoring, land-use mapping and engineering design purposes;
ii)  Feasibility Studies, Options Analysis and Front-End Engineering and Design for river
navigability improvement works;
iii)  Environmental Studies.
b)    Improvement of River Fairways (Estimated Total Cost US$ 400 million)
i)    Channel Realignment (cut-off) works in the meandering parts of the Hooghly/ Bhagirathi
River;
ii)   Backlog Maintenance and upgrade works at the Farakka Ship Lock (and potential future
doubling);
iii)  Backlog maintenance and finishing works at the Jangipur Ship Lock, including approach
canal works (to the Ganga/Padma River linking to Bangladesh);
iv)   River training works, including channel realignment and contraction works, on the Ganga
between Farakka (chainage 560 km) and Patna (1,020 km);
v)    Fairway extension to Varanasi through river training works between Patna and the
confluence of Ganga and Ghaghara rivers, the creation of barrage-locks at (or near) Ballia (chainage
1,140 km) and Ghazipur (Chainage 1,250 km).
ii.    Terminal and Immediate Access Works (Estimated Cost US$ 155 million) (including
implementation of EMPs and RAP, as required)
a)    Preparation Works (Estimated Cost US$ 5 million)
i)  Options Analysis and Detailed Design;
b)    Terminal and Access Infrastructure Works (Estimated Cost US$ 150 million)
i)   Construction of common user terminals at major centers e.g. Varanasi, Haldia and Sahibgunj
with the potential of evolving as market clusters . The location, layout and equipping of the IWT
terminals would depend on the outcome of the detailed feasibility and preliminary design and the
business and market development studies. Further, when developing these new terminals, a broad
strategic approach, modelled on freight villages or logistics clusters, would be adopted.
Component 2: Market Development and Institutional Strengthening (Estimated Cost US$ 30
million): This component would be divided into the following sub-components:
i.     Market Development
a)    Undertaking Market Development Studies and Preparation of Business Cases (by location,


﻿industry and cargo type);
b)    Undertaking public/private stakeholder consultations to encourage investment in modem
shipping technology through review of fiscal and other barriers hindering ship construction and
operation;
0
U       c)    Investigating arrangements for private sector participation in the construction and operation
of terminals.
ii.    Institutional Strengthening
a)    Undertaking a review of current IWAI staffing, future institutional options and enhanced
staffing/skill needs including on areas such as health, safety and environmental (HSE) management;
b)    Undertaking a review of Government and State roles and responsibilities in respect to River
Conservancy, Environmental Management and Trade;
c)    Undertaking review and alignment of laws and regulations in respect to IWT vessel design,
construction, manning, operation, maintenance, insurance and multi-modal transport;
d)    Exploring the option of developing a Research and Development Unit/Center for IWAI and
Enhancement of Training institutions (NINI);
e)    Developing a robust communication engagement strategy for the project (that encompasses
beneficiary surveys), for enabling stakeholder involvement and outreach.
f)    Providing facilities for Search and Rescue;
g)    Providing facilities to respond distress or casualty incidents;
h)    Upgrading vessel and river monitoring arrangements; and
i)    Improving the availability of aids to navigation.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The National Waterway 1 or NW 1 passes through the states of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and
West Bengal, and is located between Allahabad (Uttar Pradesh) to Haldia (West Bengal) on a
1,620km stretch on the Ganga (between Allahab to Farakka), on the Bhagirathi (between Farakka to
Jangipur) and on the Hooghly (downstream of Jangipur) river system. While the Ganga and the
Hoogly are natural rivers, the Bhagirathi is a regulated river primarily influenced by the barrages at
Farakka and Jangipur. The Feeder Canal and the navigation lock at Farakka become the link between
the Bhagirathi and the Ganga up-stream of the barrage.
The notified waterway includes the whole flow zones of the rivers; but navigation channels are
narrower (does not and need not use the entire width of the river), and best navigation width at any
stretch is defined by the IWAI (and used by the operators based on navigation aid provided by
IWAI). The Allahabad-Varanasi stretch (237km) of the river Ganga has low flow condition except in
the monsoon, and it is difficult to maintain an least available depth (LAD) of more than 1.2 m. The
Varanasi-Patna (363km) and the Patna-Farakka (460km) stretches include several braided portion of
the river, and substantial regular dredging is carried out each year to maintain 1.8 to 2m of LAD. The
Farakka-Tribeni stretch (364km) has river erosion and shoal issues, and requires bandalling and
regular dredging to maintain a 2.5m LAD, except that in the Bhagirathi river stretch due to the
controlled discharge from the Farakka Barrage and due to the river conservancy work a navigable
depth of at least 2m is maintained throughout the year. The Tribeni-Haldia stretch (196km) is tide
dominated, and a 3m LAD is usually maintained by the natural tidal processes. Overall, however,
maintenance of navigational channels in all the stretches is a complex task, due to large variation in
discharge (where peak flows are very large, and low flows very low), unstable morphological
condition of bank and bed, heavy sediment load, continuous braiding and meandering of the river
upstream of Farakka.


﻿Of the two biosphere reserves in the Ganga basin, one (Sundarban in West Bengal) is located on the
NW1. Of the 29 national parks in the Ganga basin, one (Sundarban) is close to the NW1. Of the 75
wildlife sanctuaries, 2 are on the NW1 (Turtle Sanctuary at Varanasi/Uttar Pradesh, and Vikramshila
Gangetic Dolphin Sanctuary at Bhagalpur/Bihar) is located on the NW1, and 8 more are close to the
O
U       NW1 (Kanwarijheel at Begusarai and Surha Tal, Balia/Bihar; Udhawa Lake at Sahebganj/Jharkhand;
Bibhutibhusan, Haliday Island, Lothian, Narendrapur and Sajnekhali - all in West Bengal). The
NW1 currently has 5 fixed terminals (Haldia, Kolkata, Pakur, Farrakka and Patna) and 15 floating
terminals (at Haldia, Kolkata, Diamond Harbour, Katwa, Tribeni, Baharampur, Jangipur, Bhagalpur,
Semaria, Doriganj, Ballia, Ghazipur, Varanasi, Chunar and Allahabad). Each of these could be
expanded and augmented in the project, but are all located within urban settings.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The IWAI including its regional offices, although not familiar with the Bank's safeguards policies,
are implementing projects within the national and state environmental policy and legal frameworks,
which are, in many cases, close to the Bank Safeguard Policies. The Government of India (the
borrower) has a number of institutions dealing with social and environmental safeguards, albeit with
mixed records of implementation and enforcement. Usually, a project of this scale and magnitude
goes through a process of environmental due diligence. However, inland navigation is exempt from
the requirements under the EIA Notifications, and unless there are massive civil construction works,
this project will not require mandatory EIA clearance from the Government of India (even if at the
state level, there will be need for specific approval from regulatory institutions with respect to Water
Act, Hazardous Material (Transport, Handling and Storage) Notification, etc.). IWAI is already
attempting to develop and implement standards for occupational health, safety and pollution
management, akin to applicable national and international standards. However, IWAI itself will need
to augment its capacity so as to be able to implement the standards among all potential future (private
sector) operators on the NW1.
To initiate the capacity building for management of environmental and social issues in the project,
IWAI (the implementing agency) has already designated a few staff (albeit with turnover issues) at
the project management unit (PMU) who would be expanded and trained during the project
preparation period. The environmental and social assessments and the institutional strengthening
studies of the project will propose capacity building plans for the IWAI at the HQ and its regional/
field offices, which would then by duly implemented by the project. Project staff will be trained in
the planning and implementation of the environmental and social management plans and
frameworks. Further, the curricula of the national level training institute(s) are being revamped to
incorporate HSE issues, and augmentation of such capacity building initiative (targeting the future
cadre of operators) is expected to be part of the EMP.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Mridula Singh (GSURR)
Tapas Paul (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project, unless carefully designed and
OP/BP 4.01                              implemented may result in unintended impacts both
in near and long term. Potential major environmental


﻿issues to be considered include: (i) modifications to
the riverbed, riverbanks and the flood plains, and the
consequent impacts; (ii) potential modifications to
the river and sediment flow, especially during the
lean season and the associated impacts; (iii) potential
damage to the aquatic fauna including dolphins,
turtles, fishes, and to the nesting and breeding
grounds and sanctuaries on and along the river bed;
(iv) construction related impacts including impacts
from dredging; disposal of dredged materials; siting
of terminals, logistics parks, bank protection works
and jetties; (v) potential pollution of the waterway
and safety and health issues arising during operation
from regular operations or by accidental spills.
Further, there is a need in this project to complement
the parallel initiatives of the government for clean-up
of the Ganga (which is a national priority issue).
These issues will be examined as part of the
cumulative impact analysis (CIA) and the EA, and
will be addressed through incorporation in the
project design and the EMP.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes         Although the nearest national park (Sundarbans) is
more than 50km away from the NW1, the project and
its operation might have potential adverse impacts on
the 2 aquatic wildlife sanctuaries which are located
within the river bed (Turtle Sanctuary at Varanasi/
Uttar Pradesh, and Vikramshila Gangetic Dolphin
Sanctuary at Bhagalpur/Bihar). Indirect impacts
might occur on the 8 other wildlife sanctuaries
located within 50km of the NW1 and are connected
by smaller waterways, or on a biosphere reserve
(Sundarban), or on 6 important bird areas located
close by (Surha Taal//Barh, Danapur Cantonment,
Mokama Taal in Bihar, Kurseala River Course and
Diyara Floodplain, Gogabil and Baldia Char in
Jharkhand, and Farakka barrage areas in West
Bengal). Further, Gangetic dolphin (the recently
declared national aquatic animal) has most of its
population in the middle Ganga stretches (from
upstream of Allahabad down to Farakka), and
conservation of the Gangetic Dolphin will be a key
issue during operation of the project. Conservation
needs of the natural habitats will be an important part
of the ongoing CIA and EA, and required measures
will be incorporated in the project design and the
EMP.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No           The project activities including its operation are not


﻿expected to involve any logging, forestry activities or
any other activity that may impact quality of the
forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No           The project activities including its operation do not
use or encourage any use of pesticides.
P hysical Cultural Resources  Yes        The Ganga river itself is a national physical cultural
OP/BP 4.11                               resource; and the project will need to complement
the ongoing parallel government programs of
cleaning and rejuvenating the Ganga including its
cultural dimensions. In addition, important heritage
assets lie on either bank of the Ganga throughout the
NW1 stretch including built structures, bathing ghats
and crematoria. Impacts on any of these protected
sites will need to be minimized during design and
operation of the project; and the EA/EMP will seek
opportunities to undertake in the project activities
which are complementary to the need of
conservation of the cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     Yes         The policy is triggered given the fact that the
4.10                                     geographical location of the project covers tribal
areas of Jharkhand and pockets of settlements in
Bihar and West Bengal. There may be other
vulnerable communities belonging to Scheduled
Castes (SCs) and other disadvantaged groups. A
Social Assessment (SA) has been commissioned and
based on the findings, the project will develop a
Tribal Development Framework/Plan and to ensure
that tribal and other disadvantaged groups are able to
restore if not improve their livelihood if adversely
affected.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        The project envisages development of common user
BP 4.12                                  terminal and improving access to these terminals is
a                                                likely to lead to land acquisition, potential adverse
impacts on livelihoods of fishermen, and passenger
movement to islands inhabited by communities
fishing. A Social Assessment has been
commissioned and project will prepare a
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP).
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   TBD          There is a chance that the project or studies carried
under the project recommends construction of
barrages (dissimilar to ship-locks) that will create
seasonal pondage. If such cases arise, the policy will
be triggered, and the IWAI will ensure, through (i)
compliance with national mandatory requirements,
and (ii) retention of an expert panel on dam/
construction safety, that such barrages (or any such


﻿other dam-like structures) are designed and
implemented at the appropriate safety standards.
Projects on International     Yes          Ganga is an international river. As per OP/BP 7.50,
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       riparian countries of the basin (China, Nepal and
Bangladesh) will need to be notified.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No          No part of the project influence area is disputed.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 08-Feb-2016
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
(i)    The IWAI has initiated the process of undertaking the cumulative impact analysis (CIA)
and the environmental assessment (EA). These works will be done together. Independent EA and
CIA consultants have been selected, and the assignments are expected to start immediately (and
are expected to be completed in next 6-10 months). IWAI finalized the terms of reference for the
EA and CIA based on (i) a series of consultation with stakeholders including current and potential
operators, users, government officials organized during October-November 2014, (ii) inputs
received from civil society organizations, and (iii) inputs received from national level
consultations (with experts, academia, civil society and government agencies) titled "Ganga
Manthan" " (i.e., "brainstorming about the Ganga") organized by the Ministry of Water
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation in late 2014. Parallel to the CIA and EA
undertaken for the project, IWAI is discussing with two other World bank financed projects/
programs - the National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG) on the ways of complementing
activities to ensure improved water quality in the river; and with the Dedicated Freight Corridor
Limited on the cumulative impacts from development and integration of multi-modal
transportation systems along the NW1 stretch of the Ganga river. In addition, the issues of
capacity building on occupational health, safety and environmental management issues are part of
the feasibility studies and institutional capacity building studies currently underway.
(ii)   OP/ BP 4.10 and OP/BP 4.12 are triggered under the project. A Social Assessment (SA)
o          has been commissioned and based on the findings, the project will develop a tribal development
framework/plan and Resettlement Action Plan and likely to be completed by October 2015.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Arnab Bandyopadhyay,Charles Kunaka
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Zia Al Jalaly (SA)                        Date: 02-Apr-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Karla Gonzalez Carvajal (PMGR)            Date: 14-Apr-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


