                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA12740
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Apr-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Apr-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                             Project ID:    P150158
                            Project Name:      Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor-3 (P150158)
                            Task Team          Benedictus Eijbergen,Atul Agarwal
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          07-Apr-2015                       Estimated   29-May-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTIDR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Railways (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (97%), Climate change
                                              (3%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    1107.00           Total Bank Financing:                650.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                457.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   650.00
                              Total                                                                                  1107.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The PDO for EDFC3 is to: (a) provide additional rail transport capacity, improved service quality
                           and higher freight throughput on the 401 km Ludhiana- Khurja section of the EDFC; and (b) develop
                           the institutional capacity of DFCCIL to build, maintain and manage the DFC infrastructure network.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                      Page 1 of 14
                         The Eastern Corridor is 1,839 km and extends from Ludhiana to Kolkata. World Bank support for the
                         Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor (EDFC) was designed as a series of projects in which three
                         EDFC sections would be delivered sequentially, but with overlapping construction schedules.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         EDFC1 (Khurja-Kanpur: 343 km) was approved by the Bank in May 2011 and is under construction.
                         EDFC2 (Kanpur-Mughalsarai: 393 km) was approved in April 2014 and is in procurement stage.
                         This Project relates to the EDFC3 section (Ludhiana- Khurja: 401 km). This proposed operation is a
                         US$650 million loan from IBRD to finance civil works and technical assistance needed for an
                         additional 401 kms along the Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor between Khurja (Uttar Pradesh)
                         and Sahnewal (near Ludhiana) in Punjab. The Government of India will contribute approximately US
                         $457 million to the project alongside the Bank’s loan.

                         The proposed EDFC3 Project consists of the following components:
                         (a) Design, construction and commissioning of the Ludhiana- Khurja section of the Eastern DFC
                         consisting of 401 km of single-track electrified railway designed for freight only train operations
                         with 25-ton axle-load (upgradable to 32.5 ton axle loads) at 100 km/h.
                         (b) Continuing the provision of institutional support to assist DFCCIL to develop its capability to
                         build, maintain and manage the DFC infrastructure network.

                         Infrastructure Component: The physical infrastructure proposed is the construction of 401 km
                         Ludhiana-Khurja section of the Ludhiana-Kolkata Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor. The
                         Ludhiana-Khurja section will be constructed as a single-line ballasted track laid on concrete sleepers
                         with crossing-loops. A single track configuration has been selected since the potential traffic is
                         modest. At opening virtually all traffic using EDFC as a whole will originate or end on feeder lines
                         managed by IR’s Zonal Railways. In time it is anticipated that new logistics centers/freight terminals
                         may be built alongside the new lines. The route alignment of the Ludhiana-Khurja section will run
                         mostly parallel to the existing IR track; however, the alignment will detour near big cities and towns.

                         On the parallel track section, existing level crossings that have relatively high traffic will be replaced
Public Disclosure Copy




                         by Road Over Bridges or Under Bridges (ROBs/RUBs) spanning new and existing tracks. The
                         remaining level crossings will be improved by interlocking them with the train signaling system and
                         by providing electrically operated booms. Audio-visual warning systems will ensure safety of
                         pedestrians and vehicles. Some of these level crossings would be replaced over time by ROBs/RUBs.
                         The alignment will be fenced at critical locations. On the detour sections there will be no level
                         crossings. A four-aspect automatic block system will utilize trackside signals. Automatic Train
                         Protection (ATP) will be provided as part of the signaling system A four-aspect automatic block
                         system will utilize trackside signals. ATP) will be provided as part of the signaling system.

                         Construction will be under Design & Build contracts, with two civil works contracts (each consisting
                         of sub-grade, bridges and track), and two system contracts (one for electrification and the other for
                         signaling and telecommunications) for the entire 401 km section. The Design & Build contracts will
                         be awarded on the basis of Performance Specifications (PS), which will permit bidders reasonable
                         freedom to carry out detailed design. DFCCIL has engaged a General Consultant/Owner’s Engineer
                         (GC/OE) for preliminary design and procurement.

                         Institutional Support Component: The Institutional support component will focus on supporting three
                         priority areas of operational, commercial and environmental management:
                         •Operational: Design of system to optimize interfaces at the interchange of trains between IR and
                         EDFC line at connection points, including train holding yard requirements;


                                                                       Page 2 of 14
                         •Commercial: A freight logistics centres market-testing program to promote private investment in
                         freight logistics centres/terminals (along either or both of) Eastern and Western Corridors plus
                         development of a contractual model and seed capital for implementation of a pilot project; and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •Environmental: Design and implementation of pilot project for an energy optimization program on
                         the DFC network.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project proposed for World Bank financing is a 401 km section between Khurja in the state of
                         Uttarpradesh) and Sahnewal, near Ludhiana in Punjab toward the North-West of Delhi which is a
                         part of the 1816 km long Ludhiana-Kolkata EDFC route. The first phase of this corridor for Khurja-
                         Kanpur (343 km) is being implemented as part of EDFC1 supported by the Bank. EDFC2 (Kanpur-
                         Mughalsarai: 393 km) was approved in April 2014 and is also in the early phase of implementation.
                         The EDFC corridor traverses the Indo-Gangetic plain connecting the port of Kolkata on the Bay of
                         Bengal in the east, to the industrial heartland of northern India in the north-west (Ludhiana). The
                         corridor would be mostly parallel to the existing railway route with diversions in densely populated
                         areas to minimize displacement of people and economic activities.

                         The EDFC3 corridor is divided into two stretches: (i) Pilakhni-Ludhiana/Sahnewal (175 km with
                         detours over 13 km) and Khurja-Pilakhni (226 km with detours over 111 km). The first stretch from
                         Pilakhni – Ludhina / Sahnewal will be taken up for construction in the first year of EDFC 3 and civil
                         works for the second stretch will be initiated in the third year of EDFC 3.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Harinath Sesha Appalarajugari (GENDR)
                         Satya N. Mishra (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            Project has been categorized as ‘Category A’, due to the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     significant impacts anticipated during construction and
                                                                    operation phase. An ‘Environmental Assessment’ to
                                                                    identify the environmental impacts has been carried out
                                                                    and an Environmental Management Plan has been
                                                                    prepared and disclosed for the first stretch of the project
                                                                    (175 km long Pilakhni – Sahnewal Section). The EA for
                                                                    the second section Khurja – Pilakhni Section, which will
                                                                    be implemented in the third year of the project, is being
                                                                    prepared and will be finalized and disclosed prior to the
                                                                    Board Presentation. The EMP for the both the stretches
                                                                    will be integrated with the contract documents for
                                                                    implementation by the contractor. Since, the project is
                                                                    third in the series of programmatic support to DFC, a
                                                                    Cumulative Impact Assessment (CIA) for the Eastern
                                                                    Corridor is also being carried out to understand the
                                                                    cumulative and induced impacts of the project.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP     No             OP 4.04 has not been triggered, as the project activities do
                          4.04                                      not impact any natural habitats.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36         Yes            OP 4.36 has been triggered as the project proposes to


                                                                     Page 3 of 14
                                                                      acquire 175 ha of protected forest in the state of Punjab.
                                                                      Appropriate compensatory afforestation measures will be
                                                                      implemented in compliance to OP 4.36 and as per the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      requirements of Forest Act of GoI.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No                The project doesn’t involve activities related to pest
                                                                      management and hence OP 4.09 has not been triggered.
                            Physical Cultural           Yes           The project activities in its first stretch of Pilakhni to
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                      Sahnewal section is likely to impact on 34 physical and
                                                                      cultural properties, after careful efforts to avoid impacts
                                                                      on the cultural resources. The EA identifies suitable
                                                                      mitigation measures (restoration or relocation) have been
                                                                      formulated as part of the EMP for implementation during
                                                                      the construction phase of the project.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/   No               The OP 4.10 is not triggered as the project does not affect
                            BP 4.10                                   any indigenous people along the EDFC3 corridor.
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes              The SIA has been carried out and Draft RAP prepared for
                            OP/BP 4.12                                the 175 km long Pilakhni-Sahnewal section. The RPF
                                                                      prepared earlier for EDFC1 (2011) has been updated
                                                                      setting guidelines for preparing the RAP for Khurja-
                                                                      Pilakhni section. The first draft of the RAP for the 226 km
                                                                      long Khurja-Pilakhni section has been received and
                                                                      reviewed by the Task team and sent back to the Client for
                                                                      revision. The Draft RAP for Khurja-Pilakhni shall be
                                                                      updated as per RPF and disclosed prior to the Board
                                                                      presentation.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No            The project activities don’t involve construction and
                            4.37                                      operation of dams and hence the policy has not been
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      triggered.
                            Projects on International   No            The policy has not been triggered, as the project activities
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      don’t involve use or potential pollution of international
                                                                      waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed        No            The project activities are not located in disputed areas as
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                          defined in OP 7.60, and hence the policy has not been
                                                                      triggered.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project involves major construction activities such as earthen embankments for the rail track,
                              number of major and minor bridges, rail fly overs and ancillary buildings. These activities are
                              expected to cause significant environmental impacts comprising diversion of forest land, cutting of
                              trees, impact on community and cultural resources, and land acquisition and involuntary
                              resettlement. Considering the above, the Project has been categorized as ‘Category A’ and triggers
                              four safeguards policies- Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Forests (OP / BP 4.36),
                              Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

                                                                       Page 4 of 14
                         Environmental Impacts: In compliance to these policies and also the Environmental Management
                         Framework developed during the preparation of EDFC1, the project has carried out an
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment (EA) for the 175 km long Pilkhani Sanhewal Section (stretch 1)
                         section that is planned to be implemented in the first year of EDFC 3. An Environmental
                         Management Plan (EMP) to mitigate the anticipated impacts of the project has also been prepared
                         and disclosed for this section of the project. The EA for the 225 long Khurja – Pilkhani Section
                         (Stretch 2) that will be implemented in the third year of the project, is also being carried out and
                         will be finalized and disclosed prior to the Board Presentation in May, Based on detailed analysis
                         carried out in EDFC1, the project has also integrated the Silicosis Reduction Strategies (SRS) and
                         Green House Gas Emission Reduction Strategies (GHG strategies), in the design of EDFC 3.

                         The EAs for both the stretches have analyzed: (i) environmental profile of the project area through
                         field investigations preparing environmental strip maps of the proposed alignment, (ii) base line
                         environmental features such air, water quality, flora / fauna, etc., for winter and summer, (iii) noise
                         and vibration impacts at various sensitive receptors have been developed for areas along the
                         project alignment, (iv) potential environmental impacts for all environmental parameters, (v)
                         ‘Project’ and ‘No Project’ scenarios and alternative alignment options.

                         The potential ‘environmental impacts’ identified in the EA for the first stretch included (i)
                         conversion of 175 Ha Protected Forest on Railway Land; (ii) cutting of about 28617 trees along
                         the 175 km of the alignment; (iii) about 180,000 m3 of earthwork in cutting, 730,000 m3 of
                         earthwork for the embankment and 100,000 m3 of quarry material; (iv) increased noise and
                         vibration levels at 13 sensitive receptors; (v) impacts on 34 physical and cultural properties; and
                         (vi) health and safety issues during construction.

                         Social Impacts: The EDFC3 corridor is divided into two stretches: (i) Pilakhni-Sahnewal (175
                         kilometers with detours over 13 kilometers) and Khurja-Pilakhni (226 kilometers with detours
                         over 111 kilometers). A total of 1157 hectares (ha) of land is required for EDFC3 over 401 kms, of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         which 1097.5 ha land is privately owned and 59.5 ha land is government owned. Social Impact
                         Assessment (SIA) and RAP for the 175 km Pilakhni-Sahnewal (Ludhiana) section has been
                         completed and the first draft RAP for the 226 km long Khurja-Pilakhni section has been prepared,
                         reviewed by the Bank task team and sent back to the Client for necessary revision; the RAP for
                         this section shall be finalized and disclosed prior to the Board presentation.

                         The key social impacts associated with this Project include the loss of land, shelter/business,
                         farming livelihoods, incomes and community properties and temporary construction related
                         impacts.
                         EDFC3 will require land acquisition along the existing route for 20 meter ROW and for 40 meters
                         ROW for crossovers and bypasses. The SIA for Pilakhni-Sahnewal shows that a total of 3051
                         people are affected with 324 losing their residential/commercial structures. Of them, about 80%
                         PAFs will lose less than 0.15 ha of land; 63% affected farmers will become landless, marginal or
                         small farmers. A total of 324 private residential/commercial properties and eight community
                         property structures are affected. About 90 percent of structure owners, who will lose over 25% of
                         built-up area, will be treated as displaced and will receive the full range of R&R benefits.
                         Traditional occupiers living on ‘abadi deh’ lands are recognized as title holders and will receive
                         compensation for their occupied land.

                         Impacts on livelihoods: According to a Social Safeguards Quality Audit carried out in January

                                                                    Page 5 of 14
                          2013, the loss of farm-based livelihoods of marginal farmers is a key adverse impact, which has to
                          be addressed applying appropriately the resettlement framework. Given that the affected farmers
                          have limited skills in non-farm activities, they will require livelihood skill training support in
Public Disclosure Copy




                          addition to financial assistance as R&R support.

                          Gender and social inclusion remain additional issues that require attention. Vulnerable households
                          including single women and women headed families lacking support of any earning members,
                          poor and aged, physically handicapped, etc are likely to face additional hardship as a result of
                          resettlement impacts. The affected squatter households dependent on wage labor could lose their
                          incomes as a result of resettlement.

                           The temporary construction related impacts such as health and safety, labor in-migration, accident
                           risks, dust and noise, movement of materials etc. are covered in the EIA.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The key long term environmental impacts of the proposed project include (i) impacts on the land
                           environment due to quarrying large quantities of quarry stone material (about 1 million m3) and
                           borrowing earth (about 100,000 million m3) for laying the rail track and (ii) increased noise and
                           vibration levels during operation phase at about 13 sensitive locations along the railway track. The
                           indirect impacts of the project includes (i) impacts on the natural drainage of the project area due
                           to the project alignment in embankment and (ii) likely land use changes in the project area, during
                           the operation phase of the project.

                          The environmental management plan prepared for the project, proposes specific mitigation
                          measures to minimize the above impacts, through detailed management plans for the development
                          and closure borrow areas and quarry sites. The environmental management plan also recommends
                          construction of noise barriers, vibration reduction measures and cultural property management
                          plans, along with sample designs cost estimates for implementation by the contractor.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          At few locations including habitations close to the new EDFC tracks, movement of local
                          communities and local traffic may also be affected. The project proposes to build adequate number
                          of Road Over Bridges and Pedestrian/Vehicular Under Passes/Bridges to minimize such risks. The
                          ROBs/RUBs are listed as linked activities to which the Bank’s safeguards policies will apply as
                          per the resettlement policy framework agreed with DFCCIL.

                           There is a likelihood that DFCCIL may seek to develop along the EDFC corridor a few transport
                           hubs and undertake other business development activities. Whereas, the exact nature and impact of
                           such development activities is not known, these activities may require acquisition of additional
                           lands, and on the positive side, could generate new employment and income opportunities for the
                           local people. As such, on the positive side, the project is expected to provide employment and
                           income opportunities to the local communities.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Minimum land acquisition and disturbance to existing features has been a prime objective of the
                           design. Resettlement planning for EDFC3 has benefited from the implementation experience of
                           EDFC1 and EDFC2. The EDFC3 corridor path was altered in view of the farmers’ disagreement
                           with the originally planned alignment based on similar experience of EDFC1. Socially sensitive
                           stretches have been avoided through selection of alternative links, and provision of bypass around

                                                                     Page 6 of 14
                           human settlements. Along the existing tracks, changes were made in the designs as far as feasible
                           thereby reducing corridor of impact to 13 meters at Saharanpur, Yamunanagar Rajpura and
                           Sirhind. Other impact minimizing measures taken included (i) ruling out service roads in built-up
Public Disclosure Copy




                           stretches; (ii) providing retaining wall/fencing for DFC tracks with three meters passage between
                           habitations and retaining walls; and (iii) re-modelling of yards and reducing distance between
                           yards and EDFC tracks.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           (a) Borrowers Measures to address environmental safeguard Issues

                          Environmental Management Plan: The borrower carried out EA for the first section of the project,
                          which recommended a comprehensive environmental management plan to address the impacts
                          identified and specific mitigation measures. The measures include (i) compensatory afforestation
                          to compensate with the loss of forest land and the loss of tree cover, in complete compliance with
                          the Forest Conservation Act of Government of India (ii) Avenue Plantation at 10 trees per km all
                          along the alignment (iii) Rehabilitation Plan for the Borrow Areas developed for the earth work for
                          the project (iv) noise barriers in 13 critical locations affected with high noise levels and mitigation
                          measures for the management of increased noise levels in other sensitive locations (v) specific
                          vibration reduction and management measures in the locations where vibration levels are expected
                          to be high (vi) cultural properties rehabilitation plan for all the affected properties and (vii)
                          specific construction safety and environmental management measures for the construction phase
                          of the project. The EMP measures will be integrated in the bid documents for implementation by
                          the contractors of the project.

                          Silicosis Reduction Strategies: Considering the large quantities of quarry material handled in the
                          project, a separate analysis of measures required to mitigate the potential impacts of ‘Silicosis’ on
                          the construction workers of the project was carried out in EDFC 1 and specific measures were
                          recommended to be integrated in to the bid documents of the project, for implementation by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          contractor. These measures including the EMP will be integrated in the bid documents for
                          implementation by the contractors of the project.

                          Environmental Management Framework: The borrower has developed an Environmental
                          Management Framework (EMF) during the preparation of EDFC 1, for the eastern dedicated
                          freight corridor. The framework defines environment management approach for identifying the
                          environmental issues associated with the proposed projects, identifies the requirements of
                          conducting EA studies and provides guidance to integrate environment safeguard measures during
                          the planning, designing and construction phase of DFC East. DFC continues to follow the
                          framework for all the activities being carried out for the Eastern Corridor.

                          GHG Emission Analysis: By virtue of its potential to shift freight traffic from road transport to
                          more efficient rail transport, the project offers significant reduction of Green House Gas (GHG)
                          emissions. An analysis of this potential to reduce GHG emissions was carried out in EDFC 1,
                          which estimated that the eastern corridor will reduce about 13.19 million GHG emissions by
                          2041-42 – a reduction of 55 percent of GHG emissions from 23.29 million ton without DFC to
                          only 10.48 million tons with DFC. In addition, the analysis has also recommended a number of
                          measures such as (i) regenerative breaking (ii) communication based train control (iii) green
                          building measures for offsite construction activities (iv) solar and wind power generation in
                          railway properties / lands. DFCCIL is actively pursuing these measures, which will further reduce


                                                                     Page 7 of 14
                         GHG emissions.

                         (b) Assessment of Borrowers Capacity to Plan and Implement the Safeguard Measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The environmental regulations of GoI do not mandate railway projects to obtain environmental
                         clearances from the Ministry of Environment & Forests (MoEF). However, as part of the
                         programmatic implementation of eastern corridor supported by the Bank, DFCIL has developed an
                         Environmental Policy and Environmental Management Framework applicable for all its activities.
                         As part of these proactive initiatives, the agency has also carried out “Green House Gas Emission
                         Analysis” of both the eastern and western corridors. Considering the nature and scale of
                         construction activities DFCIL has also developed ‘Silicosis Reduction Strategies’ to be
                         implemented in its construction activities.

                         To implement these initiatives, DFCIL has set up a Social and Environmental Management Unit
                         (SEMU) headed by a General Manager (GM). SEMU implements all the safeguard activities at
                         DFCIL, and is supported by a GM and one environmental and social specialist each.
                         This unit has successfully carried out the safeguard due diligence activities such as (i) Carrying out
                         Environmental Assessment for EDFC 2 (Kanpur – Mughal Sarai) Section (ii) carrying out an
                         Environmental Assessment of EDFC 1 (Khurja – Kanpur Section) (iii) Environmental Assessment
                         of Tundla Detour of EDFC 1 (iv) Environmental Assessment of Rail Over Bridges in APL 1 (iv)
                         Secured clearances from Taj Trapezium Authority, Archaeological Department for Tundla
                         Detourn in EDFC 1 (v) permissions for forest land diversion and tree cutting clearances, etc. and
                         (v) initiated forest land diversion clearances for EDFC 3 and (vi) Environmental Assessment for
                         the 175 km long Pilakhni Sahnewal section of EDFC 3.

                         By performing these safeguard activities; DFCIL has demonstrated its commitment to
                         environmental management and ability to comply with safeguard policies of the Bank. However,
                         DFCIL has limited experience in implementing Environmental Management Plans (EMP). This
                         would require further handholding and capacity building of SEMU and Project Managers Staff in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the field. The Bank team would work with DFCIL and will ensure these capacities are developed
                         at DFCIL.

                         Social Safeguards Measures: The safeguards policy arrangements for APL2 are a continuation of
                         those agreed for the APL1. The World Bank Operational Policy 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement)
                         and OP 4.11 (Physical and Cultural Resources) are triggered and appropriate safeguard measures
                         proposed. OP 4.10 has not been triggered as no tribal people are affected.

                         Based on the SIA, DFCCIL has prepared and disclosed a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the
                         175 km long Pilakhni-Sahnewal section in compliance with the RPF prepared and cleared by the
                         Bank in 2011. The finalization of alignment for the remaining 226 kms between Khurja and
                         Pilakhni was delayed due to changes in detours. DFCCIL has updated the RPF (2011) agreed for
                         EDFC1 setting out guidelines for carrying out SIA and preparing RAP for this remaining Khurja-
                         Pilakhni section. The draft RAP for this section has been shared by the Client, which the Bank has
                         reviewed and sent back to the Client for substantial revisions. The Draft RAP for this section
                         updated in line with the updated RPF shall be disclosed prior to the Board presentation.

                         The LA process for EDFC3 will be carried out in accordance with the RAA (2008) with providing
                         R&R assistance as per the entitlement matrix agreed with the Bank and in compliance with
                         applicable provisions of the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition

                                                                    Page 8 of 14
                         and Resettlement and Rehabilitation Act of 2013 (RFCT-LARRA). This Act exempts from its
                         purview land acquisition process undertaken under RAA, 2008, except with regard to determining
                         land compensation effective from January 1, 2015. The RFCT-LARRA prescribes calculation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         compensation at one-to-two times of the government recognized land rates in urban areas and at
                         two-to-four times that in rural areas. The RPF prepared for EDFC1 in 2011 has been updated
                         reflecting the requirements of RAA, 2008 and RFCT-LARRA, 2013 and the Bank safeguard
                         policies, which shall be approved and disclosed by the borrower prior to Negotiations.

                         The RFCT-LARRA provisions on land compensation have limited implications for the Pilakhni-
                         Sahnewal section where land acquisition has been over 90 percent completed. All land
                         compensation awards made with effect from January 1, 2015 shall be compliant with the TFCT-
                         LARRA, 2013. Wherever awards have been made after 1st Jan 2015 at old rates, the difference
                         will be paid to farmers as supplementary award in accordance with the new RFCT-LARRA.

                         Resettlement Lessons. Resettlement planning for EDFC3 has benefited from the implementation
                         experience of EDFC1 and EDFC2. The EDFC3 corridor path was altered in view of the farmers’
                         disagreement with the originally planned alignment based on similar experience of EDFC1. The
                         adaptive approach to safeguards management established for EDFC1 and EDFC2 has been
                         maintained to allow course correction in resettlement policy and practice through independent
                         monitoring and evaluation arrangements. Some of the good practices of EDFC1 and EDFC2
                         continued for EDFC3 include: (i) holding wide community consultations; (ii) hiring land survey
                         and LA facilitation consultants for demarcating impacts and for preparing land plans; (iii) regular
                         updating of land records ensuring tran sfer of land titles after LA compensation payment; (iv)
                         resolution of compensation related grievances through arbitration; (v) provision of land
                         compensation to traditional occupiers settled on village lands (abadi deh); and (vi) holding regular
                         monitoring and inter-agency coordination meetings with the state governments.

                         In response to the resettlement quality audit of January 2013, DFCCIL has taken specific measures
                         to improve implementation quality. These include: (i) expanding the scope of jurisdiction of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         district grievance mechanisms enabling them to address complaints relating to type and magnitude
                         of land affected, and compensation awarded; (ii) ensuring payment of compensation at
                         replacement value through arbitration; (iii) giving financial assistance to those losing livelihoods,
                         or/ and those rendered marginal or landless farmers. A few actions agreed with DFCCIL during
                         EDFC2 that require follow up action include: (iv) imparting job skill training to the poor, eligible,
                         and affected youth as a part of livelihood skill building plan; and (vi) improving implementation
                         capacity at field and SEMU levels with hiring social scientist and additional field staff.

                         Income Restoration. The RPF/ RAP provide for financial assistance to the affected families losing
                         their livelihoods. Given that the affected farmers have limited skills in non-farm activities, they
                         will require livelihood skill training support in addition to financial assistance. DFCCIL has
                         experimented with providing job skill training to a limited number of affected youth along Eastern
                         and Western Corridors. It has committed to prepare and implement a Skill Building Plan as a part
                         of RAP implementation in order to strengthen income generation amongst the poor, eligible and
                         affected youth as agreed with the Bank during EDFC2 preparation. This income generating
                         initiative will focus on financial literacy, skill building and entrepreneurship development for the
                         affected people, in collaboration with potential partners. DFCCIL has earmarked budget to support
                         the initiative in the RAP for EDFC2 and EDFC3.

                         Gender and Social Inclusion. The RPF and RAP are socially inclusive and gender sensitive with

                                                                   Page 9 of 14
                         special R&R provisions for women, poor, artisans, small/marginal/landless farmers, and
                         vulnerable persons. Key gender and social inclusion elements incorporated in the RPF/ RAP
                         include: (a) collection of vulnerability data in a gender segregated manner during SIA so as to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         provide special R&R benefits to the affected women; (b) providing widows, single women, and
                         women headed families with 300 days of minimum wages at current market prices as vulnerability
                         allowance; (c) non-discrimination in enumeration of PAPs for R&R benefits amongst men and
                         women; (d) income generation activities and livelihood skill training for the affected youth with
                         targeting especially women and girls as beneficiaries; (e) subsistence allowance to the displaced
                         Below Poverty Line families, house building assistance to the poor displaced families, livelihood
                         assistance to the affected small and marginal farmers and shop keepers. The guiding principle shall
                         be to target “vulnerable families that cannot be provided with immediate sources of income” for
                         providing vulnerability assistance. The vulnerable families eligible for special assistance will also
                         include aged and disabled persons irrespective of sex, if they are poor. There shall be no
                         discrimination based on age, sex, caste or faith in offering LA compensation and R&R assistance,
                         consistent with the Chapter-III (Fundamental Rights) of the Indian Constitution. It is proposed to
                         carry out a gender need assessment study to understand gender related issues in the EDFC for
                         effective gender mainstreaming.

                         Borrower’s Social Safeguards Management Capacity: The institutional arrangements for EDFC3
                         will be a continuation of the system established for EDFC1 and EDFC2. The Social and
                         Environment Management Unit (SEMU) of DFFCIL, led a General Manager, assisted by an AGM
                         and a Social Development Specialist, will play a coordinating role with hiring of NGOs for field-
                         level implementation support and Social and Environment Safeguards Monitoring and Review
                         Consultant (SESMRC) for third party monitoring and quality audit. The Chief Project Managers
                         (CPM) will continue to operate as Chief Resettlement Officers, assisted by a number of Assistant
                         Project Managers (Social). Given the expansion of safeguards responsibility, DFCCIL will have to
                         enhance its implementation capacity with hiring the Social Development Specialist and additional
                         field staff. Whereas, the SEMU has demonstrated its capacity to prepare SIA and RAP, and
                         manage extensive land acquisition, gaps in field implementation capacity has affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                         effectiveness with regard to areas such as information dissemination and people’s mobilization,
                         and resolving compensation related disputes. In this context, SEMU will need to enhance its staff
                         capacity at the field level, and will require training and sustained technical support during the
                         implementation period. The Bank team will assist the Ministry of Railways (MoR) to establish
                         institutional capacity for planning, monitoring and coordinating LA and R&R activities through
                         technical assistance and will work closely with the DFCCIL to address the above issues including
                         through regular field visits, and training support.

                         Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E). Regular performance monitoring of RAP implementation will
                         be carried out by the internal oversight mechanisms of DFCCIL, in which SEMU and the CPM
                         office will have key roles. SEMU and the CPM office will be assisted by PMC and the facilitating
                         NGOs. DFCCIL will hire SESMRC for third party monitoring and quality audit of LA and R&R
                         measures. SESMRC will provide quarterly pr ogress reports (QPR) and yearly Safeguard Review
                         Reports for necessary follow up and any remedial action that may be required.

                         Independent Grievance Redress Mechanism. The GRM for EDFC3 will remain the same as for
                         EDFC1/2. The Competent Authority for LA will be the first level for hearing and resolving
                         objections relating to land acquisition. Independent Arbitrators will hear and redress grievances
                         demanding higher compensation. The district level GRC will be the second level GRM, chaired by
                         the District Collector or her/his nominees, and comprising representatives from civil society and

                                                                   Page 10 of 14
                         the district local body. DFCCIL has issued detailed guidelines, including on the scope of GRM’s
                         hearing of complaints relating to land use type, impact area, eligibility, and structure and land
                         valuation. DFCCIL shall appoint Additional Revenue Division Commissioners as Arbitrators to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         resolve land compensation award related complaints. At the corporate level, the Director, DFCCIL
                         (Project Planning) will chair the GRM and will have representatives from IR, DFCCIL, and the
                         civil society. An Ombudsman has already been appointed to address unresolved grievances.

                         Grievance Redress Service of the World Bank: Communities and individuals who believe that they
                         are adversely affected by a World Bank (WB) supported project may also submit complaints to the
                         Grievance Redress Service (GRS) established by the World Bank. The GRS ensures that
                         complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address project-related concerns. Project
                         affected communities and individuals may also submit their complaint to the WB’s independent
                         Inspection Panel, after having brought the complaint to the World Bank's attention through its
                         GRS. Information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank’s Grievance Redress Service is
                         available at http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. Information on how to submit complaints to the
                         World Bank Inspection Panel is available at www.inspectionpanel.org.

                         Safeguards Linkages: Concurrent to the construction of EDFC3, DFCCIL is expected to construct
                         some ROBs/RUBs without Bank financing along the corridor. DFCCIL is taking measures to
                         ensure that, all these activities physically connected to the project including ROBs/RUBs will
                         comply with the requirements of EMF agreed for the project. The western Dedicated Corridor
                         financed by JICA is not directly or significantly related to the Bank financed corridor, as this
                         corridor is on a separate alignment spread in a different geographical zone and does not meet the
                         lineage criteria outlined in the OP 4.12.

                         Risks and Mitigation Measures: The key social safeguards risks identified in the resettlement
                         audit, quarterly independent quality reports submitted by SESMRC and the Bank implementation
                         support mission Aide Memoires include: (i) delays in resettlement implementation due to (a)
                         change in alignment over 111 detour stretches of the 226 km long Khurja- Pilakhni section
Public Disclosure Copy




                         requiring fresh notification for land acquisition, (ii) farmers’ dissatisfaction with low
                         compensation offered in some villages at older circle rates in Uttar Pradesh; (iii) slow legal
                         process affecting early resolution of court litigations related to LA, (iv) recent changes in the legal
                         framework for LA and R&R applicable to land compensation payment for EDFC3 after January 1,
                         2015, (v) income restoration of land losers; (vi) delays in payment of R&R assistance; (vii)
                         challenges in coordinating LA process with the concerned revenue officers of the state
                         government; (viii) poor public awareness regarding GRM established at district and DFC levels;
                         (ix) inadequate field capacity for managing LA and R&R and absence of social scientist in the
                         SEMU; (x) disputes regarding eligibility for compensation and R&R benefits; (xi) loss of access to
                         local roads in affected villages adjacent to the existing railway tracks and loss of access to
                         agricultural fields in bypass stretches and (xii) impacts on affected squatter wage laborer residents
                         without land, marginal farmers and vulnerable groups.

                         The above risks will be mitigated through the following key steps:
                         •Updating the RAP with guidelines for providing compensation at replacement value and R&R
                         assistance to various PAP categories as per their entitlements.
                         •Commitment to prepare and implement Livelihood Skill Building Plan focusing on job skill
                         training, financial literacy and entrepreneurship development as income generation support
                         measures as per the RAP.
                         •Hiring NGOs to assist in verifying R&R eligibility through community consultations and

                                                                    Page 11 of 14
                          assisting with R&R benefit distribution.
                          •Holding regular meetings with the state governments for effective coordination with competent
                          authorities and Arbitrators to resolve compensation issues.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          •Wider dissemination of entitlements/ GRM through NGOs and using other technology platforms.
                          •Expanding DFCCIL staff capacity in the field with deploying community mobilizers.
                          •Resolving eligibility disputes through proactive efforts by GRM and NGOs.
                          •Provision of minimum 3-meter wide service roads along railway tracks at habitations.
                          •Livelihood assistance for landless/ marginal farmers, displaced wage laborers and self- employed
                          people as per the entitlements matrix.
                          •Third Party R&R Monitoring and Quality Review through independent consultants.
                          •Award of contract and site hand over with clear linkage to progress in LA and R&R.
                          •Follow up stakeholder consultations by NGOs during implementation.
                          •Undertaking impact evaluations during the implementation phase.

                           Any emerging risks will be addressed based on the reports received from the SESMRC.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key elements of DFCCIL’s citizen engagement strategy include: (i) consultations with the
                           affected people during project planning and implementation, (ii) information disclosure and
                           dissemination, (iii) grievance redress mechanisms, and (iv) people’s feedback on R&R
                           implementation through third party monitoring (SESMRC).

                          Stakeholder Consultations: Primary stakeholders for EDFC3 include farmers losing land, owner
                          and squatter households losing residence and business, general public that may be affected by the
                          relocation of community properties, and people exposed to the likely temporary impacts.
                          Secondary stakeholders include the ministry of railways, DFCCIL, the concerned state
                          government, other government departments/agencies including forests and environment, etc. To
                          understand the people’s views and concerns, a total of 71 community consultations covering 138
Public Disclosure Copy




                          villages were held for preparing the RAP and EMP for Pilakhni-Sahnewal section during
                          December 2012 to April 2013. About 21 consultations have been held for preparing the first draft
                          of the RAP and EA for the for Khurja-Pilakhni section. More follow up consultations will be held
                          before finalizing the RAP and EA and also during the implementation process. Key issues
                          discussed during the consultations include: (a) likely damage to structures due to faster freight
                          trains, (b) jobs for land losers; (b) payment of compensation at latest rates; (c) need to replace
                          damaged assets such as water pipelines; (d) difficulties with updating land records; (e) livelihood
                          assistance for those losing most of their land; (f) loss of religious properties; and (g) provision for
                          underpasses, (h) provision of resettlement plots for the displaced by the village assembly (Gram
                          Sabha), etc. DFCCIL is carrying out follow up consultations with the help of field staff and
                          consultants hired to carry out SIA. DFCCIL will continue to hold community consultations as a
                          part of the land acquisition process with the help of field staff and NGOs hired to provide
                          implementation support at the field level.

                          Disclosure: The EA/ EMP and RAP (Pilakhni-Sahnewal) and draft updated RPF for EDFC3 has
                          been disclosed on the DFCCIL website and at the World Bank Info-shop on January 27, 2015. The
                          EA and RAP summary have also been translated to Hindi and disclosed locally. The list of PAPs
                          eligible for different R&R benefits will be disclosed at the village and panchayat levels. DFCCIL
                          will disseminate project information brochures amongst the PAPs in villages explaining their
                          entitlements and contact details of GRM. DFCCIL has disclosed EA / EMP, and RAP for


                                                                     Page 12 of 14
                           Pilakhni-Sahnewal, will disclose the approved RPF prior to Negotiations, and will prepare and
                           disclose the Draft EA / EMP, and Draft RAP for the Khurja-Pilakhni section before the Board
                           presentation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      25-Jan-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   27-Jan-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      00000000
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            25-Jan-2015
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      25-Jan-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   27-Jan-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            25-Jan-2015
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?


                                                                     Page 13 of 14
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Benedictus Eijbergen,Atul Agarwal
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Zia Al Jalaly (SA)                               Date: 23-Apr-2015
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Karla Gonzalez Carvajal (PMGR)                  Date: 28-Apr-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 14 of 14
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
