                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA12892
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Apr-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Apr-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Africa                             Project ID:    P149969
                            Project Name:      Volta River Basin Strategic Action Programme Implementation (P149969)
                            Task Team          Shelley Mcmillan
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          16-Apr-2015                        Estimated   21-May-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GWADR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                               International waters
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%), General water, sanitation
                                              and flood protection sector (40%), General public administration sector (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Water resource management (50%), Environmental policies and institutions
                                              (30%), Regional integration (20%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      10.94           Total Bank Financing:                   0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    0.24
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                           7.20
                              Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                               3.50
                              Total                                                                                      10.94
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Global Environmental Objective(s)


                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                         The proposed global objective is to improve the capacity of the VBA for transboundary water
                         resources management.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project is the first support provided to the VBA by the World Bank. It is expected to be
                         implemented over four years with implementation from September 2015 to August 2019. The project
                         will be financed by a $7.2 million grant from the GEF and $3.5 million grant from CIWA, and will
                         consist of four components: (i) Water Charter Development for the Volta River Basin; (ii)
                         Facilitating Dialogue, Communication and Project Monitoring ; and (iii) Implementation of SAP
                         Priority Actions. A fourth component allocates funding related to the Project Management. A
                         parallel, bank-executed activity will be conducted for an institutional assessment of the VBA, and
                         will be financed by an additional $0.5 million from CIWA. This activity is bank-executed so as to
                         have an independent assessment.

                         Component 1: Water Charter Development for Volta River Basin (US$1,992,000). The aim of this
                         first component is to develop a Water Charter which specifies roles and responsibilities of riparian
                         countries with regard to water resources use, strengthens the underpinning of VBA to promote
                         coordinated and harmonized water policies in the Basin and defines guiding principles for improved
                         water resources development and management for the basin such as better integration of IWRM
                         where transboundary resources are concerned. The Water Charter will be developed under the
                         leadership of the legal unit of the VBA, and the process of its development will involve extensive
                         consultations with relevant stakeholders in the member states to ensure ownership of the process and
                         final document. The Water Charter has the objective to: (i) facilitate dialogue and cooperation
                         between member States in the planning and implementation of programs and projects that affect
                         water resources; (ii) strengthen solidarity and promote sub-regional integration and economic
                         cooperation between Member States; (iii) specify the regulations for utilization of water resources of
                         the basin; (iv) specify the regulations on the preservation and protection of the environment,
                         especially those relating to water quality; (v) strengthen collaboration on flood management and
                         defining the modalities for exchanging hydro-meteorological data and flood information; and (vi)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         define the modalities for participation of water users in decision making on management of the water
                         resources of the Volta basin.

                         Activities in the development of the Water Charter would include: a stakeholder assessment, a legal
                         and diagnostic study, preparation of and consultation on the draft charter and dissemination of the
                         signed document. The communication of the final Water Charter to ensure that all stakeholders are
                         aware of their rights and responsibilities links into the Communication Plan under Component 2.

                         Component 2: Facilitating Dialogue, Communication and Project Monitoring (US$1,260,000). In
                         order to effectively carry out its coordination role, the Strategic Plan for the period 2015-2019
                         recommends that VBA establish communications mechanisms that target different sections of the
                         basin’s stakeholders as well as facilitate exchange of information and data on environmental, water
                         resources and monitoring of planned and ongoing projects in the Basin. While some of these efforts
                         are being addressed through the VBA Observatory and other avenues, they are being carried out in
                         ad hoc and non-coordinated manners. As such, this component focuses on the development of a
                         Communications Strategy and Plan which will serve as the guiding document for improving
                         coordination and collaboration among all relevant stakeholders; and on information sharing on
                         current and planned projects in the Basin. A stakeholder assessment will be carried out as part of the
                         development of the Communications Strategy and Plan. The component will also support activities
                         related to participation in the International Water Learning Exchange and Resource Network (IW-

                                                                      Page 2 of 9
                         Learn).

                         Component 3: Implementation of SAP Priority Actions (US$6,898,000). This component represents
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation of SAP measures through priority actions. It supports th e development of projects
                         that lead to improvements in water quality, flows and ecosystem services. Initial selection of actions
                         was done based on their transboundary nature, criteria for which was developed through consultation
                         with the VBA; additional consultations with the VBA and its national Focal Points, as well as
                         representatives of local agencies and organizations led to the final choices for priority actions. The
                         list includes actions across Components A and B of the SAP, integrating measures that directly
                         address physical stresses, to those related to human capacity, governance, knowledge and livelihood
                         in maintaining the environment. Priority actions include restoration of flows through river bank
                         rehabilitation, reversal of vegetation degradation through reforestation and enhancing of agricultural
                         practices through water-conserving techniques. Priority actions also include funding for feasibility
                         studies, consultations, capacity building and awareness-raising at the national and local levels and
                         M&E.

                         Sub-Component 3.1. Reforestation: Being implemented in Benin, Cote d’Ivoire, Ghana and Togo,
                         this activity builds priority actions based on SAP Actions B.4 and B.7, which highlight the degraded
                         forest ecosystems in these countries. Forest area degradation is attributed to shifting cultivation,
                         transhumance, overgrazing, uncontrolled bush fires used to clear land for agriculture and
                         uncontrolled exploitation of timber and other crops. In Benin and Togo, these challenges are acute
                         along the mountainsides and near river banks of the Pendjari-Oti, whereas in Ghana and Cote
                         d’Ivoire these problems occur within the Black Volta sub-basin. All four priority actions will
                         contribute towards conservation of critical ecosystem functions by rehabilitating degraded forest
                         ecosystems in the project sites.

                         Sub-Component 3.2. River Bank Protection: Being implemented in Burkina Faso, this activity
                         corresponds to SAP Action A.2, which addresses challenges to the water levels of the tributaries of
                         the Mouhoun River, one of the key streams of the Volta, and situated in the northern region of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Burkina Faso. These tributaries used to be permanent, but in recent years have been drying due to
                         human impact. Furthermore soil erosion of the river banks is leading to increased sedimentation
                         which is in turn negatively impacting flows.

                         Sub-Component 3.3. Development of Market Gardens: This component corresponds to Action A.3
                         and will be implemented in Mali. Small market gardens will be developed using water conserving
                         techniques showcasing alternate forms of irrigation applicable for the Sahel.

                         Component 4: Project Management (US$790,000). The component will finance activities related to
                         the management and strengthening of internal processes related to strengthening the capacity of the
                         VBA. This component will also provide support to the PCU to implement the project. It will thus
                         finance costs relating to fiduciary management, monitoring and evaluation of the project’s results,
                         technical reporting and audits, additional consultants for the PCU as well as any operating costs such
                         as meetings, workshops, travel expenses and training to assure project implementation according to
                         standards acceptable to IDA
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The first two components of the project will comprise of technical assistance activities for the VBA,
                         to take place at the implementing agency, located in Burkina Faso. The project may also include


                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                         installation of office and communication equipment such as servers and computers for the VBA to
                         deliver its mandated services.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project also includes implementation of priority action projects based on Strategic Action
                         Programme measures, details and locations of which will be determined during appraisal. The
                         measures will take place within the six countries of the Volta (Benin, Burkina Faso, Cote d’Ivoire,
                         Ghana, Mali and Togo).
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Abdoulaye Gadiere (GENDR)
                         Salamata Bal (GSURR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental               Yes            Among all the components, only component 3 is likely to
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      have potential environmental adverse impacts because it
                                                                    contains activities developed from the SAP priority
                                                                    actions. These activities comprise watershed management,
                                                                    alleviation of water pollution in pollution hotspots,
                                                                    wetland restoration efforts, and others. However, the
                                                                    exact locations where these actions will be implemented
                                                                    are not yet known. Consequently, the relevant safeguard
                                                                    instrument to be prepared is an Environmental and Social
                                                                    Management Framework (ESMF). This safeguard
                                                                    document has been reviewed, consulted upon and
                                                                    disclosed within the six riparian countries on April 7,
                                                                    2015 and at the InfoShop on April 7,2015.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP      Yes            OP4.04 is triggered because it is anticipated that some of
                         4.04                                       the SAP actions may overlap with natural habitats. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    ESMF includes guidance on avoiding natural habitats and
                                                                    mitigating impacts, where it is unavoidable.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36          Yes            One of the environmental measures of the SAP is to
                                                                    restore the vegetative cover of two forested areas within
                                                                    the Volta basin (Samory and Segue forests). If a SAP
                                                                    project is selected in line with this measure, then
                                                                    measures will be taken to ensure effective forest
                                                                    management planning. In addition, the triggering of the
                                                                    policy would pay particular attention on forest resources
                                                                    during the project preparation and its implementation.
                                                                    These aspects are addressed in the ESMF.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes                This policy is triggered for SAP actions which may
                                                                    involve agricultural activities. An Integrated Pest
                                                                    Management Plan (IPMP) has therefore been prepared,
                                                                    consulted upon and disclosed as part of the ESMF
                                                                    process. Furthermore since water pollution due to the
                                                                    growing use of pesticides was identified in SAP as one of
                                                                    the main challenges in the basin, this Plan will also serve
                                                                    as a step for VBA to address larger issues beyond the



                                                                      Page 4 of 9
                                                                      purposes of this project. The IPMP has been disclosed
                                                                      publicly within the six concerned countries on April 7,
                                                                      2015 and at the InfoShop on April 7, 2015.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Physical Cultural        No               It is not anticipated that the project will impact any
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                      physical cultural resources in the Volta River Basin.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/   No               There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes              The areas for implementation of the SAP Actions have
                            OP/BP 4.12                                not yet been identified. It is not anticipated that sites
                                                                      involving resettlement will be selected. Nevertheless, a
                                                                      Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared
                                                                      to ensure that preventive measures are in place, should
                                                                      any economic or physical displacement take place that is
                                                                      related to land acquisition. This RPF has also been
                                                                      reviewed, consulted upon, disclosed in the six riparian
                                                                      countries which host the project on April 17, 2015 and at
                                                                      InfoShop on April 17, 2015.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No            The project will not partake in any part of dam project
                            4.37                                      preparation, rehabilitation or construction. As such, this
                                                                      policy will not be triggered. The SAP priority actions will
                                                                      not have any relation to any dams.
                            Projects on International   Yes           The OP 7.50 is triggered by the project. To be in
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      compliance with OP7.50, Projects on International
                                                                      Waterways, the VBA sent a letter for endorsement to all
                                                                      six Volta Basin riparian countries (Benin, Burkina Faso,
                                                                      Cote d’Ivoire, Ghana, Mali and Togo) on February 20,
                                                                      2014. In return, the VBA received responses from all the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      six countries confirming their agreement for this ongoing
                                                                      project.
                            Projects in Disputed        No            There are no disputed areas in the Volta basin.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              No significant environmental impacts are expected from this project as its intention is to promote
                              sound water resources management and improve natural resources biodiversity. However it is
                              recognized that despite this the project's relatively modest environmental impacts, it is necessary
                              to follow a structured assessment process to ensure that no activities will have unintended
                              consequences on the environment. Based on these aspects, the project is classified as being EA
                              category B and triggers six safeguards policies. There are OP/PB 4.01; OP4.04; OP4.36; OP4.09;
                              OP 4.12 and OP/PB 7.50. The project may take place in or near natural habitats and forests, and
                              so the ESMF includes measures to avoid such areas or mitigate such impacts; it also includes
                              measures for undertaking some reforestation activities. The project will involve pest management,
                              and the focus of the IPMP is to use chemicals as minimally as possible. The project could include


                                                                        Page 5 of 9
                          land acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement and restrictions of access to resources and
                          livelihoods -- most likely some minor land take. Therefore, an RPF has been prepared. To be in
                          compliance with these policies the following safeguard instruments (ESMF, IPMP and RPF) have
Public Disclosure Copy




                          been prepared reviewed, consulted upon and disclosed in VBA member countries on April
                          17,2015 and at the infoshop on April 17, 2015. Based on the triggering of OP/PB7.50, a letter for
                          endorsement has been sent to all six Volta Basin riparian countries (Benin, Burkina Faso, Cote
                          d’Ivoire, Ghana, Mali and Togo) on February 20, 2014. In return, the VBA received responses
                          from all the six countries mentioning their agreement for this ongoing project.

                           During the whole phase of the project, the ESMF, the IPMP and the RPF will be implemented as
                           guidance/guidelines for any activity that will have to be financed under the project. ESIAs and/or
                           ESMPs and/or RAPs will be prepared as and when necessary.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           No long-term impact due to project activities is foreseen.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The ESMF prepared by the borrower contains: (a) a systematic environmental and social impact
                           assessment for all activities before selection and implementation; (b) procedures for conducting
                           activity-specific Environmental and Social Impacts Assessments (ESIAs) or Environmental and
                           Social Management Plan (ESMP); (c) capacity strengthening and awareness raising campaigns
                           targeted at relevant stakeholder groups for better implementation and monitoring of project
                           safeguard measures; and (d) establishment and implementation of a consultation framework for
                           the environmental control and monitoring.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Similar to the ESMF, the RPF also outlines the principles, organizational arrangements, and
                          design criteria to be applied to investments to be prepared during project implementation. An
                          investment specific Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared in line with the RPF and
                          submitted to the bank, as required, for approval after specific design information becomes
                          available.

                           Lastly, the IPMP seeks to provide guidance in how to protect environment, biodiversity and
                           people in case pesticides are used during the project implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The safeguard documents (ESMF, IPMP and RPF) mentioned above have been consulted upon
                           and disclosed before the Appraisal scheduled for April 17, 2015.

                          While the project aims to ensure a better management of the Volta Basin water resources, the key
                          stakeholders comprising community members living around the main Volta river tributaries,
                          farmers, and breeders in the targeted project sites of the project have been consulted. At these
                          different occasions, they have given their comments, concerns and viewpoints for a better
                          implementation of this ongoing operation. Moreover from February 26-27, 2015 a regional
                          workshop held in Ouagadougou and gathered stakeholders coming from all the six countries with


                                                                     Page 6 of 9
                           the goal to review and validate the three safeguard instruments.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        13-Mar-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     07-Apr-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        00000000
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Burkina Faso                                                       07-Apr-2015
                           Comments:
                           Benin                                                              07-Apr-2015
                           Comments:
                           Cote d'Ivoire                                                      07-Apr-2015
                           Comments:
                           Ghana                                                              07-Apr-2015
                           Comments:
                           Mali                                                               07-Apr-2015
                           Comments:
                           Togo                                                               07-Apr-2015
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        16-Apr-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     17-Apr-2015
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Burkina Faso                                                       17-Apr-2015
                           Comments:
                           Benin                                                              17-Apr-2015
                           Comments:
                           Cote d'Ivoire                                                      17-Apr-2015
                           Comments:
                           Ghana                                                              17-Apr-2015
                           Comments:
                           Mali                                                               17-Apr-2015
                           Comments:
                           Togo                                                               17-Apr-2015
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        13-Mar-2015



                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-Apr-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Burkina Faso                                                     07-Apr-2015
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                           Benin                                                            07-Apr-2015
                           Comments:
                           Cote d'Ivoire                                                    07-Apr-2015
                           Comments:
                           Ghana                                                            07-Apr-2015
                           Comments:
                           Mali                                                             07-Apr-2015
                           Comments:
                           Togo                                                             07-Apr-2015
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?


                                                                      Page 8 of 9
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Shelley Mcmillan
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (SA)                       Date: 18-Apr-2015
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Alexander E. Bakalian (PMGR)                    Date: 19-Apr-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                        Page 9 of 9
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
