INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
0                                                Report No.: ISDSC13897
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Jul-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:           Afghanistan                Project ID:   P156225
Project Name:      Support to the Afghanistan Independent Land Authority
Team Leader(s): Asta Olesen
Estimated Date     28-Sep-2015
of Approval:
Managing Unit:     GSU04                      Lending       Lending Instrument
Instrument:
Sector(s):         General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (25%), Public administration-
Agriculture, fishing and forestry (25%), Public administration- Other social
services (25%), Other Mining and Extractive Industries (15%), General
industry and trade sector (10%)
Theme(s):          Other public sector governance (20%), Other rule of law (15%), Other social
development (15%), Other rural development (15%), Land administration and
management (35%)
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:   4.95                  Total Bank Financing: 0
Financing Gap:        0
Financing Source                                                             Amount
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund                                            4.95
Environment        B - Partial Assessment
Category:
B. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support the Afghan Government to develop the
policy and regulatory framework and build capacity to deliver transparent, pro-poor land services,
through (a) raising public awareness, knowledge and understanding about laws and regulations
governing the land sector; (b) developing processes and service standards for Arazi's core functions
C. Project Description
The project is designed as primarily a technical assistance (TA) project that will prepare and
strengthen the newly independent Arazi for its tasks as a transparent and responsive service provider
in the land sector. Development of policies, regulations and implementation procedures and
respective staff capacity will be driven by a gender-sensitive and pro-poor approach, which will
facilitate the role of the land sector in equitable economic growth and employment generation. The


﻿project will build on the assistance and earlier achievements of land sector support interventions.
This particularly includes the assistance to Arazi provided under ARCP. The LGAF, currently being
conducted will provide further guidance for the detailed project design. As part of the Lessons-
Learned documentation, during preparation phase a comprehensive Social Assessment taking stock
O
U       of earlier analytical work and pilots in dispute resolution, land registration, as well as identification
of major stakeholder and political economy dimensions of land governance reforms will be
conducted.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project is designed as primarily a technical assistance (TA) project that will prepare and
strengthen the newly independent Arazi for its tasks as a transparent and responsive service provider
in the land sector. Specifically, the proposed project will consist of four components focused on
institutional strengthening and capacity building of Arazi through the development of an
administrative system of land registration, policy and land access. These interventions will be
consistent with the Government's and World Bank's safeguards policies and guidelines and
consultants' Terms of References (ToRs) will be drafted accordingly. As the proposed activities
under this project will only involve technical and analytical assistance, advisory services, and
building capacity of Arazi to deliver its services to support the land administration and management,
there will be no civil works or tangible investment with salient physical characteristics to be
supported under this project.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Borrower is national Land Authority and thus has custodianship of the national Law on Land
Expropriation, which is currently under amendment in order to be compliant with goods internaitonal
standards. SUbstaintial training will be required of Arazi staff to handle implementation of amended
law at national level. Arazi does not have any mandate with regard to environmental issues, but as
the government's designated lead agency in the land sector, Arazi will consult and coordinate with
other land-related agencies, in particular Ministry of Mines, and National Environmental Protection
Agency (NEPA).
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Obaidullah Hidayat (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies             Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes           The Environmental Assessment policy(OP/BP
BP 4.01                                      4.01) is triggered as it can not be rules out that
the PPG will comprise drafting of policies and
procedures which may have down-strema
enviroment impact. All legal amendments,
regulations and procedures Each set of draft
policies and guidelines for Land Access drafted
under the project will be subject to a Social and
environmental Assessment to assess
downstream social and environmental impacts
( SEA). The ToRs of the SEAs will include
environmental and social elements which will


﻿be informed by policy requirements of OP 4.01
and other relevant applicable Bank safeguard
policies. The relevant ToR will be cleared by
the Bank. To ensure holistic safeguard
approach, the project will coordinate with
NEPA, MoLSAMD and other relevant line
ministries
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No            This policy is not triggered, as the activities and
policies funded under this PPG will not entail
implication to Natural Habitats. The prevailing
Environmental Law includes a negative list
where all identifies Natural Habitats are listed
and are declared as preserved area
Forests OP/BP 4.36             No            OP/BP 4.36 (Forests Policy) is not triggered
since, policies and procedures that are
ultimately adopted by Arazi will have no
applicability with the land under forest. The
country has a Forest Law and clear guidelines
and procedures are already applicable and in
place, and under the mandate of Ministry of
Agriculture and Livestock.
Pest Management OP 4.09        No            OP 4.09 (Pest Management) policy is not
triggered because Project activities will not
involve purchase, use or storage of pesticides,
nor will it support the procurement, or use of, or
lead to the increased use of other agricultural
chemicals.
O
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  No          The Arazi Support Project does not finance any
BP 4.11                                      civil works
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10  No            The Arazi Support Project does not have any
activity in any area of indigenous people.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  Yes          Although the Project will not involve any
4.12                                         relocation or involuntary resettlement per se, the
Involuntary Resettlement Policy is triggered due
to the potential downstream impacts that could
arise from any laws, policies, procedures and
guidelines on Involuntary Resettlement that are
ultimately adopted by the government.
Activities strengthening Land Policy and
Regulatory Framework would support the
review and where applicable the revision of the
land policies and laws, including laws and
implementing regulations to enable Arazi to
implement its mandate under the Law on Land
Management Affairs and other laws, including


﻿the Land Expropriation Law, in a consistent
framework and in accordance with pro-poor
land policies and good land governance.
All legal amendments, regulations and
procedures Each set of developed laws, policies
and guidelines drafted under Land Policy and
Regulatory Framework drafted under the project
will be subject to a Social and Environmental
Assessment to assess downstream social and
environmental impacts. (SEA) as well as a legal
review by the WB. The Project will facilitate
future Bank and other partner operations by
having commonly accepted standards in place.
Broad consensus on these issues will be sought
through inter-ministerial cooperation, in
particular through the High Council of Land and
Water.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No             The Project does not have any activity involving
dams.
Projects on International      No             The Project does not involve any activity that
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                          will affect international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No           The Project does not involve any activity in any
7.60                                          know disputed area.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
IV. APPROVALS
0
Team Leader(s):        Name: Asta Olesen
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                Date: 23-Jul-2015
*        Practice Manager/     Name: Markus Kostner (PMGR)                    Date: 23-Jul-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.


