                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC6683

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Mar-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Mar-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Philippines                      Project ID:      P132401
                            Project Name:      Metro Manila Corridor Improvement Project (P132401)
                            Task Team          Ke Fang
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          26-Jun-2015                      Estimated        16-Sep-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTIDR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Urban Transport (100%)
                            Theme(s):          Infrastructure services for private sector development (60%), Urban planning
                                               and housing policy (20%), Other public sector governanc e (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    119.00                     Total Bank Financing:          53.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      41.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         53.00
                              Climate Investment Funds                                                      25.00
                              Total                                                                        119.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The objective is to help improve performance of the public transport system along a high priority
                           corridor in Metro Manila in terms of the quality and level of service, safety and security for
                           passengers, and over-all environmental efficiency.

                           To accomplish this objective, the project would: (a) develop high quality bus services, emulating
                         some of the features of a BRT, partly on segregated lanes (as permitted by available right-of-way)
                         with attractive designated stations and formal schedules, high quality, A/C buses with multiple doors,
                         weather protected stations, convenient and efficient off-board fare payment, priority through
Public Disclosure Copy




                         signalized intersections, passenger information at stations and level boarding/alighting; (b) introduce
                         traffic management and ITS approaches along the corridor and critical bottlenecks throughout the
                         city; and (c) reform the bus system and rationalize the routes by modifying the current arrangements
                         for issuing bus franchises using route measured capacity which has led to a number of inefficiencies.
                         The modified approach would involve issuing franchises using competitive contracting on a gross
                         cost basis. The focus is on managing implementation risks and deliverability in a short time.
                         C. Project Description
                         The project utilizes a comprehensive, integrated package of travel, roadway and public and non-
                         motorized transport strategies and investments to improve the people-moving performance of multi-
                         modal transport systems in high demand corridors. A full fledge Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) option
                         consisting of segregated bus ways, elevated stations, and off board fare collection for the entire
                         corridor, was analyzed but not adopted, due to considerations for reducing investment costs and
                         minimizing social environmental impacts.

                         The project consists of four main components:

                         Component 1 – Investment in PT infrastructure and System Management (Espaňa-Quezon-
                         Commonwealth Avenue corridor) This component will finance goods, works, and services for: a)
                         detailed design, construction and supervision of bus improvement infrastructure, and b) corridor
                         traffic management systems, ITS and intersection upgrades. Land acquisition and resettlement cost of
                         US$18.0 million will be financed by GoP.

                         Component 2 – Concept Dissemination and Urban Realm Enhancements This component will
                         finance studies, training, and capacity building to support: a) bus improvement application along
                         other corridors in Metro Manila; b) foster integration of land development and bus system along the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         corridor by establishing physical connections from stations and terminals to major trip attractors and
                         generators.

                         Component 3 – Project Outcome Monitoring This component will finance technical assistance,
                         equipment, and other operational support monitoring project performance and results.

                         Component 4 – Project Management This component will finance: (a) technical assistance,
                         equipment, vehicles, office equipment, outreach activities, and other operational support to help with
                         project implementation and management; (b) conduct detailed feasibility studies to support
                         implementation of bus reform program along additional corridors as identified in the bus network
                         rationalization study.

                         The project is proposed to be financed from different sources, including the IBRD, Clean
                         Technology Fund (CTF), and the Government of the Philippines. The Bank’s safeguard policies
                         however will apply to the entire project and any “linked projects”. The associated instruments such
                         as environmental assessments and management plans will comply with Bank’s procedures regardless
                         of financing sources.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented along the busy Espaňa-Quezon-Commonwealth Avenue corridor.
                         This is a main strategic transport route cutting diagonally through the upper half of Metro Manila
                         from Quezon City to Manila City. It is a corridor that is not currently served by any form of mass
Public Disclosure Copy




                         transit although the planned MRT Line 7 will serve the northern half of the corridor between
                         Fairview on the North end and Elliptical. The corridor’s strategic importance and its connections
                         with LRT1, MRT3 and Philippine National Rail together with its high volume of travel justify its
                         inclusion as a priority corridor. The corridor’s total length is 27.7 km consisting of the 13 km
                         between Manila City Hall and PHILCOA, largely along Quezon Avenue, and 14.7 km along
                         Commonwealth Avenue to an outer terminal at Fairview Mall. The corridor is located within high
                         density commercial areas of north east Manila City and south west Quezon City. These areas also
                         contain key institutional centers, a number of important medical facilities, and high density
                         residential centers – all depending on mass public transport provision.

                         The Manila-Quezon corridor extends from the immediate area around PHILCOA footbridge,
                         Commonwealth Avenue, in the north east; to the Andres Bonifacio Memorial area bounded by Padre
                         Burgos, Natividad Almeda-Lopez, A Villegas and Cecilia Munoz-Palma in the south west – a length
                         of 13.0 km. This section forms the core improvement corridor and will witness the insertion of
                         comprehensive infrastructure at the median of the corridor to assist with bus priority. Beyond
                         PHILCOA, to/from Fairview, any bus services will be asked to operate in mixed traffic.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The project will be implemented by DOTC, which will have the overall responsibility for its
                         coordination and management. The DOTC has set up a National Steering Committee (NSC) for the
                         overall policy formulation and oversight of bus rationalization in the Philippines. The Steering
                         Committee has participation of all national and city-based agencies, including DOTC, MMDA and
                         DPWH at the national level and representatives of the concerned municipalities. A Memorandum of
                         Understanding (MoU) will be signed among all agencies laying down key responsibilities and
                         obligations during design, implementation and operation of the system. A National Project
                         Management Office (NPMO) has been set up to support the mandate of the NSC and oversee
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation of all bus improvement plans, policies, standards, regulations, and projects
                         nationwide. At the city level, a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) has been set up to carry out day-
                         to-day project implementation, including project management, financial management, procurement,
                         reporting, monitoring, and environmental and social safeguards. To support project preparation and
                         implementation, NPMO/PIU will be supported by a Technical Support Consultant (TSC), in the
                         areas of project management, technical support, monitoring and evaluation.

                         DOTC is familiar with the World Bank safeguard policies and hired a firm to carry out an integrated
                         environment and social assessment. An environment and social (E&S) unit will be set-up under PIU
                         and qualified specialists will be recruited for environment and social review, ESMP implementation
                         supervision and monitoring. These personnel working on the project’s environmental and social
                         safeguards shall be appointed prior to negotiation.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         Frederick Edmund Brusberg (OPSOR)
                         Karen Jonesy Jacob (GGODR)
                         Leonardo Jr. Batugal Paat (GENDR)
                         Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (GENDR)
                         Victoria Florian S. Lazaro (GSURR)
                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies         Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment   Yes        The project aims to strengthen the institutional,
                           OP/BP 4.01                            regulatory and delivery framework for bus operations
                                                                 in a significant urban corridor in Metro Manila. It
                                                                 will entail upgrading and/or construction of
                                                                 dedicated bus lanes and other related infrastructure.
                                                                 Considering the current traffic congestion, the
                                                                 proposed activities may have construction related
                                                                 localized impacts, traffic disturbance, occupational
                                                                 health and safety of workers, commuters, pedestrian,
                                                                 non-motorized transport especially during the
                                                                 construction phase of the elevated section for Bus
                                                                 Rapid Transit. There may be additional impacts
                                                                 related to opening up of new areas identified for the
                                                                 resettlement of families residing in the road right of
                                                                 way, interaction of workers with the local
                                                                 community and the potential economic effect on
                                                                 small business during construction and operation of
                                                                 the bus services.

                                                                 An Integrated Environmental and Social Impact
                                                                 Assessment (ESIA) will be undertaken to address the
                                                                 environmental and social issues related to the project.
                                                                 An ESIA will cover social and environmental
                                                                 baseline, evaluation of impacts and the holistic
                                                                 approach to mitigate and manage environmental and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 social impacts even beyond OP 4.12 requirements.
                                                                 The ESIA report is expected to adequately cover: (i)
                                                                 description of all components of the proposed project
                                                                 and their individual and cumulative impacts; (ii)
                                                                 environmental baseline of the project influence areas;
                                                                 (iii) possible linked projects and their environmental
                                                                 impacts; (iv) alternative analysis from environmental
                                                                 consideration; (v) permanent and temporary
                                                                 economic impact on people due to construction
                                                                 work; non-renewal of some franchises in some
                                                                 jeepney routes; (vi) disposal of very old vehicles (if
                                                                 required); (vii) assessment of implementing agency’s
                                                                 capacity for environmental management; (viii) inter-
                                                                 agency coordination and public/NGO participation;
                                                                 and (ix) costing of activities proposed for
                                                                 environmental mitigation and monitoring. The
                                                                 description of environmental and social impacts will
                                                                 be developed based on alignment sheets that specify
                                                                 site specific environmental information and socio-
                                                             economic conditions. Measures to include the
                                                             accessibility needs particularly of Persons With
                                                             Disabilities (PWD) and women will also form part of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             the consultation process and incorporated in the
                                                             management plans. Environmental Code of Practice
                                                             (ECoP) will be developed to address generic
                                                             construction-related impacts and to be included as
                                                             appropriate in the bidding documents. A Grievance
                                                             Redress Mechanism will be included in the ESIA and
                                                             presented to the communities during public
                                                             consultation.

                                                             The ESIA will include a communication and
                                                             community participation plan and information on a
                                                             comprehensive public consultation process.

                                                             An integrated Environmental and Social
                                                             Management Plan (ESMP) will be formulated and
                                                             included in the ESIA. The ESMP will outline the
                                                             agreed upon and identified measures to mitigate and
                                                             manage social and environmental impacts.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No    The proposed project is not expected to have any
                                                             impact on conversion or degradation of critical or
                                                             other natural habitats. There are no known natural
                                                             habitats expected to be covered by the proposed
                                                             project. Accordingly, the policy has not been
                                                             triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No    The proposed project will not have any impact on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             health and quality of forests, the rights and welfare of
                                                             people and their level of dependence upon or
                                                             interaction with forests; and the management,
                                                             protection, or utilization of natural forests or
                                                             plantations. The proposed project is located within a
                                                             built urban environment and there are likely to be no
                                                             forest habitats within the project site. As such, the
                                                             policy has not been triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No    Not relevant for the proposed project. Use of
                                                             pesticides not anticipated.
                         Physical Cultural Resources   TBD   There are some old bridges and buildings on the
                         OP/BP 4.11                          project corridor that are considered as PCR. ESIA
                                                             will screen the PCR. If the ESIA identifies impacts to
                                                             these physical cultural resources, the policy will be
                                                             triggered at the appraisal stage and will provide for
                                                             measures to address PCR impacts including the
                                                             preparation and inclusion of PCR Management Plan
                                                             and Chance Find Procedures.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    No                         Not applicable.
                                 4.10
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                Yes                        The Project is likely to involve small size involuntary
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                land acquisition and resettlement. Potential loss of
                                                                                                                        income from business disturbance is also expected to
                                                                                                                        arise for some shop owners and some jeepney/bus
                                                                                                                        operators as a result of public transport service
                                                                                                                        restructuring that would take place on the project
                                                                                                                        corridor. The project will seek to minimize these
                                                                                                                        impacts through public communication, inclusive
                                                                                                                        planning, and feasible design interventions and
                                                                                                                        mitigation.

                                                                                                                        A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared,
                                                                                                                        disclosed and consulted upon prior to appraisal. The
                                                                                                                        RAP will include a census of affected people, socio-
                                                                                                                        economic survey, estimates of replacement values
                                                                                                                        including contingency budget, estimate of timing on
                                                                                                                        when people are likely to be moved, and Grievance
                                                                                                                        Redress Mechanism. The RAP will also specify the
                                                                                                                        procedures needed to verify the estimated
                                                                                                                        replacement rate. The compensation based on the
                                                                                                                        calculated replacement rate should be paid before
                                                                                                                        actual resettlement takes place and at least a month
                                                                                                                        prior to start of civil works. Direct social impact of
                                                                                                                        the project other than those arising from land
                                                                                                                        acquisition such as loss of income and livelihood will
                                                                                                                        be addressed in the integrated environmental and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        social management plan (ESMP).
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         Not applicable. The project does not entail works
                                                                                                                        related to dams.
                                 Projects on International      No                                                      Not applicable. Project site is specific to the urban
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   built areas of the cities of Manila and Quezon.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      Not applicable.
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 18-Mar-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      18-Mar-2015
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ke Fang
                                 Approved By:



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Peter Leonard (SA)   Date: 19-Mar-2015
                         Practice Manager/     Name: Michel Kerf (PMGR)   Date: 20-Mar-2015
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
