                                  The World Bank
                                  Strengthening agriculture sector capacities for evidence-based policy making




                                                     Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                   Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Feb-2019 | Report No: ISDSC24952




                         Feb 27, 2019                                                                                             Page 1 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Strengthening agriculture sector capacities for evidence-based policy making



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                        Project Name                 Environmental Category   Country
                                                             Strengthening agriculture
                                                             sector capacities for
                           P167786                                                        C - Not Required (C)     Serbia
                                                             evidence-based policy
                                                             making
                           Team Leader(s)                    Estimated Date of Approval   Managing Unit            Financing Instrument
                           Jeren Kabayeva, Svetlana                                                                Investment Project
                                                                                          GFA03
                           Edmeades                                                                                Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                           SUMMARY                -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                  1.80
                           Total Financing                                                                                                     1.80
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                       0.00

                           DETAILS  -NewFinEnh1




                           Non-World Bank Group Financing
                              Trust Funds                                                                                                     1.80
                                 Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund                                                            1.80


                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the proposed project is to “to strengthen the M&E capacity and systems of the MoAFWM and its
                           decentralized services for evidence-based strategic planning in agriculture and rural development”. Government
                           ownership of the evidence-based policy process is viewed as an important outcome of grant support, along with better
                           prioritization of programs and beneficiaries, and sector impact.

                           C. Project Description
                           The project is provisionally planned to begin operating in late-2018 and continue until the end of 2021, with
                           an estimated total cost of US$1.8 million. The project has two components that are described below:

                           Component 1: Capacity Building for Evidence Based Policy Making (US$1,640,000)



                         Feb 27, 2019                                                                                                     Page 2 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Strengthening agriculture sector capacities for evidence-based policy making




                           Sub-component 1.1. Diagnostic work, development of agricultural sector performance indicators, and staff
                           training (US$180,000). At the onset of the project, a diagnostic work will take place to identify the strengths
                           and weaknesses of the existing M&E system, including but not limited to the following:

                           - Governance structure of M&E system, including who is responsible for collecting, collating, validating and
                           reporting data.

                           - The use of data including links with the budget process and performance evaluation.

                           - Champions and key political events that play key roles in mainstreaming M&E.

                           - M&E tools already applied at project, program and policy levels.

                           - Extent of existing donor support in the field of M&E capacity development.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           - Gaps and duplications that hinder the effectiveness and efficiency of M&E.

                           The project will also identify a set of agricultural sector performance indicators that can guide evidence-
                           based decision making. The diagnostic and the work on the agricultural sector performance indicators, will
                           provide the basis for the training program. The training needs for building M&E capacity will be identified by
                           an International Expert. A series of short (2-4 day) training programs will be implemented regularly during
                           the life of the project. In addition to relevant Ministry staff, training will also be provided for staff of
                           subnational sector public agencies, the national institute of statistics, relevant staff of regional government
                           administrations, and university staff, as deemed appropriate. Possible areas of training will include building
                           skills in: the selection, design and use of appropriate M&E approaches; how to review existing and
                           prospective sources of information; the development and management of data bases; the design and
                           commissioning of evaluations to support evidence-based policy making; techniques of policy analysis; the
                           design of mechanisms to build citizen engagement into the process of policy evaluation; and the alignment of
                           M&E outputs with strategy implementation and budget formulation. To ensure sustainability, the project will
                           seek possibilities to reflect this training in domestic training institutions curriculum and in train the trainers’
                           programs.

                           Sub-component 1.2 Manuals and Protocols for Data Collection, and Specific Evaluations (US$1,460,000). To
                           further build skills in the development of M&E for evidence- based policy making, the project will support
                           development of manuals and protocols for data collection, frequency of reporting, and roles and
                           responsibilities of the MoAFWM and relevant departments, including pilot testing of selected indicators. In
                           addition, the project will launch a small number of surveys and analyses to be commissioned and
                           implemented by staff in the Ministry or other relevant agencies. Potential activities include: analysis of the
                           Agricultural Census; the development of templates for farm enterprise analysis (gross margins), which can be
                           updated quickly and easily with secondary data on an annual basis as the basis for monitoring trends in on-
                           farm incomes and profitability; and a program to review and improve the current survey instruments used
                           for agriculture and rural areas, to render them better suited to evidence-based policymaking. Skills for



                         Feb 27, 2019                                                                                                 Page 3 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Strengthening agriculture sector capacities for evidence-based policy making




                           development of program baseline will also be provided to enable the assessment of impact of policy
                           interventions.

                           Further, the project will fund specific, detailed economic evaluations on topics agreed with the Ministry's
                           leadership. These evaluations would typically take a few months to complete, often involving a small ad hoc
                           working group comprising of staff from the relevant departments. They will focus on different issues, such as
                           impact analysis of existing policies, including socio-economic impact, environmental impact and regulatory
                           impact assessment. The project will also build a mechanism that will link the evidence and findings generated
                           by the evaluations to the regular policy formation processes within the Ministry. Each kind of evaluation
                           would have its own issues and approaches, which could be conducted in a peer-learning environment by
                           engaging short-term international consultants to build capacity, guide, and support the Ministry as they do
                           their first evaluations. It is important for the Ministry to gain their own experience in carrying out such
                           evaluations, to help them prepare Terms of Reference and better assess the reports that they receive. In
Public Disclosure Copy




                           addition, the international experts will provide support with any specific evaluations based on the sector’s
                           emerging needs (e.g. assessment of the livestock sub-sector policies, national direct subsides, ongoing
                           implementation of the IPARD program, etc.).

                           The project will carry out information campaigns and workshops about the M&E initiative to improve the
                           knowledge between central and local governments; appropriate training to staff working on M&E
                           approaches, roles and functions, indicators, methodologies, etc.

                           The project will provide limited support for computers and software for data base management and judicious
                           use of new and promising remote sensing technologies. The project will also explore the ways to include
                           various digital platforms to help the newly established M&E Unit process big data more expeditiously and
                           efficiently.

                           An international advisor with demonstrated experience in capacity building for evidence-based policy making
                           will be recruited to guide and support project activities in the Ministry. Areas of support include: review of
                           the current institutional base within the Ministry for M&E and evidence-based policy making, including its
                           links to other ministries and public agencies, followed by recommendations and guidance on ways to
                           strengthen their institutional base; an assessment of the human resource base for policy M&E and the design
                           of a training program for building and strengthening relevant skills; a review of the current system of M&E,
                           its capacity to evaluate policy and its links to implementation of agriculture sector strategy and design of the
                           agriculture budget, and support for adoption of the principles and techniques of evidence-based policy
                           making -- including statistical analysis, commissioned research, citizen engagement and the use of
                           administrative information; a review of the current evidence-base for agricultural policy monitoring and the
                           development of recommendations on ways to strengthen its contribution to evidence-based policy making
                           for agriculture; a review of the need to build capacity for independent policy monitoring outside the Ministry
                           (e.g. universities, think tanks) as a further input to evidence-based policy making and the design and
                           implementation of appropriate training and support programs; and the development of appropriate fora for
                           sharing the outcomes of evidence-based policy making with other government ministries and public
                           agencies. As capacity building of this nature is a gradual process, and will initially need support and


                         Feb 27, 2019                                                                                              Page 4 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Strengthening agriculture sector capacities for evidence-based policy making




                           reinforcement, the International Expert will be appointed full-time in the first year of project
                           implementation. However, his/her presence will be reduced to 50 percent in the second year and to 25
                           percent in the third year of project implementation, as the national capacity for M&E will be strengthened
                           and the program work will be institutionalized within the Ministry.

                           Component 2: Project Management and Administration, Monitoring & Evaluation, Knowledge
                           Dissemination (US$160,000)

                           This component includes the provision of goods, technical assistance and training to a Project
                           Implementation Unit (PIU) for the implementation of the project (including the areas of financial
                           management, procurement, disbursement, monitoring and evaluation), financing of incremental operating
                           costs and costs related to knowledge dissemination. The component will comprise three sub-components: (i)
                           Project Management and Administration; (ii) Monitoring and Evaluation; and (iii) Knowledge Dissemination.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Sub-component 2.1 Project Management and Administration (US$118,000). The sub-component will: (i)
                           support operation of the PIU, and finance overall project management, as well as contract administration,
                           procurement, and financial management.

                           Sub-component 2.2 Monitoring and Evaluation (US$25,000). The sub-component will arrange for data
                           collection and reporting on key performance output and impact indicators through baseline survey and final
                           evaluation. This subcomponent will finance the costs of the Implementation Completion Report. The project
                           M&E framework will be developed during appraisal and its implementation will be reviewed regularly by the
                           Ministry and PIU.

                           Sub-component 2.3 Knowledge Dissemination (US$17,000): The sub-component will carry out knowledge
                           dissemination activities on the building and maintaining agriculture sector M&E systems for evidence-based
                           policy making to the relevant stakeholders. Specifically, this subcomponent will fund activities related to the
                           project launch, expert round tables and web-based and paper copy dissemination of the project's key
                           reports. The Ministry's and PIU's websites will be used for a virtual discussion of the project's studies. The
                           project will finance printing and distribution by direct mailing 100 of the final project reports in Serbian and
                           English to all key counterparts in the Government's key ministries and agencies, think tanks, NGOs active in
                           this sphere, key public libraries and higher educational institutions (faculties of economics and rural
                           development/agriculture).

                           Project Cost and Financing

                           Project cost by component and financing are summarized in the table below:

                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                Project     Grant
                                                                                                                      Financing
                                                                                                cost        Financing
                           Project Components
                                                                                                                     (inclusive
                                                                                                (US$)       (US$)
                                                                                                                     of taxes)

                         Feb 27, 2019                                                                                               Page 5 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Strengthening agriculture sector capacities for evidence-based policy making




                           1. Capacity building for evidence-based policy making                 1,640,000 1,640,00 100

                           2. Project management and administration, monitoring &
                           evaluation, knowledge dissemination                                   160,000       160,000 100


                           Total Project Costs                                                   1,800,000 1,800,000 100




                           SAFEGUARDS
Public Disclosure Copy




                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          n/a



                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          n/a



                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Nikola Ille, Environmental Specialist
                          Ifeta Smajic, Social Specialist


                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project              Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                No
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                        No
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                 No
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                            No
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11             No
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                      No
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                No
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                          No

                         Feb 27, 2019                                                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                                   The World Bank
                                   Strengthening agriculture sector capacities for evidence-based policy making




                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50                No
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                         No


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? No


                              APPROVALS

                              Team Leader(s):                                  Jeren Kabayeva
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Approved By

                              Safeguards Advisor:                             Nina Chee                                         25-Feb-2019

                              Practice Manager/Manager:                       Julian A. Lampietti                               25-Feb-2019


                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.




                         Feb 27, 2019                                                                                                                              Page 7 of 7
