INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
SDate ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Aug-2015
6                                               Report No.: JSDSC1O15
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Burkina Faso               Project ID:   P151832
Project Name:    infrastructure, urban Development and Mobility Project (P 151832)
Task Team        Aguiratou Savadogo-Tinto
Leader(s):
Estimated        14-Dec-2015                Estimated     24-May-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSUl9                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Rural and Inter-Urban Roads adHighways (55%,), General water, sanitation
and flood protection sector (10%), Sub-national government administration
(25%), General public administration sector (10%)
Theme(s):        Rural services and infrastructure urban Development   and Service
Delivery (30%), Urban services and housing for the poor (5%), Administrative
and civil service reform (10%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     105.00             Total Bank Financing:   100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                5.00
IDA Grant                                                       100.00
Total                                                           105.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The project development objective aims to contribute to removing infrastructure, connectivity and
mobility constraints facing urban and rural communities and businesses in the Bagre Growth Pole
zone and its hinterland, as well as increase access to services and promote economic development in


﻿selected regional capitals.
To do so, the project will support the implementation of the priority actions resulting from the
following strategic documents: (i) the transport sector strategy of Burkina Faso for 2011-2015; (ii)
O
U       the actions identified in the urban development master plans of the 12 regional capitals of Burkina
Faso; (iii) the relevant development strategy actions resulting from the National scheme of territory
planning (SNAT); and (iv) the national policy of housing and urban development. All those
strategies highlighted the relevance of harmonious development of urban centers and their rural
hinterlands for a sustainable economic growth of the country;and shared prosperity.
C. Project Description
The project provides an integrated package of support linking infrastructure investments with
existing and emerging economic activities in the Bagre Zone and in the regions immediately north of
Ouagadougou. Simultaneously, the project targets institutional and capacity strengthening of regional
capitals to enable them to manage rapid urbanization in terms of spatial planning and provision of
key strategic urban services with the aim of accommodating a rapidly growing population and
supporting the growth of economic activities. Finally, the project aims at supporting the
improvement of urban transport management in Ouagadougou given the link between improved
mobility and productivity in the nation's capital and most important urban agglomeration.
In terms of connecting infrastructure and linking key rural and urban centers, the project would
finance the construction and paving of key roads in the Bagre region to connect agricultural
producers and enterprises in the area with key markets, as identified in the existing Transport Sector
strategy and investment plans. In addition, the project would finance the technical studies of 40
culverts including around 100 km to be executed under the labor intensive approach (Haute Intensit6
de Main Oeuvre or HIMO).
To create enabling conditions for economic growth and the reduction in disparities across the
national territory, the project will address the technical assistance priorities identified in the master
plans of the 12 regional capital cities including: (i) design of a complete cycle of household solid
waste management (collection, transfer, treatment and disposal), (ii) undertaking detailed zoning for
each of the twelve cities, (iii) design of drainage master plans, (iv) carrying out feasibility studies to
determine economic and social viability, institutional arrangements and financing of proposed special
economic activity zones in the cities (e.g. zones for horticulture and vegetable production, areas, dry
port areas or parking areas).
In the 5 cities (2 in the Bagre zone and 3 in the core northern corridor), the project would finance the
construction and rehabilitation of key urban infrastructure and services such as urban roads, drainage
system and storm water channels, marketplaces, bus terminals, and abattoirs, using the HIMO
approach. Finally, for Ouagadougou, the project would continue support to urban transport sector
including the AOTU (Autorit6 Organisatrice des Transports Urbains), traffic scheme priority
activities implementation and a study for a dedicated bus rapid lane as pilot.
Project beneficiaries
The beneficiaries of the project are the 3,500,0000 people of the six capitals (including
Ouagadougou) and the populations living in the rural areas impacted by the interventions (roads) of
the project such as farmers, SMEs, administrative services, local authorities, the private sector and
civil society as well as all users of the roads sections rehabilitated or constructed an infrastructure


﻿and services to be put in place.
Area of coverage
O
The project will be implemented with a spatial focus on the Bagre growth pole region including 2
capital cities (Manga and Tenkodogo) and 3 capital cities of the North-West corridor (Ouahigouya,
Koudougou and D6dougou) for specific targeted activities. In addition, the 12 regional capital cities
(Ouahigouya, Koudougou, D6dougou,Tenkodogo, Manga, Dori, Kaya, Bobo, Gaoua, Banfora,
Ziniare and Fada N'gourma) will benefit from targeted technical assistance support in the areas of
planning and solid waste management. The main capital city, Ouagadougou, will benefit from a
support on urban transport activities.
Project cost
The estimated cost of the project is US$105 million, of which IDA is providing US$100 million, and
the Government of Burkina Faso is providing a counterpart funding of approximately US$5 million.
Project components
The proposed project has three components:
Component A: Infrastructure improvement for Rural-Urban Connectivity, and improved urban
services and economic development (US$96 million). This component will finance priority
investments for improved rural and urban connectivity in the Bagre zones, as well as critical urban
infrastructure in the selected cities and regional capitals. It includes three sub-components:
(i) Sub-component A. 1. would finance the construction and pay ing of the road section RN29
Manga-Zabre - Zoaga - border of Ghana and the studies of the road sections RD30 Dindeogo-Zons6
(9 km), and the rehabilitation of the road section Bagre-Dindeogo (40 km).
o
(ii) Sub-component A.2. Would finance a combination of infrastructure and TA support to the
five regional capitals and support to improvements in spat ial planning and management ofco re
urban services across all the 12 regional capitals.
(iii) Sub-component A.3. would finance core environmental and social safeguards management
associated with sub-components Al and A2, as well as communication activities, and participatory
approaches.
Component B: Institutional support, sectoral reforms and governance (US$3 million). This
component comprises two sub components. Sub-component B. 1 supports the transport sector (MIDT,
general Secretariat, Central, regional and provincial directorates involved in the project) and the
continuation and implementation of reforms in the sector. Sub-component B.2 supports urban sector
(MHU and its directorates, the beneficiary municipalities) and some urban governance and
implementation of priority reforms.
Component C: Project management, monitoring and evaluation (US$4 million). This component
includes activities related to project implementation, procurement of equipment for all the project
stakeholders, monitoring and evaluation, technical and financial audits and the recruitment of
consultants to support the project implementation. The main implementing agency will be MIDT and


﻿MHU.
Physical and Price- Contingencies: An unallocated amount of US$2 million is provisioned to cover
any contingencies fees.
0
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented in five regional capitals: Tenkodogo, Manga, in the Bagr6 Growth
pole zone, Ouahigouya, Koudougou and D6dougou in the North west and central west zone of the
country for specific targeted activities and all thel 3 regional capital cities (Ouahigouya, Koudougou,
D6dougou,Tenkodogo, Manga, Dori, Kaya, Bobo, Gaoua, Banfora, Ziniare and Fada N'gourma) for
cross cutting activities. Mobility activities are targeting Ouagadougou.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Borrower has experience in managing World Bank operations and the safeguards aspects of
those operations. Also, the country has a legal and regulatory framework and an interest in promoting
safeguards The country strategy is coherent with this philosophy as it is part of the key pillars of the
country's Strategy for Accelerated Growth and Sustained Development for 2011-15 (Strat6gie pour
la Croissance Acc6l6r6e et le D6veloppement Durable- SCADD). The Borrower's institutional
capacity for safeguard policies is acceptable. The hosting unit has implemented successive Bank
infrastructure projects including safeguards issues. Also this unit is staffed with a safeguard person
whose role is to support the preparation for environmental and social aspects. The Borrower has
drafted and submitted for IDA clearance the TORs of various safeguards instruments (including an
ESMF, RPF, Physical Cultural Resource Management Framework, ESIA, and RAP). In terms of
institutions, the country has a national agency (Bureau National des Evaluations Environnementales -
BUNEE) that is in charge of environmental studies, the monitoring and control of project
implementation at the national level.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Abdoulaye Gadiere (GENDR)
Lucienne M. M'Baipor (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project will fund roads (urban and inter-urban)
OP/BP 4.01                              construction. With regard to inter-urban roads, three
sections will be built. The first section is between
Manga-Zabre-Border of Ghana; the second goes
from Bagre to Dindeogo (40 km) and the third starts
from Dindeogo to end at Zons6 (9 km). As for urban
roads, some cities among the five (Manga,
Tenkodogo, Koudougou, Ouahigouya Dedougou)
will benefit from the construction or rehabilitation of
existing roads and also some infrastructures such as
regional markets, watering facilities, collection areas/
facilities, warehouses, animal health facilities and
possible infrastructure requested later on by the
communes. These constructions may entail potential


﻿significant adverse impacts on the environment. In
order to properly manage these impacts 3 ESIAs will
be prepared; one for each of the 3 sections of the
inter-urban roads. For those activities where exact
locations are unknown to date, an Environment and
Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be
elaborated. Terms of reference (ToRs) regarding
projected safeguard instruments have been approved
by the World Bank on May 8, 2015 and the
disclosure in the country is underway. After their
preparation all these safeguard documents will be
reviewed, consulted upon and disclosed both within
Burkina Faso and at the Infoshop.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No           The project will not undertake any investments that
may impact on natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No           Rehabilitation and road construction will occur on
existing road sections. It is not anticipated that
forests will be impacted by the project.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No           The project will not address pest management or
finance the purchase of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes         In order to anticipate and to be sure that all the
OP/BP 4.11                               precautions have been taken to protect and safeguard
physical cultural resources, addressing these
concerns will be included in Physical Cultural
Resources Management Framework, which will
include how to handle chance finds of cultural assets
within the project area. This is because activities
related to the construction of roads and other
infrastructure works will induce excavations with
potential discoveries of physical cultural resources.
The terms of reference for this safeguard instrument
has been drafted, approved by the World Bank on
May 8, 2015 and the disclosure within the country is
underway. Once prepared, it will be reviewed,
consulted upon and disclosed throughout Burkina
Faso and at the Infoshop.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No           There are no indigenous peoples in the project area.
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        Construction and rehabilitation of infrastructure
BP 4.12                                  ranging from roads to canals, SADU delimitations
markets, warehouses, and possibly other
infrastructure may lead to displacement or land
acquisition. For the construction of the 3 inter-urban
road sections, Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will
be prepared. To anticipate potential social adverse
impacts associated to investments for which exact


﻿sites are not yet known, a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) will be prepared by the client.
ToRs for all the instruments have been approved by
the World Bank on May 8, 2015. The national
disclosure is also underway. These 4 safeguard
documents, after their preparation will also be
reviewed, consulted upon and disclosed publicly
within Burkina Faso and to Infoshop.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           The project will not finance dams nor rely on dams.
Projects on International    No           The project is not expected to affect international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         The project will not be located in a Disputed Area.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 10-Oct-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The Borrower will prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a
Physical Cultural Resources Management Framework, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF),
03 Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and 03 Resettlement Action Plans
(RAP).These instruments will be prepared, reviewed, consulted upon and disclosed within the
country by the Government of Burkina Faso, and at the World Bank's Infoshop prior to project
appraisal. It is expected that the safeguards studies be completed and cleared by December 10,
2015.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Aguiratou Savadogo-Tinto
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                  Date: 05-Aug-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Sameh Naguib Wahba (PMGR)                 Date: 05-Aug-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


