                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                 APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                                           Report No.:ISDSA15936
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated:                  30-Mar-2017
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed                03-Apr-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                           Nigeria                      Project ID:               P146330
    Project Name:                      NG-Electricity Transmission Project (P146330)
    Task Team Leader(s):               Kyran O'Sullivan,Jianping Zhao
    Estimated Appraisal                20-Mar-2017                  Estimated Board           07-Jun-2017
    Date:                                                           Date:
    Managing Unit:                     GEE08                        Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                                                                        Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00(Rapid No
    Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                                 Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           490.00                          Total Bank Financing: 486.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
         Financing Source                                                                                      Amount
    BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                             4.00
    International Development Association (IDA)                                                                  486.00
    Total                                                                                                        490.00
    Environmental Category:            B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?        No

    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The project development objective is to increase the transfer capacity of the transmission network in Nigeria.
    3. Project Description
    A.     Concept

    The project supports priority investments for rehabilitation and upgrading of existing substations and
    rehabilitation of existing transmission lines across the country in order to increase power transfer on the lines.
    The rehabilitation to be carried out under the project is to address binding constraints to increase power transfer
    capacity from about five GW currently to at least seven GW. The project also includes installation of a SCADA
    system so as to maintain system stability. The substations are parts of the transmission network located across
    the country. Rehabilitation under the project will expand transmission capacity by 3,060 MVA for
    transformation at 330/132 kV (currently 8,138 MVA) and by 3,500 MVA for transformation at 132/33kV

                                                      Page 1 of 7
(currently 10,162 MVA). Rehabilitation of the proposed transmission lines will enable additional power
evacuation of about three GW from the current maximum of approximately five GW. The increase in power
transfer capacity from five to seven GW will enable DISCOS to supply consumers with this additional power.

The project also provides technical assistance to help TCN develop a clear accountability framework and a
functional governance structure, fill the gaps in both managerial and staff capacity, and explore private
financing for the development of greenfield transmission projects. The two components are described below.

B. Description of Project Components

Component 1: Transmission Network Strengthening and Improvement (US$408 million, of which FGN US$4
million and IDA and IDA SUF US$404 million equivalent excluding contingency). This component has four
sub-components: (i) the upgrading and rehabilitation of up to 48 existing substations – of these, approximately
11 require the replacement of transformers, while the others require the addition (and not the replacement) of
transformers, and addition and replacement of protection and control systems, switchgear, and associated
equipment; (ii) replacement of conductor on up to 13 132 kV transmission lines and conversion of up to two 132
kV lines from single circuit to double circuit (the total length of the transmission lines is about 1,270
kilometers); (iii) the upgrading and expansion of the network’s SCADA and telecommunication system; and (iv)
installation of voltage regulation system at the remotely located Gombe su bstation in the north eastern that is
supplied by a long 132kV line part of the country; and (v) purchase of spare equipment.

Component 2: Capacity Building and Technical Assistance (IDA and IDA SUF US$42 million equivalent
excluding contingency). This component includes the following activities: (i) consulting support and capacity
building to improve the TCN PMU’s performance; (ii) consulting services for construction supervision and
management; (iii) consulting services for feasibility studies of priority investment projects for donor financing
as identified by the ongoing transmission expansion plan study; (iv) consulting services (transaction advisory) to
support the implementation (i.e., selection and contracting of a private contractor) of a pilot PPP for
transmission infrastructure that is part of network expansion (i.e., for greenfield infrastructure); (v) consulting
services and capacity building to support TCN’s corporatization and commercialization efforts and enhance its
managerial, technical, environmental/social, and financial capacity; and (vi) consulting services and capacity
building to support public institutions in the sector, including NERC, BPE, NBET, and other government
bodies, such as the Ministry of Power and the power task force attached to the Vice President’s office.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The project is national in scope. The project will only finance the rehabilitation of existing substations and re-
conducting of existing transmission lines. The project is not expected to involve land acquisition.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Amos Abu( GEN07 )
 Edda Mwakaselo Ivan Smith( GSU01 )
6. Safeguard Policies That Might Apply
Safeguard Policies                              Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01             Yes             Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 is
                                                                triggered. The project finances the rehabilitation of
                                                                existing substations and re-conducting of existing
                                                                transmission lines. The main environmental impacts
                                                                off-site are construction traffic, noise and dust; they


                                                  Page 2 of 7
                                                        are localized to the facilities and immediately
                                                        adjacent communities and can readily be avoided or
                                                        mitigated through the application of good practices.
                                                        Significant social impacts are not expected; the
                                                        labor force at each site will be small, hence large
                                                        workers’ camps and large numbers of in-migrating
                                                        workers will not be needed. An ESMF has been
                                                        prepared because the selection of substations from
                                                        the list of 48 substations and 15 transmission lines
                                                        under consideration will not be made until after
                                                        appraisal. Some candidate substations and lines
                                                        might be subsequently dropped and others added.
                                                        The ESMF was consulted upon and disclosed in-
                                                        country and on the Bank’s website. Full
                                                        environmental and social impact assessments will
                                                        not be called for under Bank safeguards policies
                                                        and are not likely to be required by FGN law or
                                                        regulations because of the type of investments the
                                                        project will support. Site specific ESMPs will be
                                                        prepared, disclosed prior to construction and
                                                        implemented. The ESMF includes basic mitigation
                                                        measures for PCB contamination in case of PCB oil
                                                        in transformers at any of the 11 substations where
                                                        replacement is needed.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              No             The project is not expected to impact natural
                                                        habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No             The project is not expected to have impacts on
                                                        forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No             This project will not finance the procurement and/or
                                                        use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No             The project is not expected to have an impact on
                                                        physical cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No             There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes            The project will finance rehabilitation of existing
                                                        substations and re-conducting of existing
                                                        transmission lines. All activities are expected to be
                                                        carried out within the areas of existing facilities and
                                                        no land acquisition is envisaged. Resettlement will
                                                        only be necessary where there are encroachers that
                                                        need to be relocated from the transmission line
                                                        corridor, in which case RAPs or abbreviated RAPs
                                                        will be prepared. The number of affected persons is
                                                        expected to be small; reconnaissance of two of the
                                                        transmission lines revealed the presence of
                                                        approximately 50 encroachers, mostly artisans,
                                                        farmers, and traders. Any RAPs or ARAPs will
                                                        have provisions to ensure equitable treatment of
                                                        women and vulnerable groups.

                                          Page 3 of 7
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      No              The implementation of the project will not entail
                                                                   the construction of new dam neither will any of the
                                                                   project activities rely on the performance of an
                                                                   existing dam or a dam under construction (DUC).
    Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No                   This project will not involve discharges to or
    7.50                                                           extraction of water from any international
                                                                   waterways or any tributary or other body of surface
                                                                   or groundwater that is a component of any such
                                                                   waterway.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No              The project will not be located in disputed areas as
                                                                   defined by OP/BP 7.60.
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
    any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    The proposed project is classified as Environmental Assessment Category B (partial assessment). Investments
    consist of rehabilitation and upgrading works at existing TCN substations and transmission lines. The project
    activities are not expected to require the acquisition of any land as there are sufficient spaces in the existing
    substations to accommodate all construction activities. The re-conducting of the transmission lines will be
    carried out within the transmission line corridor which is already owned by TCN. No large-scale, significant, or
    irreversible adverse impacts are anticipated. The main environmental impacts off-site are construction traffic,
    noise and dust; they are localized to the facilities and immediately adjacent communities and can readily be
    avoided or mitigated through application of good practices and, where appropriate, preparation and
    implementation of site-specific environmental and social management plans (ESMP). The main on-site concern
    is workplace safety, which will also be addressed through health and safety measures to be included in the
    ESMPs. Resettlement will only be necessary if there are encroachers that need to be relocated from the
    transmission line corridor, in which case RAPs or abbreviated RAPs will be prepared.
    2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
    project area:
    Potential environmental and social impacts are not significant. No potential indirect and/or long term impacts
    due to anticipated future activities in the project area are envisaged.
    3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
    N/A
    4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
    borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
    A framework approach is being applied in this project as the detailed scope of all project activities will not be
    known at the time of appraisal. A preliminary list of 15 transmission line where re-conducting may be done and
    approximately 48 existing sub-stations where the project may finance replacement of transformers (at up to 11
    stations), addition of transformers and associated equipment has been identified. An international engineering
    firm has been engaged to visit all substations, review the proposed options, confirm the technical viability of the
    proposed schemes, and define the scope of work for the supply and installation contract to be procured through
    the international competitive bidding process. Once the engineering consultant has completed its review, the
    actual substations to be included in the project and the work to be performed at each will be known. Design
    work will then be carried out to prepare detailed specifications of the required investments at each substation site


                                                     Page 4 of 7
   as well as at the transmission lines. Some substations and lines in the preliminary scope may be dropped and
   others included during the detailed design phase. Furthermore, the scope may contract or expand (i.e. sub-
   stations and lines in the preliminary list may be dropped or added) following successive rounds of procurement
   if project costs are more or less than current cost estimates. An Environmental and Social Management
   Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been prepared and disclosed. The ESMF
   and RPF describe the procedures and processes that will be followed in preparing and disclosing site specific
   safeguard instruments where required as soon as the exact locations and scope of sub-project activities are
   known.

   The Environmental, Resettlement and Social Unit (ERSU) of the PMU has provided effective oversight of
   environmental and social management in the series of Bank-supported projects since NEDP. It now included a
   full-time social safeguards specialist. PMU’s ERSU has supervised the work of consultants preparing safeguards
   instruments and has also prepared a number of instruments in-house, including the ESMF and RPF for this
   project. However, it has recently experienced difficulties in timely completion of ESMPs acceptable to the
   Bank, and this together with lapses in coordination with PMU Procurement, have resulted in delays in
   subproject implementation and loan disbursements in the Nigeria Electricity and Gas Improvement Project
   (NEGIP). The project will demand a significant additional volume of work from the PMU’s ERSU, and its
   capacity must be enhanced in order to ensure the preparation and implementation of high-quality ESMPs and
   RAPs, efficiently and on time. PMU plans to engage an international consulting firm to provide advice and
   support in safeguards, particularly the periodic audits of environmental compliance with ESMPs and national
   law by project contractors, and mentoring and training for PMU’s ERSU.
   5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
   safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
   During the preparation of this project including the preparation of the Environmental and Social Management
   Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), informed consultations were held with key
   stakeholders. Some of the key stakeholders include: Nigeria Electricity Regulatory Commission (NERC),
   Transmission Company of Nigeria (TCN), consumers of power/electricity, NGOs, and communities. The major
   areas of concerns identified by the various stakeholders and how the project will address these concerns were
   documented and taken into account in preparation of the ESMF and RPF. This informed consultation will be
   continued during the implementation of the project. In addition, the project has a very robust Grievance Redress
   Mechanism (GRM) for documenting and addressing concerns raised by citizens.
   .




B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            07-Mar-2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         29-Mar-2017
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




   Nigeria                                                                       29-Mar-2017
   Comments: At the website of the Transmission Company of Nigeria.
   Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
   Date of receipt by the Bank                                      11-Mar-2017
   Date of submission to InfoShop                                   29-Mar-2017
   "In country" Disclosure
PHRESCTRY




   Nigeria                                                                   29-Mar-2017
   Comments: At the website of the Transmission Company of Nigeria.


                                                   Page 5 of 7
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [X]     No []       NA         []
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice      Yes [X]     No []       NA         []
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP               Yes [X]     No []       NA         []
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                 Yes [X]     No []       NA         []
 framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
 prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards   Yes [X]     No []       NA         []
 or Practice Manager review the plan?
 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                   Yes []      No []       TBD        [X]
 Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access    Yes []      No []       TBD        [X]
 to assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means
 of livelihoods)
PHCompliance




 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [X]     No []       NA         []
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a          Yes [X]     No []       NA         []
 public place in a form and language that are understandable
 and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [X]     No []       NA         []
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been            Yes [X]     No []       NA         []
 included in the project cost?
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [X]     No []       NA         []
 include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
 related to safeguard policies?
 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [X]     No []       NA         []
 with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
 the project legal documents?


         III. Approval
         Task Team Leader(s):         Name:Kyran O'Sullivan,Jianping Zhao
         Approved By:
         Safeguards Advisor:          Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)           Date: 30-Mar-2017
         Practice Manager/Manager:    Name: Wendy E. Hughes (PMGR)         Date: 03-Apr-2017

                                                Page 6 of 7
Page 7 of 7
