INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA14965
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Sep-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Sep-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Tajikistan                 Project ID:  P154561
Project Name: Real Estate Registration Project (P15456 1)
Task Team       Victoria Stanley
Leader(s):
Estimated       28-Sep-2015                Estimated    21-Jan-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSULN                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Central government administration (50%), General agriculture, fishing and
forestry sector (30%), Information technology (20%)
Theme(s):       Land administration and management (80%), Personal and property rights (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      10.00            Total Bank Financing:   10.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                10.00
Total                                                                      10.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The development objective of the project is to support the implementation of a real estate registration
system nationwide which is reliable, transparent and efficient.
3. Project Description
The Project will be financed with US$10.0 million IDA credit. The Project components are:
Page 1 of 6


﻿A) Real Estate Registration System Development (US$2.8 million) This component would support
the establishment of a national real estate registration system and the institutional development of
SUERIP. The component would include: physical infrastructure improvements, improving customer
O
U         services and transparency, support to planning and institutional sustainability, support further
development of policy and the regulatory framework for registration, and support training activities.
B) IT Software Development and Data Management (US$5.9 million) This component would
support the digitizing/conversion of paper documents into a database and development of IT
software, with required hardware. The component would include activities such as: data conversion,
data capture and incorporation into the new system (paper and digital), conversion of mortgage
information (currently help by the Ministry of Justice) and incorporation into the new system,
software development, IT hardware, and a web portal for professionals and the public.
C) Public Awareness and Education, Monitoring and Evaluation, Project Management (US$1.3
million) This component would include: support to SUERIP to manage the project through financing
a small project unit, monitoring and evaluation, and public awareness and education campaigns and
outreach activities. Public awareness and education activities would explain registration services,
requirements and benefits to the public as well as special groups (women, rural citizens, and elderly).
Monitoring and evaluation would include gender disaggregated data on registration as is already
collected for issuance of use rights certificates. Monitoring would also include a citizen feedback
mechanism to track improvements in customer service and confidence in the system. The component
will also support strengthening SUERIP's grievance redress mechanism for registration.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be national. The project will be mostly office work - scanning and document
management, IT systems development, training, public awareness, legal analysis, policies and
procedures.
U         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (GSURR)
O
German Stanislavovich Kust (GENO3)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         Though the proposed project will mostly be office work -
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               development of systems, procedures, processes, HR
capacity - there will be office renovations. The type of
expected environmental impacts of concern are localized
in nature and more adequately addressed through
environment permits and good construction practice, or in
the case of World Bank policies, through implementation
of site specific EMPs (in the case of renovations). It is
anticipated that environmental risks related to
rehabilitation and renovation would be easily predictable
and mitigated.
As sites for renovations to be funded are not yet known,
an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) will
Page 2 of 6


﻿be prepared prior to Appraisal, with site-specific EMPs to
be prepared as needed during project implementation. At
present it is expected that all renovations will be
sufficiently minor that Checklist EMPs can be used for
the subprojects. Therefore, the project level EMF will
also use the Checklist EMP template, completed based on
general project information rather than site-specific
details. If during project preparation it becomes evident
that more substantial renovations requiring regular (non-
Checklist) EMPs for some of the subprojects, the format
of the EMF will be adjusted accordingly. The project
team will meet with RSA to discuss this at an appropriate
point during project preparation, possibly around the
QER.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       Yes          4.11 is triggered as a precaution. It is not known which
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 buildings will be renovated and it is possible one or more
may be cultural resources. However the list of renovation
sites is not available and may not be known at appraisal.
Cultural resources will be included in the EMP Checklist
and site specific EMP-checklists prepared during
implementation as sites are known.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           Indigenous Peoples as defined by OP 4.10 are not present
BP 4.10                              in the project area.
Involuntary Resettlement No          Any civil works under Component 1 will be limited to
OP/BP 4.12                           office renovations and will occur within the footprint of
existing premises. No OP 4.12 impacts are expected.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Project's environmental risks are moderate and connected with minor civil works associated
with office rehabilitation and repair. Though no social safeguards are triggered, a social
Page 3 of 6


﻿assessment is underway to, among other things, identify vulnerable groups, and in so doing better
inform project design and implementation and ensure widest possible impact.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The long term environmental impacts are positive. Improving land tenure and land management
generally leads to better environmental management of land and other natural resources. The long
term social impacts are also positive and the project will seek to broaden tenure security to all
through public awareness raising, improved service delivery and other specialized interventions as
determined by the social assessment underway.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The project considered building new offices, but this was deemed to be too expensive and would
potentially have greater environmental and social impacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower plans to address safeguards policies through application of national environmental
laws and regulation, including permits and permissions from the responsible governmental body
(State Committee for Environmental Protection - SCEP) and the use of site-specific EMPs.
Nevertheless, SUERIP's's capacity is weak and therefore a part-time environmental specialist
consultant will be hired as part of the Project Implementation Group (IG) to directly oversee
safeguards implementation and compliance. The specialist consultant will work in close
collaboration with the M&E and procurement specialists of the IG and will be responsible for: 1)
supervising and assisting contractors in the preparation of full EMPs and checklists, 2) control of
environmental aspects of the contracts for civil works (associated with office rehabilitation and
repair), 3) control of environmental monitoring within these contracts, and 4) overall
implementation of the project Environmental Management Framework (EMF). The specialist
consultant will also be responsible for contacting relevant representatives of SCEP (including
solving possible problems), and for training existing agency staff throughout the project
implementation in order to build borrower capacity.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
O
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The EMF was disclosed via publication in the newspaper and displayed on public notice boards in
all local SUERIP offices. Comments will be accepted and incorporated.
Once the specific office locations and the schedule for renovation is known, the site-specific EMPs
will be posted in the relevant offices and advertised locally for comment.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                15-Jul-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             12-Aug-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Page 4 of 6


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Tajikistan                                               04-Sep-2015
Comments: The Environmental Management Framework has been published in the national
newspapers "Asia Plus" (dated September 3, 2015, in Russian) and "Sado
Mardum" (dated September 4, 2015, in Tajik). It has been posted at the same time on
the website: info.cadastre.tj
And the EMF has been posted on all public notice boards in all SUERIP offices
around the country.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
0          World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Page 5 of 6


﻿Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No[   ]NA []
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
O
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Victoria Stanley
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Jorge A. Munoz (PMGR)                Date: 18-Sep-2015
Manager:
Page 6 of 6


