                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                          RESTRUCTURING STAGE
               Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
.




                                                                                           Report No.:ISDSR21611
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated: 10-Apr-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                           India                          Project ID:                 P149811
    Project Name:                      Karnataka Multisectoral Nutrition Pilot (P149811)
    Task Team Leader(s):               Abeyah A. Al-Omair
    Estimated Appraisal                                               Estimated Board
    Date:                                                             Date:
    Managing Unit:                     GHN06                          Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                                                                          Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00(Rapid No
    Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                                Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           4.55                              Total Bank Financing: 0.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                        Amount
    Borrower                                                                                                       0.00
    Japan Social Development Fund                                                                                  4.55
    Total                                                                                                          4.55
    Environmental Category:            B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?        No

2. Current Project Development Objectives


Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)


3. Project Description
The project has three components to achieve the PDO, namely:

Component 1: Increase consumption of nutritious foods and improve household nutrition-related knowledge
and behaviors. This component will deliver direct support to under-three children, adolescent girls and
pregnant/lactating women from poor and vulnerable households in the form of locally-sourced nutrition
supplements coupled with support to encourage household behaviors with a large impact on nutrition,

                                                       Page 1 of 5
notably breastfeeding, complementary feeding and hygiene practices. Nutrition volunteers engaged under the
project in each village will implement the program at the village level with the support of grassroots groups,
including women's self-help groups and village health and sanitation committees.

Component 2: Improve access to multi-sectoral interventions with an impact on nutrition. This component
will aim to leverage interventions and services in several sectors that have an impact on the nutritional status
of poor families in the target areas. At the policy and administrative levels, coordination will be strengthened
between key programs. On the ground, contracted non-governmental organizations (NGOs), community-
based organizations, and village nutrition workers will facilitate access by poor families to programs in
various sectors, so that integrated support is offered to the targeted poor families.

Component 3: Project management and monitoring and evaluation. This component will finance
management capacity for implementation of the project, including the management costs of the
implementing NGOs and the development of an effective information, education and communications (IEC)
strategy which will be monitored for assessing behaviors change. Rigorous monitoring and evaluation will be
supported, including baseline and follow-up household surveys to measure nutritional status, household
knowledge and behaviors, and access to services. This will provide the necessary evidence on program
effectiveness to inform decisions on potential scale-up.

The project will target and directly benefit 35,000 vulnerable beneficiaries from the three target groups:
under 3 year-children, adolescent girls (11-18 years), and pregnant and lactating mothers in these two blocks.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The project is proposed to be implemented in Chincholi block of Gulbarga district and Devadurga block of
Raichur district covering all 421 villages in these blocks. Both these blocks are located in northern part of
Karnataka. Agroclimatically, they are located inthe North Eastern Transition and Northern Dry Zone
respectively. Tur dal, jowar, cotton and sugarcane in Chincholi and paddy, cotton, jowar and chilli in
Devadurag are the major crops grown.

Chincholi has a sizable Scheduled caste and Muslim population while Devadurga has a predominantly
Scheduled Tribe population.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Anupam Joshi( GEN06 )

6. Safeguard Policies                          Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01            Yes             policy is triggered to ensure that any potential
                                                               adverse environmental impacts relating to
                                                               hygiene and quality of energy dense food
                                                               production are addressed and mitigated. An
                                                               IESA was undertaken and an ESMF is in place.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                    No              This is not triggered as no impact is anticipated
                                                               on any natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                             No              This policy is not triggered as there are no
                                                               activities that will have an impact on forests
                                                               and their management.
Pest Management OP 4.09                        No              This policy is not triggered as there is no


                                                    Page 2 of 5
                                                              procurement of any pesticides or pesticide
                                                              application equipment. No other agro-
                                                              chemicals are to be procured as well.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11         No             This policy is not triggered as there are no
                                                              activities requiring excavation and/or chance
                                                              finds.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                  Yes            This policy is triggered due to presence of
                                                              tribal communities in project areas. There will
                                                              be a 100% coverage of tribal communities by
                                                              the project.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12            No             This policy is not triggered as no land
                                                              acquisition is required and activities will result
                                                              in any kind of resettlement/ rehabilitation or
                                                              displacement.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      No             This policy is not triggered as no dams are
                                                              involved in the project
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No                  This policy is not triggered as no international
7.50                                                          waterways are involved.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No             This policy is not triggered as no disputed areas
                                                              are involved.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There are no safeguards issues during the implementation of the project. A level 2 restructuring is undertaken
to extend the project duration by 1 year. This time extension will have no implications on the safeguards
arrangements, which will continue to be in place. The project continues to be a Category B during the
extension period.

There are no significant environmental or social impacts flowing from the project interventions. However,
since energy dense food supplements would be produced and delivered to targeted beneficiaries to consume,
adequate care has to be taken at the production unit to maintain safety, health, hygiene and sanitation quality.

Further, since the project area has sizeable tribal, marginalized and minority communities, special effort will
be required to ensure that project benefits flow to them equitably. However, the project design would
mitigate potential exclusion of such groups since the project aims to cover a 100% of all eligible beneficiaries
in the project area.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
No such impacts are anticipated
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
Not applicable
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment

                                                    Page 3 of 5
of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
During implementation of the project, in addition to constantly applying and monitoring the implementation
of the provision of the ESMF, Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) for EDF production units have been
developed by the project. The SOP are helping in uniformly applying the various provisions for the ESMF.
No adverse impacts and/or challenges have been observed during project implementation and the
performance of safeguards continues to be satisfactory.

The Borrower has carried out an Integrated Environment and Social Assessment (IESA) and formulated an
Environment and Social Management Plans (ESMP). The plans are simple and well integrated in the project
design itself. Due to such mainstreaming, the ESMP does not require extra staff to implement. Since the
project involves delivery of energy dense foods to target beneficiaries, detailed guidance has been provided
in the ESMP on health, hygiene and sanitation measures to be implemented at the production unit. It covers
various issues such as siting of the production unit, layout and design issues, equipment to be used, facilities
to be provided, storage of raw materials, packaging, sanitation management of the plant, personal hygiene of
workers, etc.

Tribal communities in the project areas are well integrated into the mainstream society. However, tribal and
scheduled caste (SC) groups (Tribal & Vulnerable Groups- TVG) have very poor development outcomes.
The Human Development Report, 2005, for Karnataka states that the development of Scheduled Tribes and
Castes in 2004 was at the level that the rest of the communities were in 1991. Therefore, a Tribal &
Vulnerable Groups Development Plan (TVGD Plan) has been prepared which details specific measures to be
taken to ensure that development outcomes from this project flow equitably and substantially to the TVGs.
Measures include: tailoring behavior change communication strategy based on consultations with these
communities to ensure that it addresses appropriate issues, adequate representation of TVGs in
social/community audits, preference to TVGs in hiring workers for the food supplement production unit,
priority to TVGs in ensuring leveraging of existing government programmes, a project reporting system that
provides disaggregated data to reveal progress of different social groups, etc.

These plans (Environment Management Plan & the Tribal & Vulnerable Groups Development Plan) has been
made part of the deliverable in the contracts the Borrower will sign with partner NGOs who will implement
the project at the ground level. The Borrower has adequate capacity to implement these plans.

No revisions are required for the extended project period and the original documents remain in force.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are direct beneficiaries of the project, their families, ASHA and Anganwadi workers,
Village Nutrition Volunteers, and staff of other line departments in the project area. As part of the IESA,
stakeholder consultations were held in three Gram Panchayaths each in Chincholi (February 19, 2014) and
Devadurga (February 20, 2014) blocks to explain the project components and World Bank safeguard policies,
as well as receive their feedback on the project design and components. Consultations were conducted at the
village level and at a time convenient to these stakeholders. The consultation process was photo-documented.
All communities welcomed the project and felt that it would be of benefit to them. They expressed their
willingness to participate in the project. A key feedback was non-acceptance of ragi as an ingredient in the
food supplement. The ESMP were made available at the Taluk Panchayat Office for public access.
.




 B. Disclosure Requirements
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.

                                                   Page 4 of 5
     If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::
     Not applicable

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to    Yes      [X]     No []        NA        []
 the World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a     Yes      [X]     No []        NA        []
 public place in a form and language that are
 understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
 and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional Yes      [X]     No []        NA        []
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been       Yes      [X]     No []        NA        []
 included in the project cost?
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes        [X]     No []        NA        []
 include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
 related to safeguard policies?
 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been         Yes      [X]     No []        NA        []
 agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
 reflected in the project legal documents?

    III. APPROVALS

    Task Team Leader(s):          Name: Abeyah A. Al-Omair
    Approved By:
    Safeguards Advisor:           Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)           Date: 11-Apr-2017
    Practice Manager/Manager:     Name:                                    Date:




                                                   Page 5 of 5
