INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA7261
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Mar-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Africa                     Project ID:  P145566
Project Name: Southern Africa Trade and Transport Facilitation Program - SOP2 (P145566)
Task Team       Richard Martin Humphreys,Sevara Melibaeva
Leader(s):
Estimated       20-Feb-2015                Estimated    30-Apr-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (60%), Public administration-
Transportation (20%), General industry and trade sector (15%) , Public
administration- Health (5%)
Theme(s):       Trade facilitation and market access (70%), Regional integration (25%), HIV/
AIDS (5%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
O
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      69.00            Total Bank Financing:   69.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                69.00
Total                                                                      69.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Program Objective. The program objective of the Southern Africa Trade and Transport
Facilitation Program is to facilitate the movement of goods and people along the North-South
Corridor (NSC), whilst supporting improvement in the services for Human Immunodeficiency Virus/
Page 1 of 11


﻿Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (HIV/AIDS) and road safety. This objective will be realized
through a sequential improvement in the physical, institutional and social infrastructure in
participating countries, and the strengthening of the management and monitoring on the corridor.
O
U         The Project Objective. The objective of the Southern Africa Trade and Transport Facilitation
Program - Phase 2 (SATTFP SOP2) is to facilitate the movement of goods and people along the
North-South Corridor and at the key border crossings in Malawi, whilst supporting improvements in
road safety and health services along the corridor.
3. Project Description
The North-South Corridor (NSC) enters Malawi at Songwe on the border with Tanzania and provides
a strategically important road connection for Malawi to the port of Dar-es-Salaam. In addition to
offering an alternative to the ports in Mozambique, the corridor forms a key trading route with Kenya
and Tanzania. The corridor runs south through Malawi, serving Lilongwe, the capital, and Blantyre
where a large proportion of the country's commercial and industrial capacity is located. The
southern section of the NSC extends west from Blantyre to the border with Mozambique at Mwanza
and then to Beira, the port that is used for the majority of Malawi's overseas imports and exports, and
to South Africa. The Nacala Corridor that connects Zambia and Malawi to the port of Nacala crosses
the NSC in Malawi. A further branch of the NSC enters Mozambique at Dedza, providing a more
direct route to Beira and South Africa for Lilongwe and the north of Malawi. Customs data from
2010 shows that 38 percent of Malawi's foreign trade passes through Mwanza, 26 percent through
Dedza and 22 percent through Songwe.
The pavement condition along the 970 km of the NSC (Ml) in Malawi between Songwe, Blantyre,
Lilongwe and Mwanza is generally in good to fair condition, with some localized sections in worse
condition. South of Lilongwe, a 159 km section benefitted from periodic maintenance with localized
reconstruction, funded by the GoM and the European Union (EU). The Roads Authority (RA) has
identified the following three sections of the M1 road as their priorities for intervention: In order of
decreasing priority, these are: (i) Karonga - Songwe (46 km), (ii) Kacheche - Chiweta (70km), and
(iii) Mzimba Turn off - Mzuzu - Kacheche (147km). The Karonga - Songwe section is an important
section of M1 that provides a shortest route for Zambia's Eastern Province to the port of Dar for
imports of agricultural inputs and export of agricultural produce, and carries 22 percent of Malawi's
foreign trade to the border point at Songwe. The road section also provides access for local
communities engaged in intensive rice cultivation along the road, much of which is old in markets on
the Tanzanian side of the border. The road section is currently in poor to fair condition, with
considerable edge break, and some short sections of failed pavement.
Road transport along transit corridors has been identified as a major factor in the spread of Human
Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (HIV/AIDS). Transport workers,
their spouses, and sexual partners have long been identified as vulnerable groups at high risk of HIV/
AIDS. This reflects that: (a) the former are often absent from home for prolonged periods, increasing
the likelihood of unsafe sexual activity; (b) there is often a lack of knowledge among long-distance
truck drivers as to risky and safe behavior; (c) there is often higher than average levels and frequency
of alcohol consumption among this group, increasing the incidence of risky behavior; and (d) the
increased mobility can itself facilitate HIV transmission from areas of high to low prevalence,
nationally, and across borders. Despite recent achievements, Malawi continues to have one of the
highest HIV prevalence rates in the world; 10.6 percent for adults aged 15-49 in 2010, only slightly
less than in 2004, at 11.8 percent.
Page 2 of 11


﻿Similarly, fatalities and injuries from road traffic crashes represent a significant and growing
economic and social cost in Africa, particularly on the major trade corridors. Africa has one of the
highest road traffic death rates in the world, with little difference in rates between those countries
categorized as low-income (32.3 deaths per 100,000 head of population per year) and those
U         categorized as middle-income (32.2 deaths per 100,000 head of population per year). Based on the
World Health Organization data (WHO, 2013), in 2010 there were 728 fatalities on Malawian roads,
with a vehicle fleet of 130,000, resulting in a rate of 56 fatalities per 10,000 motor vehicles, a rate
almost four times the combined rate for all 49 African countries (15 fatalities per 10,000 motor
vehicles), 5.6 time that of Botswana, four times that in South Africa, and more than 100 times greater
than that of Sweden and United Kingdom. The number of fatalities increased to 925 in 2011, based
on data from World Health Organization (WHO). Over the period of 2008-2012, the total of 11,466
accidents were reported and recorded in Malawi, resulting in on average in 781 fatal, 579 serious,
643 minor and 290 damage-only accidents (including collisions with animals only) per year. The
total number of accidents on the main paved network only was registered at 5,063, of which 2,012
were fatal and 1,237 serious injuries, based on Malawi National Road Safety Council (NRSC)
database. The Directorate of Road Traffic and Safety Services (DRTSS) is now finalizing a draft,
with technical assistance from the European Union.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The resealing/rehabilitation of the Karonga - Songwe road section of the North South Corridor in
Malawi, the mitigation of the identified accident blackspots, the improvements at the three border
crossings, and refurbishment of 20 health facilities along the corridor are all expected to involve
activities either entirely within the current right of way (ROW), or completely within the footprint of
the existing facility.
During the Bank's site visit to the road section and the border crossings in November 2013, no
significant environmental and social negative impacts expected from the project were observed. The
Karonga-Songwe road section does not cross any sensitive or critical areas and the interventions do
not require any new alignments. Some minor negative environmental impacts are expected during the
construction that should be prevented and mitigated in accordance with the Environmental
Management Plan (EMP) included in the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA).
The environmental and social issues if any in the case of the border crossing interventions and
refurbishment of health facilities will be confirmed during the preliminary assessment using the
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Management
Framework (RMF) developed by the RA during the project preparation. The environmental and
social studies will be developed as part of the feasibility studies of these sub-projects. In this context,
according to the Bank's Environmental Assessment Policy (OP/BP 4.01) the Program is classified as
Category B.
The ESIA for the Karonga - Songwe road section has been completed, and consulted upon. The
interventions at the border crossings and health facilities potentially will require a preparation of an
ESMP, which, as mentioned before, will be included as part of the feasibility studies of the
respective works.
The Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP/BP 4.12) is triggered despite the fact that the interventions
are expected to be within the existing ROW for the road infrastructure component and within the
footprint of the existing facilities at the border crossings as well as the health facilities for the trade
Page 3 of 11


﻿facilitation and social infrastructure components respectively. However, the design for the road
works is ongoing and some of the related infrastructure such as access roads and queries, etc. could
potentially require additional land. Moreover, there are encroachments within the ROW in terms of
crops, trees, and a limited number of dwelling/buildings. Finally, there are currently settlements
O
U        within the road reserve, which includes area extending 30 meters from the middle to both sides of the
road (in line with the Malawian legislation for highways). A Resettlement/Compensation Action
Plan (RAP) has been prepared for the Karonga - Songwe road rehabilitation project. Currently, it is
estimated that there are a total of 230 affected people whose houses, farms and/or other property will
be affected by the anticipated land acquisition, and displacement for the project will affect shelter
and livelihood of some of the local community members. Also, 240 ha of cultivable land will be
required for the project. A Resettlement Management Framework (RMF) has been developed by the
RA for the Project and will guide the preparation of all RAPs in relation to other works financed
under the project if any additional land take is found to be required based on the respective designs.
All costs associated with expropriation or compensation is to be borne by the GoM. The RMF has
been disclosed in the country and in the Infoshop on February 10, 2015; and the RAP has been
completed, consulted upon and disclosed in the country on February 24, 2015 and in the Infoshop on
February 25, 2015.
The Physical and Cultural Resources Policy (OP/BP 4.11) is triggered given Malawi's rich
archaeological and cultural resources and the likelihood of the Project to support works requiring
excavations. The ESMF includes Chance Find Procedures (CFP) as well as measures to screen for
and manage potential impacts on cultural heritage or property that could be affected by neighborhood
development plans.
The ESIA for the Karonga-Songwe road section was disclosed accordingly in the country on
February 24, 2015 and Infoshop on February 25, 2015. The draft ESMF and RMF have been
completed and consulted upon in line with the Bank's requirements on September 24, 2014. The
final versions of these documents were disclosed before appraisal in the country and the Infoshop on
February 10, 2015. The RAP for the Karonga-Songwe was disclosed in country on February 24,
2015, and Infoshop on February 25, 2015.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Helen Z. Shahriari (GSURR)
o        Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         This policy is triggered due to the potential adverse
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               environmental and social impacts from the civil works
activities in Components 1, 2 and 3 (rehabilitation of the
Karonga - Songwe road, improvement of the border post
at Songwe, Dedza and Mwanza, the alleviation of
accident blackspots, and the improvement of the lower
level health facilities along the corridor). Following the
Bank's Operational Policy the project is classified as
"Category B".
An ESMF has been developed in order to strengthen the
capacity of the RA, ensure adequate environmental and
Page 4 of 11


﻿social management during project implementation and
compliance with the national law and the Bank's
Safeguards Policies. It was socialized according to the
Bank's requirements with the main stakeholders, and
disclosed before appraisal on February 10, 2015 in the
country and Infoshop.
An ESIA for the Karonga-Songwe road section has been
prepared, including the EMP, and disclosed in the country
on February 24, 2015, and Inforshop on February 25,
2015. The environmental studies required for the border
crossing improvements and refurbishment of health
facilities will be developed once the feasibility studies of
these sub-projects are completed.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   No           The location of the project interventions is not expected to
4.04                                  have any negative impacts on natural habitats, including
critical or sensitive areas.
The ESMF includes appropriate screening provisions to
identify whether any critical or sensitive area will be
affected by the project.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No           The location of the project interventions is not expected to
have any negative impacts on forest areas.
The ESMF includes appropriate screening provisions to
identify whether any forest areas become affected.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No            The project will not finance any agricultural investments
that may result in the use of pesticides, nor does it require
other pest management procedures.
Physical Cultural        Yes          This Policy is triggered given Malawi's rich
Resources OP/BP 4.11                  archaeological and cultural resources and the likelihood of
the Project to support works requiring excavations. The
ESMF includes Chance Find Procedures (CFP) as well as
measures to screen for and manage potential negative
impacts on cultural heritage or property that could be
affected by neighborhood development plans.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes          This policy is triggered since some of the interventions
OP/BP 4.12                            require land and could affect livelihood. This is despite
the fact that all measures have been taken for the
rehabilitation to be done within the existing ROW for the
road component and within the footprint of the existing
facilities in the border crossing as well as the health
facilities for the trade facilitation and social components
respectively. However, still land is needed for the road
Page 5 of 11


﻿section. In addition, some of the related infrastructure
such as access roads and queries, etc. could potentially
require additional land. Moreover, there are
encroachments within the right of way (ROW) in terms of
crops, trees, and a number of dwelling/buildings. Finally,
there are currently settlements within the road reserve,
which includes area extending 30 m from the middle to
both sides of the road (in line with the Malawian
legislation for highways). Hence, a RAP has been
prepared for the Karonga-Songwe road rehabilitation
component, and disclosed in country on February 24,
2015, and in Infoshop on February 25, 2015. According to
the RAP, a total of 230 people will be affected either by
their houses or their farms and other properties.
Furthermore, 240 ha of cultivable land will be lost to the
project. The project also prepared a Resettlement
Management Framework (RMF), which was consulted
upon and disclosed in the country and Infoshop on
February 10, 2015. Once the designs for other project
interventions are completed, the RAPs for those
structures if required will be guided by the RMF. All costs
associated with resettlement are to be bome by the
Government of Malawi.
Safety of Dams OP/BP     No           The project will not finance the construction or
4.37                                  rehabilitation of Dams.
Projects on International  No         Some investments under the project are expected to take
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                  place near the international border between Malawi and
Tanzania, but no impact on the river is expected.
O
U         Projects in Disputed     No            The project will not finance any activities in areas subject
Areas OP/BP 7.60                      to international disputes.
o
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The main adverse environmental and social impacts are site specific and transient and relate to
Components 1, 2 and 3 of the project: the proposed rehabilitation of the Karonga-Songwe road, the
alleviation of accident blackspots, the refurbishment of health facilities along the corridor, and
improvement of the border posts at Songwe, Mwanza, and Dedza border crossings.
The main environmental and social negative impacts relating to the activities within the Project
include the following: a) Effects related to the road sitting; b) Social effects; c) Loss of ecological
and productive values; d) Hydrological and water resources; e) Traffic impacts; f) Air, water and
noise pollution; and g) Effects Post project maintenance. In some locations, the works may require
the contractor to establish diversion for the traffic, but these diversions, even where necessary, are
also envisaged to fall entirely within the ROW. The detailed design requires the contractor to use
Page 6 of 11


﻿existing borrow pits for all works, but if some new sites are identified, they will be accessed by the
construction of temporary access roads. The interventions to address the identified accident
blackspots are also expected to be entirely within the 30 meter ROW. The proposed refurbishment
of the health centers and the improvements at the border crossings are also envisaged to take place
O
either within the footprint of the existing facilities, or on publicly owned land.
In regards of the physical and cultural resource (PCR) impacts, all civil works are taking place
within the right of way of existing roads, and thus no impact to any physical or cultural resources
is expected. However, there will be earth works, and therefore, chance findings may occur. The
ESMF developed by the RA for the Project includes a chance finding mechanism and
corresponding protocols of action.
The SATTFP SOP2 in Malawi has been assigned the Environmental Category B - Partial
Assessment, since it encompasses the rehabilitation of the Karonga-Songwe road section, minor
new construction for accident blackspots, and the refurbishment of existing facilities at the health
centers and at the border crossing. All interventions are within the existing right of way (ROW) of
the road, or within the footprint of the current facility, or on public land.
The sub-component on piloting Emergency Response and Health Services is not expected to
involve any new construction or land acquisition. The environmental studies for these
interventions will be prepared as part of the feasibility study for refurbishment of health facilities
and address the requirements to ensure appropriate disposal and management of medical waste.
By contrast, the potential positive social impacts include the following: (i) increased employment
and opportunities for income generation for skilled and unskilled workers during the construction
phases; (ii) better access to market for farm producers along the road and growth in services
provision; (iii) indirect employment opportunities and opportunities for income generation for
local residents close to the works sites from the provision of food and beverages to construction
workers; and (iv) indirect employment opportunities and opportunities for income generation for
local residents in the hinterland of the reconstructed roads and border crossings from the provision
of food and beverages to users.
In regards of resettlement issues, a RAP for the Karonga - Songwe road rehabilitation project
a           estimated that there are a total of 230 affected people whose houses, farms and/or other property
will be affected by the anticipated land acquisition and displacement for the project will affect
shelter and livelihood of some of the local community members. Also, 240 ha of cultivable land
will be required for the project. A RMF developed by the RA for the Project and will guide the
preparation of all RAPs in relation to other works financed under the project if any additional land
take is found to be required based on the respective designs. All costs associated with
expropriation or compensation is to be borne by the GoM.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
There are not expected to be any significant long term adverse impacts associated with the project
as the civil works for the road rehabilitation will be carried out on existing road segments of the
corridor. The right of way of the targeted road segments has been largely respected.
Potential positive indirect impacts include improved business opportunities in the project area,
including better access to the market for farm producers along the road and growth in services
Page 7 of 11


﻿provision.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
During project preparation other alternatives and mechanisms are being considered to minimize
adverse safeguards impacts related to the civil works of the project. Drawing from experiences of
other Bank Projects in the region, the design for the road will consider the road alignment and
proposed intervention with the aim of reducing adverse environmental and social impacts.
Environment and social protection clauses will be incorporated into the works contracts (road
rehabilitation, crossing borders, and others), including HIV/AIDS prevention. Safeguards
specialists from RA and the Bank's team will monitor compliance in the implementation of the
clauses.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
In order to strengthen the environmental capacity of the RA and ensure adequate environmental
and social management during project implementation, an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) was developed by RA with the support of the Bank's safeguards specialists,
as part of the Bank's requirements during project preparation. The ESMF includes appropriate
screening provisions and management measures in case any critical areas are identified during
project preparation or implementation, and potential affectation of the physical and cultural
properties (chance finds procedures) is revealed. In regards to the involuntary resettlement issues,
the RA with the support and coordination with the Bank's safeguards specialists, developed a
Resettlement Management Framework (RMF), based on the Malawi's law and the World Bank
Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP/BP 4.12). The RMF will guide the preparation of future
RAPs in relation to all works under the project if any additional land take is found to be required
based on the respective designs. The ESMF and RMF have been consulted upon and disclosed in
country and Infoshop on February 10, 2015.
The ESIA for the Karonga-Songwe road section, including a detailed and costed Environmental
Management Plan (EMP) and the RAP have been prepared to address triggered safeguard issues.
The ESIA and RAP for the Karonga-Songwe section has been disclosed in-country on February
24, 2015 and at Infoshop on February 25, 2015.
The RA's Environmental Management Unit (EMU) has only one staff person to manage the
environmental and social issues in the institution. In order to address properly the social issues and
specifically to follow-up and monitor the implementation of the resettlement plans (RAP) in the
SATTFP SOP2, the Bank's safeguards team recommended hiring a social specialist to support the
EMU. Additionally, RA with the support of the Bank's safeguards specialists is preparing a
Safeguard Strengthening Plan (SSP) in order to identify the activities for improving the
environmental and social capacity in the RA. The budget for the SSP implementation can be
financed as part of the component 4 of the SATTFP SOP2. Institutional arrangements for
environmental and social management will be included in relevant safeguards documentation.
In regards of the reporting arrangements, the EMU and Consultant's appointee to deal with
environmental management will cooperate with other experts such as District Land Officers,
District Valuers, Community Development Officers and District Environmental Officers to
provide the Environmental and Social Planner at the RA with environmental reports of the project
implementation as part of the progress reports and annual environmental monitoring reports. The
Page 8 of 11


﻿reports will be part of the quarterly progress reports (QPR).
All works contracts and bidding documents will have the environmental and social protection and
management clauses incorporated, including HIV/AIDS prevention, in order to enable contractors
O
to follow up on environmental and social due diligence during civil works and to mitigate the
anticipated negative impacts.
During the implementation, the Bank's safeguards team members will also provide guidance,
including: (i) strengthening the capacity of the various stakeholder groups in environmental and
social assessment and monitoring and reporting procedures, through training and sensitization
programs; (ii) ensuring that proposed mitigations measures are effectively implemented; and (iii)
ensuring that local communities are involved and consulted during the application of the various
mitigation measures.
In order to help mitigate against the risk of increased road accidents due to increased vehicular
traffic, measures will be incorporated in the design of the roads, including (i) adequate road
signing and signaling; (ii) speed bumps and rumble strips at key locations to help alert drivers and
reduce speeds in built-up areas; (iii) provision of shoulders in zones close to villages so as to
provide adequate facilities for pedestrians; and (iv) building of adequate bus stops and approach
areas, and rest stops.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders include the Malawi Government (ministries and agencies), non-
governmental organizations, private sector, and development partners with direct or indirect
involvement in the project, communities and businesses located along the M1 road corridor, and
those directly affected by the project (project affected people - PAPs). The Ministry of Land,
Housing and Urban Development is responsible for providing the regulatory direction for the
implementation of resettlement activities. In liaison with the District Commissioner through the
District Lands Office, the Ministry will monitor the implementation of all resettlement activities to
ensure compliance with policies enshrined in policy documents under this project. The District,
Towns, and Villages Councils Authorities are the government entities responsible to approve the
RAP.
The ESMF and RMF were presented and socialized on September 24, 2014, with a wide range of
stakeholders, including national and local governments, and NGOs. A number of topics discussed
were related to the impact of the project such as impact on land, livelihood, and gender. A
summary of these consultations, issues raised and possible solutions have been included in the
Annexes of respective documents. The ESMF and RMF have been finalized and disclosed in the
country and Infoshop on February 10, 2015.
Public meetings and consultations during preparation of ESIA and RAP for the Karonga-Songwe
road project have been held with the local community stakeholders along the project influence
area. All instruments have been made available for viewing to the public in RA offices, RA
website, district, town and village councils. Advertisements notifying the availability of the
documents for viewing and locations will be placed in local newspapers.
The project will continue the dialogue and consultations with all the stakeholders on a regular
basis through and rely on the rigorous implementation of ESIA-ESMP and RAPs to ensure the
Page 9 of 11


﻿appropriate prevention, mitigation and compensation, with an emphasis on PAPs, in accordance
with the policies of Malawi and the Bank's safeguard policies, in active consultation with key
stakeholders. Consultations with local communities will continue to be organized during project
implementation to minimize conflicts, enhance cooperation, and the implementation of the works
O
contracts.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              07-Feb-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           25-Feb-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Malawi                                                   24-Feb-2015
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              07-Feb-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           25-Feb-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Malawi                                                   24-Feb-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
N/A
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes[X] No[  ]   NA [   ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Page 10 of I1


﻿If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X ] No[  ]  NA[  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Richard Martin Humphreys,Sevara Melibaeva
Approved By
Regional Safeguards    Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)          Date: 18-Mar-2015
Advisor:
Practice Manager!      Name: Supee Teravaninthorn (PMGR)          Date: 23-Mar-2015
Manager:
Page 11 of 11


