                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA16713
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Mar-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                              Project ID:    P154525
                            Project Name:      Uttarakhand Workforce Development Project (P154525)
                            Task Team          Shinsaku Nomura
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          07-Mar-2016                        Estimated   01-Jul-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GED06                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Vocational training (90%), General industry and trade sector (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (20%), Export development and
                                              competitiveness (10%), Education for the knowledge economy (70%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      89.00           Total Bank Financing:                    74.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           15.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                  74.00
                              Total                                                                                        89.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is “to improve the quality and relevance of training at
                           priority Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs) and to increase the number of skilled workers through
                           short-term training in Uttarakhand.”
                            3. Project Description


                                                                        Page 1 of 7
                         The UKWDP has the following three components. Components 1 and 2 will use a result-based
                         financing (RBF) approach using Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs), and Component 3 uses
                         traditional expenditure-based financing.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Component 1: Improving the Quality and Relevance of ITI Training
                         •        Component 2: Increasing the Supply of Skilled Workers through Short-term Training
                         •        Component 3: Policy and Institutional Development and Project Management

                         The following PDO indicators will be used to measure the progress towards achievement of the PDO.
                         •       Job placement rate among graduates of priority ITIs after six months of training completion
                         •       Number of students enrolled in labor-market-relevant trades in priority ITIs (% of which are
                         female)
                         •       Number of students who obtain certification from a short-term training course (cumulative,
                         % of which are female)

                         Project Components:
                         •        Component 1
                         The primary objective of Component 1 is to (a) improve the delivery of labor-market-relevant
                         training, and (b) increase the number of graduates in industry-relevant trades from the ITI system.
                         This component will support the improvement of the ITI system in Uttarakhand to address critical
                         constraints through four corresponding subcomponents: 1.1 - Comprehensive improvement of quality
                         and relevance of priority ITIs; 1.2 - Professional development of ITI teachers and staff; 1.3 -
                         Strengthening industry linkages; and 1.4 - Institutional capacity development of the skills
                         development system. Subcomponents 1.1 and 1.3 focus on a selected number of priority ITIs while
                         Subcomponents 1.2 and 1.4 will benefit all ITIs.

                         •        Component 2
                         The main objective of Component 2 is to increase the supply of skilled workers in market relevant
                         trades in Uttarakhand, trained through short-term training. The activity is primarily implemented
Public Disclosure Copy




                         through the scheme managed by the SDM. The scheme provides NCVT-affiliated Modular
                         Employable Skills (MES) courses and SSC-affiliated short courses in partnership with registered
                         PTPs. Registered PTPs, which meet the state’s quality requirements, will provide training programs
                         based on the SDM’s outcome-linked financing mechanism. Training costs will be reimbursed by the
                         SDM upon satisfactory achievement of outcome milestones, including training completed and
                         certified, employment obtained, and workers remaining in the job for 6 months. The SDM
                         operationalizes the state’s mandate to increase the number of skilled workers in Uttarakhand through
                         short-term training and this subcomponent will scale up the coverage of beneficiaries under this
                         scheme for enhancing the outcome toward the state’s goal of 650,000 trained workers. The result of
                         this component is monitored by DLI 6: Increased supply of workers with labor-market-relevant
                         skills.

                         •        Component 3
                         Component 3 consists of TA and institutional capacity-development activities to support the
                         designing and implementation of Components 1 and 2 activities and to enhance the administrative
                         capacity of the GoUK’s skills and training sector. The component consists of two subcomponents:
                         Subcomponent 3.1 - Technical assistance for institutional strengthening and Subcomponent 3.2 -
                         Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and project management. The TA will introduce, among others, a
                         piloting of RPL, enhanced job placement support to students, and increased accountability of ITIs
                         through the introduction of the ITI performance scorecard. It will support establishment of a job


                                                                     Page 2 of 7
                         placement system, with introduction of career counseling, soft skills development for job search, and
                         business start-up support to students. To feed into the Skills Development Policy, the TA will
                         support diagnostic assessments of female enrollment and labor market participation, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         administrative capacity of the DTE, and overall skills sector profile.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project will be implemented in the Himalayan Indian state of Uttarakhand (UK) in India. Located
                         between Latitude: 28°43' N to 31°27' N and Longitude 77°34' E to 81°02' E, the Himalayan state has
                         an area of:53,483 sq.km of 7448 sq. km are plain areas and the rest hill areas. The province has
                         34651 sq. km of forest areas. The state is divided into 13 administrative units, called districts.
                         Dehradun is its temporary capital. Uttarakhand has a population of 10.086 million, 51% of which are
                         male and 49% female. The state has a literacy rate of 78.80% and average sex ratio of 963. 70
                         percent of the people live in rural areas. The state has a scheduled caste (SC) population of 1.893
                         million and scheduled tribe population of 0.292 million of which 0.265 million live in rural areas.
                         72% of the population are Hindus whereas about 10% people are Muslims. The major tribes
                         inhabiting in the state include: Bhoksas in the Dehradun area, Juansaris in western Gharwal region,
                         Rajis living the northern areas bordering Nepal, the Bhotias in the upper Himalayan valleys in the
                         Kumaon region, Tharu in the Tara region bordering Nepal and a limited number of nomadic pastoral
                         tribes called the Gujjars. Many of the tribal groups living in Uttarakhand share geographical spread
                         beyond its territory into Nepal and Himachal Pradesh, and Uttar Pradesh.

                         It is envisaged that the project activities will have an overall positive impact. However, some
                         environmental concerns are associated with limited construction activities; capacity of the ITIs to
                         address environmental concerns, effectiveness of the curriculum, and capacity of the State to address
                         these issues. An Environment Assessment (EA) was undertaken by the GoUK to analyze the existing
                         situation to help design and implement the Project in an environment friendly manner by providing
                         for effective and optimal utilization of resources. The assessment has been analyzed so as to develop
                         an Environmental Management Framework (EMF). Appropriate measures have been suggested and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         developed in the Environment Management Framework (EMF) to minimize and mitigate the likely
                         adverse environmental impacts associated with the Project.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Charu Jain Kalia (GWA06)
                         Pyush Dogra (GEN06)
                         Sangeeta Kumari (GSU06)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            Environmental Assessment will be undertaken based and
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     environmental impacts anticipated from limited
                                                                    construction activities will be analyzed so as to develop
                                                                    an Environmental Management Framework (EMF). The
                                                                    EMF will be applied to each infrastructure activity
                                                                    envisaged under the project in each ITI and an EMP if
                                                                    required shall be developed.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP     No             OP 4.04 is not being triggered for the project as no
                          4.04                                      interventions are envisaged in natural habitats, including
                                                                    those defined as ‘critical’ under the policy.


                                                                     Page 3 of 7
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36           No             OP 4.36 is not being triggered for the project as no
                                                                        interventions are envisaged in forest areas and therefore
                                                                        no conversion/degradation of this natural resource is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        expected to occur.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No                  OP 4.09 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                        biological/environmental control methods or reliance on
                                                                        synthetic chemical pesticides is not envisaged.
                            Physical Cultural            No             The implementation of the IPF is not likely to affect
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                        religious structures of local significance or other physical
                                                                        cultural resources.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/       Yes            The Policy 4.10 is triggered as the project will be
                            BP 4.10                                     implemented state wide in Uttarakhand which has a tribal
                                                                        population dispersed in a few districts.
                            Involuntary Resettlement No                 The Project shall not finance any civil works that may
                            OP/BP 4.12                                  involve land acquisition or involuntary resettlement.
                                                                        Therefore OP 4.12 has not been triggered.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP         No             OP 4.37 is not being triggered for the IPF as there is no
                            4.37                                        construction of new dams or activities that are concerned
                                                                        with safe functioning of existing dams.
                            Projects on International    No             OP 7.50 is not being triggered for the IPF as no
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                        interventions are envisaged in international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed         No             OP7.60 is not being triggered for the project as no
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                            intervention is envisaged in the disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              It is envisaged that the project activities will have an overall positive impact, and none of the
                              activities under the Project entail any potential large-scale, significant or irreversible adverse
                              environmental impacts. However, with limited civil works activities, the safeguard policy on
                              Environment (OP/BP 4.01) has been triggered. The potential environmental impacts primarily
                              concern: (i) poor site planning and design (location site planning/accessibility/design); (ii) lack of
                              proper maintenance of buildings and associated services; (iii) improper resource consumption and
                              disposal; and (iv) lack of environmental health and safety practice, and (v) the capacity of the ITIs
                              and states to to address these issues.

                              The project may support limited civil works that will not involve land acquisition or involuntary
                              resettlement; therefore, the Bank Operations Policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) is
                              not triggered. Since some districts are inhabited by tribal communities and will be covered under
                              the state-wide operation, the safeguard policy on Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) has been
                              triggered. GoUK carried out a Social Assessment (SA) and prepared a Scheduled Caste and
                              Scheduled Tribe Development Plan (SSDP) and Gender Equity and Social inclusion (GESI)
                              guidelines. It requires social screenings for all activities involving civil works and cleared with the
                              SPIU, which will be responsible for implementation of SSDP and GESI. At the ITI level,


                                                                          Page 4 of 7
                           principals will be the key person implementing SSDP and GESI measures in their institution.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           No potential indirect and/or long term adverse impacts due to activities under the Project are
                           envisaged. Overall, the impacts are likely to be positive as the proposed Project will help in
                           improving the quality and relevance of ITI trainings as well as increase the supply of skilled
                           workers.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The activities proposed under the Project will not have any adverse impact on environment or
                           cause any involuntary resettlement.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           GoUK has carried out a Social Assessment (SA) and prepared a Scheduled Caste and Scheduled
                           Tribe Development Plan (SSDP) and Gender Equity and Social inclusion (GESI) guidelines.
                           GoUK has also undertaken an independent Environmental Assessment (EA) to analyze the
                           existing situation to help design and implement the project in an environment friendly manner by
                           providing for effective and optimal utilization of resources. The potential environmental impacts
                           primarily concern (a) poor site planning and design (location site planning/accessibility/design);
                           (b) lack of proper maintenance of buildings and associated services; (c) improper resource
                           consumption and disposal; and (d) lack of environmental health and safety practices. Appropriate
                           measures have been suggested and developed in the Environmental Management Framework
                           (EMF) to minimize and mitigate the likely adverse environmental impacts associated with the
                           project. Under SSDP/GESI, mandatory social screenings are to be carried out for all activities
                           involving civil works and cleared with the SPIU in order to ensure that no civil works involving
                           any involuntary resettlement impacts will be supported by the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           SPIU will assume the overall responsibility for adequate maintenance of the personnel and
                           resources required to supervise, monitor and implement both SSDP/GESI and EMF.
                           Environmental and social management shall be addressed by designating officers responsible for
                           safeguards at SPIU, who carry responsibilities as an Environmental Officer and an Information,
                           Education, Communication and Social Specialist. At institution level, principals and responsible
                           staff member will monitor SSDP/GESI and EMF. The SPIU will co-ordinate, monitor and provide
                           support for: (a) satisfactory implementation of the SSDP/GESI and EMF; (b) orientation and
                           training for field level staff of the concerned ITIs and other stakeholders; and (c) reporting and
                           documentation. SPIU will share bi-annual reports on SSDP/GESI and EMF implementation and
                           related activities with the Bank.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Consultations with various stakeholders were carried out as a part of the SA and EA exercises
                           through interviews, formal and informal discussions. Field visit to sample project ITIs and
                           stakeholder consultations were organized with ITI management, members of faculty, students
                           (separately with girls and boys) from various social backgrounds, including ST and SC groups,
                           and poor and disadvantaged and nearby communities. Consultations were also carried out with
                           community groups and members from civil society along with other government departments. The
                           draft EA report, SSDP and GESI guidelines were disclosed on the GoUK's website on February
                           25th, 2016 and through Bank's infoshop on February 27th, 2016. GoUK organized a State level


                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                           stakeholder consultation with the concerned government departments, ITIs, industry people and
                           students, etc., based on the draft documents on March 5th, 2016. The draft reports shall be
                           finalized after incorporating comments of the stakeholders and disclosed again on state website
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and Bank's infoshop. The documents will also be translated in Hindi and placed in SPIU, relevant
                           ITIs, and district offices for the public.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Feb-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   27-Feb-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            25-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Feb-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   27-Feb-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            25-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?


                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Shinsaku Nomura
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Halil Dundar (PMGR)                           Date: 10-Mar-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
