                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA16812
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Feb-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Gabon                              Project ID:    P132824
                            Project Name:      eGabon (P132824)
                            Task Team          Michel Rogy,Dominic S. Haazen
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          02-Mar-2016                        Estimated   05-Jul-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTI11                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Public administration- Information and communications (20%), Information
                                              technology (10%), Telecommunications (10%), General informa tion and
                                              communications sector (10%), Health (50%)
                            Theme(s):         e-Government (25%), Infrastructure services for private sector development
                                              (25%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (25%), Health system
                                              performance (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      57.65           Total Bank Financing:                   56.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.15
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                      1.50
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                        56.00
                              Total                                                                                        57.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to: (i) improve the timeliness and availability of
                           information to support the delivery and management of public health services; and (ii) to foster the

                                                                        Page 1 of 6
                         development and roll-out of eHealth applications and services, and Information and Communication
                         Technology (ICT) services more generally.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The PDO would be achieved by developing and rolling out a new National Health Information
                         System (NHIS), harnessing ICT to support the needs of both clinical staff and health system
                         managers, and by advancing the promotion and growth of a local digital ecosystem in Gabon through
                         opportunities arising from the development and roll-out of eHealth applications and services.

                         Direct beneficiaries of the eGabon Project will be patients of the national health system and health
                         workers, as well as private sector actors and entrepreneurs, with a specific focus on women and
                         youth, seeking to conduct business in the digital economy. Indirect beneficiaries potentially include
                         all of the country’s population, benefitting from increased availability and quality of affordable
                         health services as well as mHealth and other useful applications tailored for local needs.
                         3. Project Description
                         The e-Gabon project will be executed over a five-year period with a total IBRD financing of US$ 56
                         million and will follow an integrated solutions with three components : (1) strengthening the
                         National Health Information System (NHIS) ; (2) advancing the development of a digital innovation
                         ecosystem in Gabon; and (3) supporting project implementation.


                         Component 1: Strengthening the National Health Information System (Estimated Cost US$ 40.24
                         million IBRD and US$ 1.50 million GoG counterpart funding). The aim of this component is to
                         improve the efficiency and effectiveness of health service delivery and management which will be
                         critical to improving Gabon’s human development outcomes. It will also be leveraged to foster the
                         development of the digital innovation ecosystem in Gabon by incentivizing local content, services,
                         and applications development centered on health services and information (see Component 2 below).
                         This component will support MSPSSN and ANINF in : (i) conducting studies to develop/agree upon
                         appropriate standards to guide information systems development in the health sector, including on
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the required legal and regulatory framework; (ii) conducting detailed feasibility studies for the NHIS,
                         including on financing the operating costs after closing date of the project ; (iii) developing the
                         integrated NHIS; (iv) rolling out the NHIS, initially in a single geographic region and then
                         throughout the whole country once the system is stable, including the setting up of a National Health
                         Information Center (NHIC); (v) technical assistance to creating a detailed change management
                         strategy for the MSPSSN in the broader context of an articulated e-health strategy implementation
                         plan, including required process redesign/re-engineering to facilitate effective interfaces between the
                         NHIS and the related manual processes and utilization of the NHIS capabilities; (vi) knowledge
                         management, including providing study tours of for Gabonese counterparts in selected best practice
                         countries, information and communications, and the development of a cadre of trainers in the new
                         NHIS; (vii) strengthening capacity of technicians and information system capabilities administrators
                         within the MSPSSN and related agencies; and, (viii) providing technical assistance to support to the
                         new National Health Plan (Plan National de Santé (PNDS), and the preparation for a results-based
                         financing (RBF) pilot. The counterpart funding is covering an increasing share of the operating costs
                         of the NHIC and of the NHIS which is expected to be operational in the third year of implementation
                         (0% in year 3, 25% in year 4 and 50% in year 5). This component will be implemented jointly with
                         the Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice.

                         Component 2: Advancing the development of a digital innovation ecosystem (Estimated Cost US$
                         11.00 million all IBRD). The aim of this component is to contribute to economic diversification in


                                                                      Page 2 of 6
                         Gabon by fostering the emergence of a digital innovation ecosystem, including a digital incubator in
                         Libreville and smaller-scale incubators in Port-Gentil and Franceville, with the side benefit of
                         improving both private and public e-service delivery, which will be critical to stimulate the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         development generate job opportunities in particular for women and youth. This component will
                         support, under the leadership of the MENP, public and private stakeholders of the digital economy in
                         Gabon in: (i) conducting detailed feasibility studies for the incubators to finalize the concept and
                         assisting in creating the governance structure of the incubators ; (ii) knowledge management,
                         including providing study tours of for Gabonese counterparts in selected best practice countries and
                         information and communications ; (iii) setting up the incubators including rental of office space,
                         revamping of office space, IT and office equipment, other operating costs and the hiring of the
                         managers of the 3 incubators and of an administrative assistant for the digital incubator in Libreville ;
                         (iv) develop and implement a strategy to promote the development of local digital content,
                         applications and services, including organizing hackathons and business plan competitions; and (v)
                         strengthening the capacity of MENP to lead the digital economy agenda. The private sector involved
                         in the governance of the incubators sector is expected to fund a minimum of US$ 0.15 million to
                         cover the salaries of the managers of the 3 incubators and of the administrative assistant for the
                         digital incubator in Libreville towards the end of the project; any other staff of the incubator is
                         expected to be funded by the private sector [TBC]. This component will be implemented with
                         technical support from the Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice

                         Component 3: Supporting project implementation (Estimated Cost US$ 4.76 million IBRD and
                         [TBC] GoG counterpart funding). The aim of this component is to provide fiduciary support to the e-
                         Gabon project by the CN-TIPPEE , building upon the arrangements set up for the CAB4 project.
                         This component will cover : (i) staff, training, office equipment, and operating costs ; (ii)
                         environmental and social studies, their implementation and/or the monitoring of their
                         implementation ; (iii) monitoring and evaluation (M&E) for component 1 ; (iv) M&E for component
                         2 ; (v) midterm and completion reviews ; and [TBC](vi) front-end fees.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed cities for the business incubators are already connected via the national fiber optic
                         backbone and are the three most populated cities in the country: Libreville (estimated 41% of the
                         Gabon’s population), Port-Gentil (8%) and Franceville (3%). There will be no land acquisition, and
                         no new construction of premises under the project. Potential adverse negative impacts and risks
                         linked to revamping of office space in existing identified premises for the incubators are likely to be
                         small-scale and site-specific and thus easily remediable and reversible with usual mitigation
                         measures on the waste management and workers health surety and security measures in the
                         contractor contracts.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Antoine V. Lema (GSU01)
                         Paul-Jean Feno (GEN07)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes            The sites of the business incubators to be set up under
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      component 2 of the project will be in Libreville, Port-
                                                                     Gentil and Franceville. There will be no land acquisition,
                                                                     and no new construction of premises under the project.



                                                                       Page 3 of 6
                                                                       Potential adverse negative impacts and risks linked to
                                                                       revamping of office space in existing identified premises
                                                                       are likely to be small-scale and site-specific and thus
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       easily remediable and reversible with usual mitigation
                                                                       measures on the waste management and workers health
                                                                       surety and security measures in the contractor contracts.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No             The project will not affect natural habitats.
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No             The project will not affect natural habitats.

                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No                 The project will not involve pest management.

                            Physical Cultural           No             The project will not affect physical cultural ressources.
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No             The project will not affect indigeneous peoples.
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    No             The project will not involve involuntary resettlement.
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             The project will not construct or rely on dams.
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No             The project will not affect international waterways.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No             The project is not located in a disputed area.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              There will be no land acquisition, and no new construction of premises under the project. Potential
                              adverse negative impacts and risks linked to revamping of office space in existing identified
                              premises for the incubators are likely to be small-scale and site-specific.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Not applicable
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              Not applicable
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              Potential adverse negative impacts and risks linked to revamping of office space in existing
                              identified premises for the incubators are easily remediable and reversible with usual mitigation
                              measures on the waste management and workers health surety and security measures in the
                              contractor contracts. Moreover, it doesn’t seem that the buildings visited present a risk of asbestos;


                                                                         Page 4 of 6
                           however, it is proposed that, as mitigation measure, a certificate of the absence of asbestos is
                           submitted before signing the lease. The Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)
                           includes three (3) types of measures:     measures to be included in the bidding documents (RFP)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and works contracts, whose costs will be taken into account by bidders when proposing their unit
                           prices or turnkey prices (cf. measures to include in the unit price table) ; engineering measures
                           included in the RFP and the works contract; and environmental measures (awareness raising,
                           monitoring and evaluation, etc.).
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Consultation took place in Libreville on February 6-10, in Port-Gentil on January 18-19, and in
                           Franceville on January 22-23. Cleared safeguards documents have been published in country
                           (March, 1st 2016) and in Infoshop (February 29, 2016). Arrangements for environmental
                           safeguards supervision have been defined and agreed. Inputs from Bank’s environment and social
                           specialists will be provided throughout project implementation, to support the PIU CN TIPPEE as
                           well as the Line Ministry in charge of Ecology and Sustainable Development) in monitoring the
                           effective implementation of safeguards. Relevant provisions of the safeguard documents will also
                           be included in the Project Operation Manual.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      16-Feb-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   29-Feb-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Gabon                                                            01-Mar-2016
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?



                                                                    Page 5 of 6
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Michel Rogy,Dominic S. Haazen
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                       Date: 07-Mar-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Boutheina Guermazi (PMGR)                     Date: 08-Mar-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 6 of 6
