INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA15165
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Jan-2016
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Jan-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Rwanda                      Project ID:  P150844
Project Name: RW-Urban Development Project (P150844)
Task Team       Meskerem Brhane,Jonas Ingemann Parby
Leader(s):
Estimated        11-Jan-2016                Estimated    29-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSU13                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Sub-national government administration (50%), Urban Transport (20%),
Sanitation (5%), Solid waste management (5%), General water, sa nitation and
flood protection sector (20%)
Theme(s):       City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (30%), Urban planning and
housing policy (15%), Urban services and housing for the poo r (40%),
Municipal governance and institution building (15%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
ci 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
O
Total Project Cost:     100.00             Total Bank Financing:    95.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            5.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                  95.00
Total                                                                       100.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project development objective is to enhance urban management and provide access to basic
infrastructure in selected urban centers.
Page 1 of 8


﻿3. Project Description
The project provides an integrated package of support to address key challenges associated with
Rwanda's urbanization: (i) access to basic infrastructure to promote livability and local economic
development; (ii) upgrading of informal areas to promote inclusive urbanization; and (iii) building
the capacity of district governments for better urban management.
Component 1: Basic infrastructure provision in secondary cities (US$ 80million). This component
a        will support provision of basic infrastructure in the 6 secondary cities to enhance living conditions
for residents and support local economic development. Eligible investments are those that are
directly under the mandate of district governments such as roads, drainage, solid waste management
and sanitation.
Component 2: Informal Settlement Upgrading in Nyarugenge District of Kigali (US$ 1Omillion).
This component will support the upgrading of an 86 hectare unplanned settlement comprising of 4
cells (Rwampara, Kiyovu, Biryogo and Agatare), which cover one of Kigali's oldest located close to
the Central Business District (CBD). The project area is densely populated (220 people per ha) with a
total population of almost 19,000. The upgrading of the site shall serve as a model for community
based urban regeneration that can be scaled up to other parts of Kigali and to secondary towns in
Rwanda. Planning and design has actively involved communities within the area and flexible
standards have been applied with the fundamental objective of minimizing resettlement, land
acquisition and social disruption. This upgrading project will help define the most appropriate
approach for upgrading in the Rwandan context and these lessons will be shared and disseminated
among key stakeholders, especially district leaders to scale up the approach. To further assist the
scaling up of urban upgrading initiatives, technical support will be provided to RHA under
Component 3.
Component 3: Technical Assistance for Sustainable Urban Management (US$ 3 million). This
component provides technical assistance for key priorities identified for achieving sustainable urban
development: (i) support for building competitive cities; (ii) capacity building for urban
management; (iii) developing information systems for coordinated planning and strategic decision
making; and (iv) capacity building for scaling up urban upgrading.
Component 4: Project management (US$ 2 million). This component will support overall project
coordination by MININFRA and project management of secondary cities by LOA. The activities
supported include PIU staffing costs, training related to project implementation, safeguards
monitoring, beneficiary surveys, design review and supervision.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will include a number of infrastructure activities, such as construction of secondary
urban roads, drainage, medium to small scale water and sanitation facilities, small scale solid waste
management interventions, street lighting, etc. The first phaseof the sub-project investments only
include rehabilitation of secondary urban roads and drainage. Based on the initial screening, field
visits, interviews with the project stakeholders, the proposed activities triggers WB OP 4.01 -
Environmental Assessment, OP 4.04 - Natural Habitats and OP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources.
The policy on Natural Habitats may be relevant to the project, as several of the secondary cities are
located in proximity to lakes, rivers and wetlands, which may require specific design and/or
mitigation measures. There are no known cultural resources in the targeted project areas, however,
Page 2 of 8


﻿OP 4.11 is triggered as the project involves earth works. The ESMF for the project incorporates
chance find procedures, which will also be included in bidding documents for use by the contractors.
On social safeguards, the project interventions will trigger World Bank Operation Policy on
O
)         Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12 although social assessment and field visits suggest that the social
and environmental impacts will neither be large scale or irreversible. The investments under first
phase have been selected directly through citizen engagement in all cities with least and/or minimal
expropriation of land and displacement of communities, businesses and services. In some cases, the
displacement of households and expropriation of land has been avoided, minimized and/or managed
through a negotiated flexibility of construction standards with RTDA where permitted and by
applying an active community participatory planning, implementation and maintenance process for
neighborhood improvement. Nonetheless, in Kigali and Musanze there are few investments in the
first year pipe line interventions that require Resettlement Action Plans (or Abbreviated Resettlement
Action Plans) and Environmental & Social Management Plans (ESMP). Preparation of these
instruments have been closely coordinated with the feasibility and technical design consultants. In
addition, a Resettlement Policy Framework and an Environmental and Social Management
Framework has been prepared for the urban infrastructure investments not yet identified.
For the first year of activities, the sub-projects in Musanze City will displace and/or partially affect
26 households (partially affect 24 households and demolition of two kiosks along the road) and in
Agatare area in CoK relocation of 34 households and partial and limited impact (pushing back a
meter or half a meter of boundary walls) for approximately 255 homes and/or businesses. The client
has prepared the two abbreviated resettlement action plan (ARAP) for cities of Musanze and for
Agatare Area in the CoK.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Svetlana Khvostova (GENO 1)
Yasmin Tayyab (GSU07)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The project will include a number of infrastructure
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               activities, such as construction of secondary urban roads,
drainage, medium to small scale water and sanitation
facilities, small scale solid waste management
interventions, street lighting, etc. Based on the findings of
EMF and RPF, field visits and interviews with the project
stakeholders the project is assigned EA Category B as the
proposed projects will have environmental and social
impacts, which are expected to be reversible and limited
to the project site. The ESMF has been prepared and
consulted upon and will be publicly disclosed in Rwanda
and in the World Bank InfoShop prior to project
appraisal. As the project identified the investments to be
conducted during the first year of implementation, the
EIA/ESMP and RAPs have also been prepared, consulted
upon and will be disclosed locally and in the Infoshop
before project appraisal. The EIA/ESMP and RAPs cover
rehabilitation and construction of secondary urban roads
Page 3 of 8


﻿and drainage in six secondary cities and in Kigali.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes         The policy on Natural Habitats is applicable to the
4.04                                project, as several of the secondary cities are located in
proximity to lakes, rivers and wetlands, which may
require specific design and/or mitigation measures to
avoid negative impacts, for example solid and liquid
construction waste management and increased runoff. The
findings of the EMF (and EIA) did not identify any
irreversible or large scale impacts, that cannot be avoided
or mitigated.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       Yes         There are no known physical cultural resources identified
Resources OP/BP 4.11                in the vicinity of proposed project sites during screening.
The EMF includes a sample chance finds procedure to be
incorporated into subproject EMPs and bidding
documents, once these are identified.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes        The project interventions will trigger World Bank
OP/BP 4.12                          Operation Policy on Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12.
The first year pipe line interventions require Resettlement
Action Plan (or Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans)
in Kigali and Musanze and Environmental Impact
Assessment / Environmental Management Plans (EMP)
for Rubavu, Rusizi, Musanze, Muhanga, Huye, Nyagatare
and the City of Kigali. Preparation of these instruments
have been closely coordinated with the feasibility and
technical design consultants. In addition, a Resettlement
Policy Framework and an Environmental Management
Framework has been prepared for the urban infrastructure
investments not yet identified. The investments under first
phase have been selected with least and/or minimal
expropriation of land and displacement of communities,
businesses and services. In some cases, the displacement
of households and expropriation of land has been avoided,
minimized and/or managed through a negotiated flexible
standard of construction with Rwanda Transport
Development Authority where permitted and by applying
an active community participatory planning,
implementation and maintenance process for
neighborhood improvement.
Page 4 of 8


﻿Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
U         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
O
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There are no potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts associated with the
project proposed activities. The first year of project investments includes rehabilitation and
construction of urban roads and drainage. The investments for subsequent years of the project will
be identified and designed during implementation stage. Social Assessment through field visits to
the secondary cities of the potential infrastructure does not indicate any large scale or irreversible
social and environmental impacts. The first year pipeline interventions will require EIA for all
cities and Resettlement Action Plans (or Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans) in Kigali and
Musanze, the budget for these RAPs will be the responsibility of the Districts and as such has been
included in the 2016 budget cycle. Preparation of these instruments have been closely coordinated
with the feasibility and technical design consultants.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
There are no indirect and/or long term impacts die to anticipated future activities in the project
area. In addition, will project is anticipated to have significant positive impacts due to
improvements to urban infrastructure.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The investments under first phase have been selected with least and/or minimal expropriation of
land and displacement of communities, businesses and services. In some cases, the displacement
a          of households and expropriation of land has been avoided, minimized and/or managed through a
negotiated flexibility of construction standards with RTDA where permitted and by applying an
active community participatory planning, implementation and maintenance process for
neighborhood improvement. The project design for the first year of activities was conducted in
close collaboration with safeguards assessments, which provided an opportunity to minimize
potential negative impacts and maximize environmental and social benefits.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The capacity to manage the social and environmental impacts of the project preparation and
implementation is insufficient at the Ministry, LODA and District levels. MININFRA has already
has established and filled positions for Sociologist and Environmentalist at senior level. The SPIU,
which will be under Local Development Agency (LODA), will also include two positions; a
Sociologist and Environmentalist, who will in turn hire consultants as and when needed for
support. The SPIU in LODA is managing another World Bank project: the Great Lakes Trade
Facilitation Project. This project has assigned a full time position for a social development
Page 5 of 8


﻿specialist who will spend 50% of their time on RUDP and 50% on the Great Lakes Project. In
addition, a Mobile Implementation and Capacity Support Team (MICST) would be engaged
through a Consulting Firm to support the SPIU in RUDP activities. The MICST will include a
social expert primarily to provide technical support and guidance to each of the six Districts in
O
Q)         implementation and monitoring of their respective RUDP programs. The Districts already have
positions of Environmental Officers working under the One Stop Center. The districts will bring
on board a social expert for monitoring the day to day activities for RAP implementation, provide
support in the preparation of safeguards instruments for the second phase of investments and act as
the community liaison for all social aspects of the project. Skills in mainstreaming of social,
vulnerability and gender issues will be boosted at all levels through training under the embedded
capacity building component of the RUDP.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The identification and prioritization of the first phase investments has been undertaken through
citizen engagement in all six secondary cities and the City of Kigali. Consultation workshops were
led and managed by the Local Authorities (and observed by the Bank team) with representation
from the project affected villages, Cells and Sector leaders; city and urban area leaders; Districts
leaderships and technical staff; community members; opinion leaders; local experts; CBOs/CSOs/
NGOS; Central Government representatives; the Feasibility Study team representatives; and
Social Assessment team. The RUDP was generally viewed positively by communities in the
respective project areas and implementation of the proposed sub-projects was viewed and assessed
by beneficiary citizens across the seven cities as having following benefits: i) improved town
connectivity, accessibility and infrastructure; ii) improved health; iii) social cohesion and
engagement; and iv) economic opportunities. The first phase of investment were deliberately
prioritized to affect minimal expropriation of land and displacement. Cities of Nyagatare, Rusizi,
Rubavu, Huye and Muhanga were able to completely avoid expropriation in the first phase
investments, while the cities of Musanze and Agatare area of the CoK managed to significantly
limit the need for expropriation.
O
All safeguards documents: the ARAPs (for 2 cities), ESMF, EIA and RPF have been disclosed in
Kigali on MININFRA website (http://www.mininfra.gov.rw/index.php?id=256), and on CoK
O
website (http://www.kigalicity.gov.rw/spip.php?articlel322) and in the InFoShop prior to
appraisal in January 2016.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              04-Jan-2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                           12-Jan-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Rwanda                                                   12-Jan-2016
Comments: http://www.mininfra.gov.rw/index.php?id=256
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              20-Dec-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           07-Jan-2016
Page 6 of 8


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Rwanda                                                    07-Jan-2016
Comments: http://www.kigalicity.gov.rw/spip.php?articlel322
O
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]   NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]   NA [ X ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?           Yes [ X] No [    ]  TBD [   ]
310 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [ X] No [ ] TBD [ ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
1500 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes[X] No[  ]  NA[    ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Page 7 of 8


﻿Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
a          measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Meskerem Brhane,Jonas Ingemann Parby
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)            Date: 22-Jan-2016
Practice Manager/     Name: Maria Angelica Sotomayor Araujo     Date: 22-Jan-2016
Manager:                     (PMGR)
Page 8 of 8


