                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC1022

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Apr-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Apr-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Georgia                           Project ID:      P149952
                            Project Name:      East-West Highway Corridor Improvement (P149952)
                            Task Team          Mustapha Benmaamar
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          18-May-2015                       Estimated        17-Sep-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTIDR                             Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Public administration- Transportation (4%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and
                                               Highways (96%)
                            Theme(s):          Other public sector governance (3%), Regional integration (48%), Trade
                                               facilitation and market access (49%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    140.00                      Total Bank Financing:        140.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                        0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         140.00
                              Total                                                                         140.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed PDOs are to: (i) contribute to the gradual reduction of road transport costs and to
                           improve road safety along the section upgraded under the project; and (ii) strengthen the capacity of
                           the Roads Department (RD) and Ministry of Regional Development and Infrastructure (MRDI) to
                           plan, manage and maintain the road network and improve road safety.
                         The PDOs are similar to those used in the current East West Highway Improvement Projects
                         supporting the improvements to the E60 highway since they contribute to the achievement of the
                         overall objective of improving the East West Highway Corridor westward from Tbilisi.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         PDO Level Results Indicators:

                         The Project indicators follow the same approach used in the past EWHIP projects with a focus on
                         improvements to transit and vehicle operating costs for the section that is funded under the project.
                         Current indicators used in the Third and Fourth East West Highway Improvement Projects Results
                         Framework, related to the condition of the primary network and road safety statistics along the East-
                         West highway are adopted for the proposed project to maintain consistency in the measurement of
                         the impacts of successive upgrading of sections of the East West Highway corridor.

                         The indicators for capturing the first and second dimension of the PDO and proposed core indicator
                         are as stated below. The indicator ‘increase in asset value of the East West highway corridor from
                         Tbilisi to Sarpi’ is aimed at capturing the outcome of activities to achieve the planned upgrading of
                         the corridor. An intermediate indicator ‘length of the East West highway corridor with International
                         Roughness Index greater than 6’ is included in the overall results matrix. Together with the asset
                         value indicator, it will be possible to measure success in the development and management of the
                         East West Highway corridor as a whole.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed project would consist of four components totaling US$170 million:

                         Component 1: Civil Works and project supervision (Cost estimate: US$150.0 million)
                         (a)      Upgrading of existing 2-lane East-West Highway from Zemo Osiauri to Chumateleti to a 4-
                         lane dual carriageway road. The section is approximately 13.5 km long and runs through a hilly
                         terrain. Upgrading of this section will require many structure works, including construction of 3
                         tunnels (about 2.5 km) and 10 bridges (about 2.5 km). The carriageway will have a concrete
Public Disclosure Copy




                         pavement. (Cost Estimate: US$ 145 million, including contingencies);
                         (b)      Delivering of construction supervision and quality assurance services. These services will
                         cover all civil works financed under the Project. This activity will also include a Technical Audit of
                         the civil works contracts (Estimated Cost: US$5.0 million).

                         Component 2: Institutional strengthening (Estimated Cost: US$ 15.0 million)
                         Assisting the MRDI and the RD in consolidation of road asset management practices and move
                         towards highway corridor development and management approach. This component will thus build
                         on past and on-going institutional strengthening activities and implement some of the
                         recommendations of the institutional and technical studies carried under the Fourth East-West
                         Highway Improvement Project (EWHIP-4). Specific activities are as follows:

                         a)          Establishment of a National Highway Control Center (NHCC): As a follow up of the
                         communication and ITS strategies developed under EWHIP-4, a central coordination unit for all
                         communications related to planned and unplanned events - such as incidents and emergencies - on
                         the East-West highway corridor will be created and possibly extended to cover the entire network of
                         roads under the RD in a longer term. The role of this unit would be essential as it would gather and
                         assess information from the roads network nation-wide and deploy and coordinate intervention
                         resources to manage / monitor traffic and control, for instance, electronic signs on the roads in
                         conjunction with relevant entities;
                         b)      Support to the road sector financing and road sector institutional study: this could include
                         support to establish a dedicated entity to manage the existing highway network and its future
Public Disclosure Copy




                         development;

                         c)      Support with the implementation of the priority activities which will be identified in the on-
                         going road safety strategy and action plan to be developed under EWHIP-4. Road Safety audits are
                         already included in the road design, road safety data base is being developed and a set of road safety
                         interventions to improve safety along the existing road section have also been implemented. This
                         sub-component will likely support additional activities to improve institutional coordination activities
                         and priority actions that will be identified by the on-going study.

                         Component 3: Project management support (Estimated Cost: USD 2.5 million)
                         (a)     Support to RD in contract management for the main civil works and consulting contracts
                         under the project;
                         (b)     Support to the Transport Research and Rehabilitation Center (TRRC) in organizing financial
                         audits and delivering project monitoring and evaluation services.

                         Component 4: Preparation of supporting studies for future projects (Estimated Cost: USD 2.5
                         million)
                         Feasibility study of a 50 km bypass of Tbilisi. The Tbilisi bypass will be part of the East West
                         Highway Corridor and requires similar design standards and solutions to the sections already
                         developed in the past projects.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         East-West Highway section between Zemo Osiauri and Chunateleti is located in Khashuri
                         municipality, Kvemo Kartli region of Georgia. Highway corridor runs through a difficult terrain with
                         a hilly relief crossed by small rivers flowing through deep gorges. Significant part of the area,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         including slopes, is under forest cover. The rest of the land is either used for agriculture or is highly
                         transformed. Present alignment of the two-lane highway passes through a popular resort of Surami,
                         however the new alignment will bypass this settlement. Rivers are characterized with a dynamic flow
                         highly variable by season. High waters carry vast volumes of sediment and debris. There are no
                         towns or industrial facilities along the highway section covered by the project. Medium-scale
                         agricultural land take will have to be undertaken for the project purposes and physical relocation of
                         several households may also be required.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The proposed project will be implemented by the RD, an agency that has been implementing several
                         Bank-funded projects since 2004. The RD's institutional experience in applying the Bank's safeguard
                         policies is therefore extensive.

                         The Resettlement and Environmental Protection Division has good track record, long experience and
                         adequate in-house capacity to implement and monitor provisions set out in relevant social safeguards
                         instruments – RPFs/RAPs. The compliance with social safeguards requirements is assessed as
                         satisfactory for the ongoing East West Highway Improvement Projects. The staff received
                         professional on-the-job training as part of the Bank’s technical assistance and participated in the
                         safeguards training provided by the Bank in 2013. Detailed compliance reports on land take and
                         compensation payments effected are submitted timely to the Bank for approval before
                           commencement of civil works for the sub-sections. A few complaints reported to the Bank have been
                           handled adequately and resolved in a satisfactory manner.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental performance of transport portfolio projects has been rated satisfactory or moderately
                           satisfactory for most of the time, occasionally slipping down to moderately unsatisfactory. Recorded
                           glitches were predominantly due to the lack of in-house capacity of the RD to undertake
                           environmental monitoring of works as well as to insufficiently quick/effective follow-up by the RD
                           on the identified environmental issues. The RD's present institutional structure is generally relevant
                           for safeguards management: there is a separate unit for environmental management within the
                           Resettlement and Environmental PRotection Division comprised of the core staff and consultants
                           some of which are based in the regional offices of the RD. Nonetheless, a large number of ongoing
                           contracts, as compared to the current staffing, limit RD's ability to closely monitor and strongly
                           manage environmental performance of multiple large-scale projects financed by various donor
                           organizations. Deployment of a works supervision consultant for the purposes of implementing
                           EWHCIP which will undertake, among other tasks, supervision of safeguards compliance will be
                           critically important for smooth implementation of the project. TOR of a supervision consultant will
                           be carefully reviewed by the Bank to ensure that environmental monitoring function is well
                           articulated, giving sufficient details on the methodology and scope of work. The Bank team will also
                           undertake close supervision of safeguards performance under this Category A project, including field
                           work during and between formal implementation support missions, so that any issues that may arise
                           are promptly spotted and brought to the attention of the RD's management.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Darejan Kapanadze (GENDR)
                           Nino Metreveli (GSURR)
                           Vera Dugandzic (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         Yes            The project will finance the upgrading of large scale
                           OP/BP 4.01                                      transport infrastructure, most part of which will be
                                                                           built along a new alignment. It may therefore have
                                                                           significant and irreversible impacts. The project is
                                                                           thus classified as environmental Category A. A full-
                                                                           scale Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                                                                           (ESIA) was carried out. The four lane carriageway
                                                                           will be constructed in a difficult terrain, passing
                                                                           through hills, mountains, and gorges in between. Ten
                                                                           bridges and tree double-tube tunnels will have to be
                                                                           built. It is expected that the main environmental
                                                                           impacts at the construction phase will come from
                                                                           clearing of the right-of-way; establishment /
                                                                           operation of work camps and temporary access
                                                                           roads; and earth works, including extraction of
                                                                           material. Temporary and final disposal of excess
                                                                           material and waste in a proper manner will take
                                                                           much effort. Selected alternative of the road
                                                              alignment avoids most valuable forest stands of the
                                                              area with an acknowledged recreational function,
                                                              however several kilometers will pass through
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              forested lands and will require removal of trees.

                                                              Operation phase impacts are likely to include
                                                              generation of runoff from the carriageway and noise
                                                              disturbance to fauna. ESIA will explore all potential
                                                              impacts of the project in a greater detail and will
                                                              result in the preparation of environmental mitigation
                                                              and monitoring plans.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    TBD   Parts of the road will be built on a forested land.
                                                              These forest stands have lesser density, height, and
                                                              other quality merits as compared to those high value
                                                              forests that the preferred design option will allow to
                                                              bypass. Part of the forested area within the project's
                                                              impact zone is an artificial plantation of coniferous
                                                              trees. Nonetheless, ESIA will examine the study area
                                                              to identify whether it is critical for supporting
                                                              populations of any protected / important animal and/
                                                              or plant species, and how sensitive such habitats
                                                              would be to the expected impacts from the project
                                                              implementation. Final decision on triggering of OP/
                                                              BP 4.04 will be taken before appraisal.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09        No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural Resources    Yes   Project implementation is not expected to negatively
                         OP/BP 4.11                           affect any known physical cultural resources.
                                                              However, the portion of the highway to be
                                                              constructed along a new alignment carries the
                                                              potential of encountering chance finds in the course
                                                              of earth works, which have happened in several past
                                                              projects in neighboring locations. The policy is
                                                              triggered to have adequate arrangements in place for
                                                              handling of likely chance finds.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No
                         4.10
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   OP 4.12 is triggered as the planned construction
                         BP 4.12                              works aimed at upgrading the existing two-lane
                                                              highway to a four-lane dual carriageway road will
                                                              require land acquisition. However, since detailed
                                                              design of the preferred alignment has not been
                                                              completed yet, the overall level of resettlement and
                                                              size and scale of land requirements cannot still be
                                                                                                                        determined. Before project appraisal the
                                                                                                                        Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) developed for
                                                                                                                        the ongoing East West Highway Improvement
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        Projects will be updated to reflect EWHCP
                                                                                                                        specificities. It will provide guidance for the
                                                                                                                        preparation and implementation of the site-specific
                                                                                                                        Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) to mitigate any
                                                                                                                        adverse resettlement impacts. The RAP will be
                                                                                                                        developed and disclosed before project appraisal.

                                                                                                                        As was the practice with RPFs/RAPs developed to
                                                                                                                        date, social inclusion measures to address special
                                                                                                                        needs of the women, vulnerable families and
                                                                                                                        marginalized communities will be incorporated as
                                                                                                                        well as guidelines for prior and informed
                                                                                                                        consultation with the respective municipalities /
                                                                                                                        communities, grievance redress, information
                                                                                                                        disclosure and monitoring and evaluation.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No

                                 Projects on International                                   No                         After thorough analysis of alternative alignments for
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   the re-routed parts of the highway, an alternative
                                                                                                                        with least environmental impacts has been selected.
                                                                                                                        This alternative allows to avoid works in the
                                                                                                                        waterways and will have no impact on the
                                                                                                                        quantitative and/or qualitative parameters of any
                                                                                                                        international water body.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 07-Apr-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The draft ESIA report, including EMP, will be disclosed and discussed with all relevant
                                      stakeholders before appraisal. The updated RPF, currently in use for the ongoing EWHIPs, will be
                                      re-disclosed and open for public feedback before project appraisal . RAP will be also developed
                                      and disclosed before project appraisal expected in May 2015.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Mustapha Benmaamar
                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                     Date: 13-Apr-2015
                                 Advisor:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Practice Manager/   Name: Juan Gaviria (PMGR)   Date: 14-Apr-2015
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
