INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA13385
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Oct-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Oct-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Philippines                Project ID:  P153744
Project Name: Philippines Social Welfare Development and Reform Project II (P153744)
Task Team       Pablo Ariel Acosta,Aleksandra Posarac
Leader(s):
Estimated       05-Oct-2015                Estimated    17-Nov-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSPO2                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Other social services (60%), General education sector (20%), Health (20%)
Theme(s):       Social Safety Nets/Social Assistance & Social Care Services (40%), Education
for all (20%), Child health (20%), Other social protect ion and risk management
(20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:    450.00             Total Bank Financing:  450.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                    0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     450.00
Total                                                                     450.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The proposed PDO is to support DSWD to improve the use of health and education services of poor
children.
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 6


﻿This project contributes to the financing of the DSWD's conditional cash transfer program and
related MTEP over the next four years, as recently endorsed by the Development Budget
Coordination Committee (DBCC) and whose total cost is projected at US$ 5.84 billion. The amount
of the proposed IBRD project is estimated at US$ 450 million (7.7 percent of the total CCT cost in
2016-2019).
Component 1: Support to the CCT Program (IBRD Funding: US$ 450 million; ADB Funding: US$
400 million; Government Counterpart Funding: US$ 4.98 billion)
The objective of this component is to support the continuous delivery of the Pantawid Pamilyang
Pilipino CCT Program to poor households with children. It will continue to contribute to the
financing of the health and education grants given to the CCT beneficiaries nationwide over the
period of four years, starting from the date of Project effectiveness. Financing would amount to about
7.7 percent of total cash grants in the CCT program. The beneficiary households - poor households
with children 0-18, should continue to be selected using the national household targeting system -
Listahanan - that follows a standardized targeting mechanism with rigorous quality control process.
Component 2. Strengthening of CCT Implementation and Monitoring and Evaluation (IBRD
Funding: US$ 0; ADB Funding: US$ 0; Government Counterpart Funding: US$ 5.2 million)
This component will allow DSWD to undertake necessary enhancements to the CCT Program. It will
do so by allowing DSWD's National Project Management Office (NPMO-Pantawid) to enhance
implementation of the CCT, through a strengthened capacity for monitoring, evaluation and data
analysis, enhanced payment and GRS, streamlined and improved family and youth development
sessions, and faster compliance verification and beneficiary data systems.
Specifically, the component will use own Government funds as planned in the above referenced
MTEP to undertake institutional and capacity development and monitoring and impact evaluation
activities, including: (a) strengthening policy analysis and monitoring and evaluation capacity,
U        including conducting a CCT Program impact evaluation and annual CCT Program implementation
spot checks; (b) training of central, regional and municipal staff to deliver the CCT Program; (c)
developing content for, and strengthening capacity to deliver, strategic communications, including
strengthening the beneficiary feedback mechanism; and (d) training for the development and delivery
of family and youth development sessions.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will cover the poor and vulnerable households, which includes indigenous people. No
negative social impact is expected from the project.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Leonardo Jr. Batugal Paat (GENDR)
Maria Loreto Padua (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies  Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental          Yes         The project supports conditional cash transfer to poor
Assessment OP/BP 4.01              households. The project does not support construction of
physical infrastructure, civil and earth-moving works nor
Page 2 of 6


﻿expected to directly promote activities that may have
adverse effects on the environment. Thus, the project has
no direct environmental impact. However, OP 4.01 is
triggered on account of the need to assess the social
impacts of the project on the beneficiaries and other major
stakeholders, including the Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10).
A social assessment is included in the PAD (Annex 6),
which also included the assessment of the IP safeguards
instrument (i.e., IPPF) for the previous CCT project.
The project will not support any civil works.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          The project will not support physical infrastructure and
4.04                                activities that may have direct or induced impacts to
habitats and the biodiversity.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          There will be no construction of physical infrastructure
nor any other activities that are expected to lead to or
promote any encroachment of forest or conversion of land
uses.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          The project will not finance the purchase of pesticides nor
promote the use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural       No          The project will not support any civil nor earth-moving
Resources OP/BP 4.11                works. There is no foreseeable impact on Physical
Cultural Resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes         Indigenous communities or households remain to be
BP 4.10                             among the poorest and disadvantaged areas particularly in
terms of human development outcomes. Thus, while the
specific target households are yet to be selected/ updated
it is likely that some of them will be indigenous peoples.
An updated IPPF has been prepared by DSWD based on a
summative report on the results of the review of the
implementation of the IPPF and various IP consultations
during the SWDRP implementation since 2010. The IPPF
has been cleared by NCIP on September 4, 2015. DSWD
disclosed the IPPF in its website (www.dswd.gov.ph) on
September 8, 2015, and the Bank has disclosed the IPPF
in Infoshop on September 13, 2015.
Involuntary Resettlement No         The project will not finance civil works thus no land
OP/BP 4.12                          acquisition nor involuntary resettlement is expected.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No          The project will not finance dams.
4.37
Projects on International  No       The project is not situated in international waterways.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No          Not applicable
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Page 3 of 6


﻿A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
O
The project will not support any physical investments or civil works, hence any environmental
impacts is not expected. The project, however, is likely to benefit directly the indigenous peoples
(IPs) through the conditional cash transfer (CCT) program, which targets poor areas where IPs
may be present.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The long-term positive impact on IP is improved human development conditions particularly
resulting from improved access to basic education and health services.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not applicable.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
DSWD has prepared an enhanced Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework (IPPF) which defines the
mechanism for identifying or screening the grantees in indigenous communities; various
strategies to ensure that the program elements are all IP-sensitive; various mechanisms for
representation/participation of IPs at all levels of operations from national to local levels and the
monitoring of the IPPF implementation. In most part, the enhanced IPPF drew lessons drawn
from almost 7 years of implementing the previous IPPF for the SWDRP which is the predecessor
project.
DSWD is familiar with the Bank's safeguard policies since it is currently implementing World
Bank other projects for which safeguards policies/framework have been formulated and
implemented satisfactorily.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultations with IPs regarding Pantawid Pamilya were done regularly through annual focused
group discussions with IP grantees and through the regular meetings of the program Advisory
Committees at all levels (from national to municipal) wherein the National Commission on
Indigenous People (NCIP) is represented or a regular member. The IPPF has been cleared by
NCIP on September 4, 2015. DSWD disclosed the IPPF in its website (www.dswd.gov.ph) on
September 8, 2015, and the Bank has disclosed the IPPF in Infoshop on September 13, 2015.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                               08-Sep-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                            13-Sep-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Page 4 of 6


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
O
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              08-Sep-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           13-Sep-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Philippines                                              08-Sep-2015
Comments: IPPF disclosed in DSWD website (www.dswd.gov.ph)
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ] No[X]    NA [   ]
report?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Ifthe whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Page 5 of 6


﻿Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No[   ]NA []
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
O
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Pablo Ariel Acosta,Aleksandra Posarac
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Jehan Arulpragasam (PMGR)            Date: 09-Oct-2015
Manager:
Page 6 of 6


