INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA13289
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-May-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Armenia                   Project ID:  P150505
Parent       P126782
Project ID:
Project Name: Lifeline Road Network Improvement AF (P 150505)
Parent Project LIFELINE ROAD NETWORK IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P126782)
Name:
Task Team       Maria Carolina Monsalve,Nargis Ryskulova
Leader(s):
Estimated       18-May-2015               Estimated    31-Jul-2015
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIDR                      Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (60%), General transportation sector
(40%)
Theme(s):       Rural services and infrastructure (60%), Infrastructure services for private sector
development (20%), Trade facilitation and market access (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     50.00            Total Bank Financing:   40.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                  10.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     40.00
Total                                                                     50.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
Page 1 of 8


﻿2. Project Development Objective(s)
A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The Project Development Objective is to improve access of rural communities to markets and
services through upgrading of selected lifeline roads, and to strengthen the capacity of the
Ministry of Transport and Communication to manage the lifeline road network.
B. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
3. Project Description
The proposed Additional Financing for the Lifeline Road Network Improvement Project (LRNIP-
AF) would finance the rehabilitation of about additional 155 km of the lifeline road network,
institutional capacity building activities, and project management costs. The Project will have two
components:
Component 1: Lifeline Road Improvement (Total cost: US$46.51 million; IBRD: US$37.20 million).
This will rehabilitate additional 155 km of lifeline roads, bringing the total number of km
rehabilitated under the project to 360 km. This component comprises civil works for the
rehabilitation of roads (sub-component 1.1), two rehabilitation and maintenance contracts (sub-
component 2.2), supervision and technical designs (sub-component 2.4), and includes the
construction costs associated with the Safe Village schemes on all road sections rehabilitated under
the AF and the purchase and installation of road signs.
Component 2. Project Management and Institutional Strengthening (Total cost: US$3.39 million;
IBRD: US$2.71 million). This component will finance project management and implementation,
including financial audits (sub-component 2.1), purchase of road laboratory equipment (sub-
component 2.2), the development of a road safety action plan and the implementation of selected
activities from the action plan (sub-component 2.3), and under the technical assistance sub-
component 2.4 it would finance: (i) preparation of a social monitoring and evaluation study; (ii)
preparation of a strategic development plan for the lifeline road network; and (iii) lifeline road
network data collection for the RAMS; and (iv) technical assistance with regard to disaster risk
preparedness for the road sector.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Seven road sections were selected for rehabilitation during the first year of the project
implementation: (1) H1-Hrazdan-H55, (2) Martuni-Vahashen-Vardenik, (3) M2-Sisian, (4) Eranos-
Tsakqar, (5) Maralik-Qaraberd-Dzithankov, (6) H6-Nor Gehi-Argel-Arzakan-Hrazdan, and (7) M 11
Martuni-Vardenis-NKR brd., km 6+500 - km 10+700. The remaining road sections will be identified
during the project implementation.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Darejan Kapanadze (GENDR)
Sarah G. Michael (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          Activities financed under the LRNIP-AF are not expected
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Page 2 of 8


﻿to have significant impact on the environment. All
planned physical works are limited to rehabilitation of the
existing alignments. Overall long term social and
environmental impacts will be positive, while negative
impacts will be of minor scope and duration, and typical
for any small to medium size road rehabilitation activity.
The project continues to be classified as environmental
Category B.
The Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) is prepared through updating of the
Environmental Management Framework of the original
LRNIP. The ESMF provides guidance for undertaking
site-specific environmental due diligence throughout the
Project life, including procedures for environmental
screening proposed individual investments, planning
measures for mitigating potential risks of these
investments, and monitoring application of these
measures. The use of an EMP Checklist for Small Scale
Road Construction or Rehabilitation is proposed for
facilitating site-specific environmental management
planning under the Project.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           The Project does not finance construction of any new
4.04                                 roads and all works will be undertaken within the present
road corridors. Hence an impact on natural habitats is not
expected. Site-specific EMPs will examine proximity of
individual work sites to the designated protected areas or
to valuable habitats outside them and will recommend
mitigation measures as required.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No           The project will not finance construction of any new
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 roads, therefore it is unlikely to impact any registered
historical and cultural monuments. Likelihood of chance
findings is modest as no new roads will be constructed
and no significant re-alignment of the existing roads will
be undertaken. However, as a precautionary measure, the
updated ESMF provides guidance on proper handling of
chance findings should they be encountered during earth
works.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         The Project is expected to have positive social impacts in
OP/BP 4.12                           the form of improved access to markets, nearby towns,
Page 3 of 8


﻿and provided opportunities for temporary employment
through the contractors. Based on the experience of the
ongoing original LRNIP, the road improvements will
include upgrading or arrangement of sidewalks, drainage,
etc., with good engineering standards, and will require a
minimum road cross-section of 10 meters. It is possible
that all roads may not have 10-meter encumbrance free
cross-section. Thus, the Project may require some minor
land acquisition. In order to mitigate related impacts, a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was updated by
the Government. The RPF covers the process of
identifying the anticipated impacts, consultation process
during design and implementation stages, grievance
mechanisms, implementation arrangements, monitoring
mechanism, coordination with civil works, etc.
Once the detailed designs for specific road sections are
finalized and if any of those requires involuntary
resettlement, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be
prepared, disclosed and discussed with the affected
people. The Government will be responsible for
implementing RAPs prior to commencement of civil
works. Bank approval will be sought if project financing
is proposed for land acquisition.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Project is not expected to have significant impact on the environment. All planned physical
works are limited to rehabilitation of the existing alignments. They are unlikely to induce
immediate or mid-term new development of a significant scale in the project area. Therefore,
negative social and environmental impacts of the project will be of minor scope and duration, and
typical for any small scale road rehabilitation activity, while the long term social impact will be
positive.
An Environmental Management Framework(EMF) currently used for the purposes of LRNIP has
been re-worked into the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to be applied
for the needs of LRNIP-AF. It provides general guidelines for applying environmentally sound
practices to local roads rehabilitation. Site-specific Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) will
Page 4 of 8


﻿be produced for all road sections to be upgraded with the Project support. Site-specific EMPs will
specify environmental risks associated with rehabilitation works to be carried out in respective
locations, recommend respective mitigation measures, and provide monitoring schemes for
tracking adherence to the mitigation plans. EMPs will be included into tender documents and later
get incorporated into contracts for the provision of works hence becoming contractually binding
for works contractors. Adherence to the EMPs in the course of civil works will be sufficient for
keeping environmental impacts of the Project at the acceptable minimum level.
The Project will not undertake any form of massive land acquisition and will not cause restriction
of access to sources of livelihoods, because all physical activities will be carried out within the
existing right of way. Based on the experience of the previously completed Lifeline Roads
Improvement Project (LRIP), the road improvements will include upgrading or arrangement of
sidewalks, drainage, etc., with good engineering standards and will require a minimum road cross-
section of 10 meters. It is possible that all roads may not have 10-meter encumbrance free cross-
section. In order to mitigate the potential social or economic impact of any minor land take or
related impacts, therefore, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared by the
Government as a precautionary measure. Overall, the potential social impacts of the project
investments are expected to be of a small scale and site-specific; and thus easily remediable typical
of category B projects. Any project-related social or economic displacement will be handled
through the Resettlement Action Plans (if needed).
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
No indirect and long term negative impacts are anticipated in relation to future activities in the
project area.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The project does not include new developments: it will be rehabilitating existing roads, therefore
no alternatives were considered. It will improve sections of the existing lifeline road network
critically important for rural livelihood.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower drafted ESMF for LRNIP-AF by revising EMF currently used for the purposes of
LRNIP, and updated the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) also applied to the ongoing
LRNIP. These framework documents provide comprehensive guidance for undertaking site-
specific safeguards work. Once designs for the rehabilitation of individual road sections are
prepared on the rolling basis, site-specific Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) will be
developed for all works, and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be prepared in cases if
rehabilitation works require any type of involuntary resettlement. Adherence to EMPs and
implementation of RAPs, as required, will be mandatory for works financed from the project
proceeds.
The Ministry of Transport and Communication (MoTC), as an owner of the lifeline road network
and policy making authority, will have the overall responsibility for implementation of the Project.
The MoTC will delegate day-to-day implementation of the project to the existing Transport
Projects Implementation Unit (PIU) under the MoTC. The TPIU is governed by the Project
Management Board chaired by the MoTC and comprised of stakeholder ministries and
Government agencies. The TPIU was established to implement development projects financed by
Page 5 of 8


﻿the Bank and the Government of Armenia. It successfully implemented Lifeline Roads
Improvement Project (LRIP) and is currently managing the ongoing LRNIP. The TPIU has no in-
house environmental and/or social specialist and uses external consultant service for the
application of safeguard policies. Environmental and social performance under LRNIP is
satisfactory. The TPIU adheres to the requirements of the EMF, ensures development of site-
specific EMPs for all individual investments, and tracks coverage of environmental aspects by the
technical supervision consultant. As a result of these efforts, no environmental damage has been
done throughout the implementation of LRIP and LRNIP.
Similar to the present arrangement under the LRNIP, civil works under the LRNIP-AF will also be
supervised by a consulting firm commissioned by TPIU. Along with other responsibilities, this
firm will be assigned to track compliance of civil works contractors with the EMPs and will
monitor implementation of the prescribed mitigation measures.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key project stakeholders are the MoTC, Ministry of Territorial Administration, Ministry of
Nature Protection, Traffic Police, local municipalities, and residents of settlements which use
lifeline roads for connecting to services and markets. A wider range of population of Armenia will
benefit in a longer term from the expected increased access to economic and social opportunities,
and job creation resulting from better connectivity through the rehabilitated lifeline roads.
The final draft versions of the ESMF and the RPF were disclosed through the World Bank
Infoshop on April 22, 2015. The documents were also disclosed through the website of the
Ministry of Transport and Communication of Armenia on May 04, 2015 in Armenian (http://www.
mtc.am/pages.php?lang=1&id=77&page name=announc) and English languages (http://www.mtc.
am/pages.php?lang=3&id=78&page_name=announc). On May 5, 2015 the invitation for public
consultations was published in one of the local newspapers providing website links to the
documents, as well as date and time of the public consultation (attached to the minutes of the
public consultations, Annex III, ESMF and RPF). On May 15, 2015 the public consultations were
held. Participants included representatives of the Transport PIU, regional governments
(marzpetarans), representatives of environmental and resettlement NGOs, representatives of NGOs
and experts/specialists dealing with women/gender issues. Minutes of these consultations are
presented in Annex III of ESMF and RPF. Following public consultations, the ESMF and the RPF
were updated and re-disclosed through the Bank Infoshop on May 18, 2015. Site-specific EMPs
will be drafted, disclosed, and consulted with local stakeholders prior to tendering of works at any
given work site. RAPs, if required, will be drafted, disclosed, discussed with project-affected
people, and implemented by the Government prior to commencement of works.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                14-Apr-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             22-Apr-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Page 6 of 8


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Armenia                                                  05-May-2015
Comments: The final draft version of the ESMF was disclosed through the website of the
Ministry of Transport and Communication of Armenia on May 04, 2015 in
Armenian (http://www.mtc.am/pages.php?lang=1&id=77&page_name=announc)
and English languages (http://www.mtc.am/pages.php?
lang=3&id=78&page_name=announc). On May 5, 2015 the invitation for public
consultations was published in one of the local newspapers providing website links
to the documents, as well as date and time of the public consultation (attached to the
minutes of the public consultations, Annex III, ESMF). On May 15, 2015 the public
consultations were held. Participants included representatives of the Transport PIU,
regional governments (marzpetarans), representatives of environmental and
resettlement NGOs, representatives of NGOs and experts/specialists dealing with
women/gender issues. Minutes of these consultations are presented in Annex III of
ESMF. Following public consultations, the ESMF was updated and will be re-
disclosed through the Bank Infoshop on May 18, 2015. Site-specific EMPs will be
drafted, disclosed, and consulted with local stakeholders prior to tendering of works
at any given work site.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              14-Apr-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           22-Apr-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Armenia                                                  05-May-2015
Comments: The final draft versions of the RPF was disclosed through the website of the Ministry
of Transport and Communication of Armenia on May 04, 2015 in Armenian (http://
www.mtc.am/pages.php?lang= 1 &id=77&page name=announc) and English
languages (http://www.mtc.am/pages.php?lang=3&id=78&page_name=announc).
On May 5, 2015 the invitation for public consultations was published in one of the
local newspapers providing website links to the documents, as well as date and time
of the public consultation (attached to the minutes of the public consultations, Annex
III, RPF). On May 15, 2015 the public consultations were held. Participants
included representatives of the Transport PIU, regional governments (marzpetarans),
representatives of environmental and resettlement NGOs, representatives of NGOs
and experts/specialists dealing with women/gender issues. Minutes of these
consultations are presented in Annex III, RPF. Following public consultations, the
RPF was updated and will be re-disclosed through the Bank Infoshop on May 18,
2015. RAPs, if required, will be drafted, disclosed, discussed with project-affected
people, and implemented by the Government prior to commencement of works.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Page 7 of 8


﻿Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X]   No [  ]   NA [    ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X]  No [  ]   NA [    ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X]  No [  ]   NA [    ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or  Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X]    No [  ]   NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X]  No [  ]   NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Maria Carolina Monsalve,Nargis Ryskulova
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Juan Gaviria (PMGR)                   Date: 15-May-2015
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


