                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSR19980
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Oct-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Oct-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kenya                                        Project ID:           P111545
                            Project Name:      Kenya Cash Transfer for Orphans and Vulnerable Children (P111545)
                            Task Team          Emma S. Mistiaen
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          19-Jan-2009              Estimated     31-Mar-2009
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GSP01                     Lending       Specific Investment Loan
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                       No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       126.00           Total Bank Financing:      50.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                                Financing Source                                                  Amount
                               BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                  30.00
                               International Development Association (IDA)                                                         50.00
                               UK British Department for International Development (DFID)                                          34.00
                               UN Children's Fund                                                                                  12.00
                               Financing Gap                                                                                        0.00
                               Total                                                                                              126.00
                            Environmental
                            Category:
                            Is this a     No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives


                            3. Project Description


                                                                                 Page 1 of 5
                         The additional financing will support the two components of the original project. However,
                         following the modification to the PDO, the description of Component One will be revised to reflect
                         this modification. Component One will thus aim to contribute to building the capacity of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         government to deliver the National Safety Net Program by (i) strengthening program systems to
                         ensure good governance; (ii) harmonizing cash transfer programs to improve sector coherence; and
                         (iii) capacity building for expanding cash transfer programs to promote more comprehensive and
                         equitable coverage. Component Two will remain unchanged. The activities to be supported through
                         the two components are described below:

                         Component One: Policy Development and Institutional Strengthening (US$ 10 million equivalent
                         from IDA and US$ 5.2 million equivalent through DFID co-financing).
                         The component aims to contribute to building the capacity of the government to deliver the National
                         Safety Net Program by (i) strengthening program systems to ensure good governance; (ii)
                         harmonizing cash transfer programs to improve sector coherence; and (iii) capacity building for
                         expanding cash transfer programs to promote more comprehensive and equitable coverage. These
                         three areas of support reflect the key results of the National Safety Net Program and the World Bank
                         support to it through the Program for Results (PforR), including the recommendations of the
                         assessments that were carried-out by the World Bank to inform the design of this program. To build
                         capacity in these three areas, this component will support the provision of technical assistance to the
                         government to further development and strengthen core program systems, such as targeting,
                         enrolment, payments and complaint and grievance handling among others.

                         Component Two: Program Implementation in Selected Sub-counties (US$ 51.2 equivalent through
                         DFID co-financing). The activities to be financed through this component remain unchanged from
                         the original project, as this consists of financing regular cash transfers to poor and vulnerable
                         households caring for OVCs that are enrolled into the program. These households are selected in
                         accordance with the Program?s Operational Manuel. Once enrolled into the Program, each household
                         receives a monthly payment in cash, which is delivered every two months either through the Kenya
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Commercial Bank (KCB) or Equity Bank. The monthly transfer is currently Ksh 2,000.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project aims to be nationwide in coverage. The CT-OVC Program selects geographic areas to
                         support based on a ranking of locations that is informed by poverty and vulnerability criteria.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Gibwa A. Kajubi (GSU07)
                         Vanessa Sigrid Tilstone (GSU07)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               No
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                          4.04
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
                          Pest Management OP 4.09     No
                                                      No



                                                                       Page 2 of 5
                            Physical Cultural
                            Resources OP/BP
                            Indigenous  Peoples4.11
                                                 OP/    Yes
                            BP 4.10
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement    No
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Previous project was Environmental Category C. Additional financing will not result in a change
                              of this category.

                              The Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) that was carried out by the World
                              Bank as part of the preparation of the PforR operation, together with a number of independent
                              assessments, found that the CT-OVC Program tends to be well targeted to those households that
                              are eligible for support. However, concerns have been raised that targeted programs may exclude
                              some vulnerable and marginalized groups. The ESSA found that some marginalized groups may
                              not be captured in these programs but that this is not due to deliberate effort to exclude them by
                              program staff but as a result of the limited coverage of the program as compared with the level of
Public Disclosure Copy




                              need. In in view of the findings of the ESSA, there is a need for the CT-OVC program to pay keen
                              attention to Minorities, Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups. As a result, while the original OVC
                              project did not trigger OP 4.10, this safeguard policy has been triggered for the additional
                              financing. A Vulnerable and Marginalized Group Framework has thus been prepared by the
                              Borrower in accordance with the requirements of OP4.10. The framework sets out the institutional
                              arrangements (including capacity building where necessary) for addressing any grievances and
                              monitoring and reporting. It has been disclosed in the Borrower's website and in the Banks Info
                              Shop following clearance by the Bank.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                N/A
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                N/A. No alternatives were considered.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                The Operations Manual for the CT-OVC Program has been updated in response to the findings of
                              the ESSA. The targeting process has been strengthened to better ensure that all eligible
                              households, regardless of their place of residence, language or ethnicity, are considered for

                                                                       Page 3 of 5
                           inclusion in the program and that the most deserving are then enrolled. The complaint and
                           grievance mechanisms have similarly been reformed to improve their usability by poor and
                           vulnerable households and follow-up by program staff. Additionally, a section has been added to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the Operations Manual that provides guidance to front-line staff on how to reach minority,
                           vulnerable and marginalized groups. A review of social safeguards was carried out of the CT-OVC
                           program and the NSNP jointly between April and July 2016 to identify whether they are operating
                           in accordance with World Bank social safeguards policies. The review found no strong evidence
                           that minority groups are being regularly or systematically excluded (although low coverage in
                           remote areas continue to be a challenge for the program) and the environmental and social risk
                           rating therefore continues to be low. The review however concluded that more can be done to
                           implement the recommendations of the ESSA, particularly increasing the understanding and
                           documentation of these groups and where they are located and provided recommendations for how
                           to do this. A number of recommendations were made in the review and will be followed up and
                           monitored by the program.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Consultations were held with minority, vulnerable and marginalized groups during the
                           preparation of the ESSA and the feedback from these consultations are reflected in the ESSA
                           report. Given the findings of the ESSA, and the triggering of OP4.10, a Vulnerable
                           andMarginalized Group Framework has been prepared. Consultations with the key stakeholders
                           were held within the framework of existing program and also with communities in possible areas
                           of operation with care not to raise expectations in the communities until specific program locations
                           are known. There are however no adverse impacts anticipated from any of the OVC program
                           activities.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      16-Sep-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   18-Sep-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kenya                                                            25-Sep-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework Yes [           ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?



                                                                     Page 4 of 5
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Practice Manager?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Emma S. Mistiaen
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (SA)                       Date: 04-Oct-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Practice Manager/    Name: Iamele P. Rigolini (PMGR)                      Date: 05-Oct-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 5 of 5
