                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSR17140
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Feb-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Niger                                        Project ID:           P145268
                            Project Name:      Niger Disaster Risk Management and Urban Development Project (P145268)
                            Task Team          Sylvie Debomy,Jean Baptiste Migraine
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          28-Oct-2013                                  Estimated   11-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSU13                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector:            Flood protection (36%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector
                                               (23%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry secto r (20%), Central
                                               government administration (11%), Sub-national government administration
                                               (10%)
                            Theme:             Rural services and infrastructure (41%), Natural disaster management (28%),
                                               Water resource management (22%), Gender (6%), Municipal governance and
                                               institution building (3%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                          No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       106.64           Total Bank Financing:                                      100.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                    0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                         100.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                     6.64
                              Total                                                                                               106.64
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?


                                                                                Page 1 of 12
                         2. Current Project Development Objectives
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Project Description
                         The proposed components are: (i) flood protection infrastructure; (ii) support to local governance;
                         (iii) contingency component; and (iv) project management. The LDCF resources are expected to
                         contribute mainly to components 1 and 2. Details are as follows:

                         Component 1: Flood Risk Management Investments (US$79.64 Million) – This component will
                         finance a combination of infrastructure rehabilitation and disaster risk management structural
                         interventions. The overarching principle for this component is ensuring sustainability to future
                         flooding events in the urban and rural areas of Niamey, Dosso, Tillabéri, and Diffa regions.
                         Activities at the commune level have been prioritized by the local and regional authorities according
                         to their potential contribution to reducing flood risks or rehabilitating livelihoods in flood-affected
                         areas. Feasibility and technical studies are either ongoing - financed by the project preparation
                         advance - or expected to be launched at project effectiveness. Following are the sub-components:
                         1.1      Drainage, irrigation and socio-economic priority infrastructures (US$40 Million): This sub-
                         component will support construction of sewage collectors and primary networks in Niamey, Dosso,
                         Kollo, Say, Tera and Tillabéri; rehabilitating drainage canals and waste management in Niamey;
                         rehabilitation of drinking water supplies and social infrastructures for populations affected by the
                         2012 floods.
                         1.2      Flood protection infrastructure (US$14 Million, of which US$1.33 Million from LDCF ):
                         Under this sub-component, the project will support biological and mechanical bank protection, stone
                         barriers and thresholds in “koris” (sandy intermittent streams) to reduce runoff intensity,
                         rehabilitation and upgrading of existing dikes to protect Niamey Commune 4 and 5 as well as 14
                         irrigated perimeters along Niger and Komadougou Rivers. LDCF would support biological bank
                         protection.
                         1.3      Rehabilitation of watersheds (US$25.64 Million, of which US$5.31 Million from LDCF):
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This sub-component will support sustainable land and water management practices (soil recovery,
                         stone embankments, rock thresholds) in Sirba and Gouroubi tributaries’ watersheds that will enable
                         soil & water conservation, enhance infiltration and reduce peak flows; rehabilitation of 14 irrigated
                         perimeters damaged by 2012 floods along the Niger and Komadougou Rivers; sand dune fixation in
                         Diffa and Tillabéri regions; reshaping or re-profiling of natural drainage canals (former arms of the
                         Niger River and Gounty Yena) in Niamey; and pond control structures along the Komadougou River
                         in Diffa Region. The LDCF would support sustainable land and water management practices,
                         specifically for land recovery works on glazes and plateau.

                         Component 2: Capacity development and Social Accountability (US$22.0 Million). This component
                         will provide technical assistance for the development of central and local governments’ capacities.
                         Disaster risk management (risk evaluation, risk-informed planning, preparedness and response
                         capacities) and climate change adaptation will be mainstreamed as part of routine development
                         processes.
                         2.1     Support to elected officials, municipal services and civil society (US$5 Million): This
                         subcomponent is expected to strengthen local governments’ fiduciary and technical capacity;
                         collaboration frameworks (inter-government management); information management; development
                         and sanitation master plans. The capacity development of local governments will leverage resilience
                         as an added-benefit.
                         2.2     Support to central government (US$6 Million): This subcomponent will support capacities


                                                                      Page 2 of 12
                         with a crosscutting approach and specific target towards institutional collaboration. Examples of
                         technical assistance would include: development of a national sanitation policy (stormwater,
                         wastewater, basic sanitation, and solid waste), capacity development for the Department of Planning
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and Housing, equipment and training for monitoring river water levels and flows, supporting
                         maintenance of irrigated perimeters.
                         2.3     Strengthen disaster risk management capacities (US$11 Million): This sub-component
                         supports national and local disaster risk management capacities, including risk evaluation, risk
                         reduction, preparedness and emergency response capacity. Examples of technical assistance include
                         development of risk atlas (hazard, exposure, vulnerability and loss probability information);
                         development of real-time multi-hazard information systems for proper monitoring of risk and
                         available resources; standard operating procedures for early warning and response; guidelines for
                         safe construction practices and for mainstreaming disaster risk reduction and climate adaptation.

                         Component 3: Project Management (US$5.0 Million). This component will build institutional
                         capacity to ensure sustainable integration of project activities within the country’s existing
                         institutions and systems. It will ensure coordination of all the activities of the project, including
                         monitoring and evaluation. This component will cover all eligible expenditures including
                         strengthening institutional capacity; procurement of office furniture and equipment; hiring of
                         essential staff, including technical and financial audits; and all recurrent costs.

                         Component 4: Contingency Component: (US$0). Following an adverse natural event that causes a
                         major disaster, the Government of Niger may request the Bank to re-allocate project funds to support
                         mitigation, response, recovery and reconstruction. This component would draw resources from the
                         unallocated expenditure category and/or allow the government to request the Bank to re-categorize
                         and reallocate financing from other project components to partially cover emergency response and
                         recovery costs. This component could also be used to channel additional funds should they become
                         available as a result of an eligible emergency. Disbursements would be made against a positive list of
                         goods, works, and services required supporting mitigation, response, recovery and reconstruction
                         needs. All expenditures under this component, should it be triggered, will be in accordance with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         paragraph 11 of OP 10.00 and will be appraised, reviewed and found to be acceptable to the Bank
                         before any disbursement is made. Eligible operating costs would include the incremental expenses
                         incurred for efforts arising as a result of the natural disaster.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The specific sites for infrastructure investments and their scope will be determined during project
                         preparation based on the government’s detailed assessments of priority needs within the target
                         regions in consultation with local population and authorities and detailed technical studies to be
                         undertaken. The general areas include: Niamey, Dosso, Diffa and Tillaberi regions
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Emmanuel Ngollo (GENDR)
                         Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (GSU01)

                          6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental                Yes            The project will rehabilitate and upgrade sanitation and
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                       infrastructure works in several locations. As the sites and
                                                                      works are not yet finalized, an ESMF has been prepared,



                                                                        Page 3 of 12
                                                        consulted upon, and disclosed both in-country and at the
                                                        InfoShop before appraisal. The ESMF formulates
                                                        standard methods and procedures, along with clear
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        institutional arrangements for screening, review, approval,
                                                        implementation and monitoring of sub-project-specific
                                                        safeguards instruments (ESMPs, ESIAs and/or RAPs) as
                                                        necessary. These instruments will also be consulted upon
                                                        and disclosed in-country and at InfoShop.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No    Due to the location of interventions in urban areas, or in
                         4.04                           areas were infrastructure and/or productive activities were
                                                        already in place, no negative impacts to critical or
                                                        sensitive natural habitats are expected.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    No interventions are financed in forest areas, nor do they
                                                        involve forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes    Although procurement of pesticides is not envisaged
                                                        under the project, it is expected that intensification of
                                                        agricultural production and productivity, as a result of
                                                        water retention and land use planning for crop production
                                                        purposes, will likely lead to an increased use of pesticides.
                                                        The Government of Niger has recently developed a Pest
                                                        Management Plan for the PRODEX and the Emergency
                                                        Food Security Projects. The project has updated the
                                                        existing PMP and submit it to the Bank for clearance and
                                                        then disclosure in-country and at Bank InfoShop, prior to
                                                        appraisal.
                         Physical Cultural        Yes   The Physical Cultural Resources Policy (OP 4.11) is
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           triggered because Niger is viewed as a rich cultural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        heritage area. Though it is unknown at this time which
                                                        sites may contain such resources, due to the lack of
                                                        specifics on the locations, size, scale of planned
                                                        investments under the project, it was judged prudent to
                                                        use caution when implementing the productive
                                                        investments, especially with the civil works for water
                                                        retention and drainage infrastructures. The ESMF
                                                        addresses potential impacts and includes suggested
                                                        mitigation measures.

                                                        Dispositions taken for subsequent sub-project-specific
                                                        safeguards instruments will entail ensuring that ESIAs/
                                                        ESMPs consultants and contractors are able to do the due
                                                        diligence, or are teamed up with Physical Cultural
                                                        Resources (PCR) experts to ensure that impacts on PCR
                                                        are assessed and mitigation measures commensurate to
                                                        those impacts, including proper handling of chance finds
                                                        are implemented in the design, in accordance with
                                                        national and World Bank policies.



                                                         Page 4 of 12
                                                           The Project team and implementers shall ensure that the
                                                           proposed mitigation measures are derived from Projects
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           and subproject specific ESIAs/ESMPs, and more
                                                           specifically: (i) have been discussed and agreed upon by
                                                           concerned parties; (ii) include an assessment of the
                                                           capacity to implement the measures; and (iii) are
                                                           acceptable within the national regulatory and legal
                                                           framework, including laws and regulations concerning
                                                           cultural heritage and the antiquities. These and other
                                                           dispositions related to PCR will be discussed in the
                                                           ESMF.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No       There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
                         BP 4.10
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes      OP 4.12 is triggered due to the potential impacts related to
                         OP/BP 4.12                        civil works, which may lead to minor land acquisition,
                                                           loss of assets and/or access to resources. A Resettlement
                                                           Policy Framework has been prepared, consulted upon,
                                                           approved and disclosed in-country andat the InfoShop
                                                           prior to appraisal. Potential legacy issues/perceptional risk
                                                           issues arising from resettlement already conducted by the
                                                           UN and GoN will be addressed through a social
                                                           assessment during project preparation once the exact
                                                           intervention areas have been identified. The project team
                                                           will consider cost effective ways to assist the resettled
                                                           populations.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP        No    The project will not finance the building of dams and is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4.37                              not supporting dam infrastructure. Subject to technical
                                                           studies the project may finance local flood prevention
                                                           structures that may temporarily retain excess water during
                                                           peak volume events, but which do not pose dam safety
                                                           issues. If built, such structures may affect water
                                                           availability to downstream riparians.
                         Projects on International   Yes   Two scenarios are at play. First, planned flood prevention
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50              infrastructure investments along the Niger River and its
                                                           tributaries, under Component 2, may affect water flow
                                                           into the Niger River, an international waterways servicing
                                                           9 riparian countries (Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon,
                                                           Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea, Mali, Niger, and Nigeria).
                                                           Second, the project plans to engage in the rehabilitation of
                                                           existing dikes and renovation of water pumps along the
                                                           Komadougou River in the Diffa region. With regard to the
                                                           triggering of OP 7.50 on 'International Waterways', the
                                                           Policy is triggered for both the proposed interventions on
                                                           the Niger River Basin as well as the Komadougou River
                                                           Basin. The Government has already notified (September



                                                            Page 5 of 12
                                                                       13, 2013) the riparian countries through the Niger Basin
                                                                       Authority (NBA) and the Lake Chad Basin Commission
                                                                       (LCBC). The team is following up closely with both the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       NBA and the LCBC to expedite riparian response process.
                                                                       Once the response is received the team will prepare a
                                                                       Memo to the RVP taking into account NBA’s and
                                                                       LCBC’s feedback.
                            Projects in Disputed        No             OP 7.60 is not triggered as there are no known disputes
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                           over project area

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               This proposed project is considered an environmental category ‘B’ project since the anticipated
                              impacts will be small in scale and site specific and therefore manageable to an accepted level. Five
                              safeguard policies are triggered: (i) Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); (ii) Involuntary
                              Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12); (iii) Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09; (iv) Physical Cultural Resources
                              (OP/BP 4.11): and (v) Projects on International waterways (OP/BP 7.50).

                             Since at this stage only the general locations where most works will be conducted are known;
                             specific sites are yet to be determined. Accordingly, the following safeguard documents have been
                             prepared by the government and approved by the World Bank: (i) Environmental and Social
                             Management Framework (ESMF); (ii) Pest Management Plan (PMP); and (iii) Resettlement
                             Policy Framework (RPF). These documents have been consulted upon and will be disclosed
                             publicly in-country and at the InfoShop prior to appraisal. Once specific sites and corresponding
                             impacts are identified, the Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs), Environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                             and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be prepared as
                             part of project implementation as necessary before any infrastructure is put in place.

                             Under component 1, the anticipated negative environmental and social impacts of the project
                             would result mainly from civil works associated with rehabilitation of existing infrastructure. The
                             consequence would be some disruption of livelihood activities, acquisition of land, use of
                             pesticides and related public health and perhaps physical cultural impacts. OP 4.01 is triggered to
                             account for and address these impacts. The Government has prepared an Environmental and Social
                             Management Framework (ESMF). The ESMF provides guidance and measures, with the
                             associated implementation arrangements, with clear roles and responsibilities, along with capacity
                             strengthening measures for effective implementation and monitoring of the ESMF. It also provides
                             cost outlays and a timetable for preventing and mitigating all these potential impacts. In particular,
                             the ESMF provides steps for screening all subprojects, outlines procedures for preparing,
                             reviewing, clearing, disclosing and monitoring subproject-specific ESIAs/ESMPs. As a condition
                             of investment, it has been agreed that no civil works will commence, without proper compliance
                             with the above procedures.

                             A PMP has been prepared, which provides sound institutional arrangements, along with clear roles
                             and responsibilities for implementing and monitoring on pesticides-related impacts, in light of the
                             potential intensification and diversification of agricultural production and productivity.


                                                                        Page 6 of 12
                           OP 4.12 is triggered to cover civil works under component 1, which may require some land
                           acquisition leading to relocation and displacement of households and/or loss of assets. In case any
Public Disclosure Copy




                           land acquisition or compensation becomes necessary, the costs will be covered by the Borrower.
                           The Borrower has prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) with guidelines for
                           completion of a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), as needed, in case any land acquisition, and/or
                           restriction of access to resources should occur. The RPF includes the guidelines and procedures for
                           compensation and/or resettlement in the event that future activities under the sub-projects should
                           require land acquisition, involuntary resettlement or cause restriction of access to livelihoods or
                           assets and resources. It contains (i) an assessment of the country regulatory and institutional
                           framework for land acquisition and compensation; (ii) likely categories of affected assets and
                           parties, as well as the scope of impacts; (iii) a gap analysis and a compensation framework
                           consistent with OP 4.12 and the national legislation; (iv) measures to assist vulnerable groups; (v)
                           a consultation framework to enable the participation of affected populations in the preparation of
                           specific resettlement plans; (vi) an institutional framework to implement the resettlement policy
                           framework; (vii) a grievance redress mechanism; and (viii) a monitoring and evaluation
                           framework and budget.

                           Even though a large number of infrastructure works will be performed, this will mostly be
                           rehabilitation of existing infrastructure in areas where negative envir onmental and social impacts
                           of the interventions are expected to be temporary and limited to the immediate area surrounding
                           the respective construction sites thus not requiring a physical footprint in addition to the existing
                           one. No civil works will take place without prior approval and disclosure of a RAP or ESIA/ESMP
                           in the country and the Bank’s Infoshop. In addition, specific environmental and social clauses will
                           be incorporated into relevant bidding documents and contracts to ensure compliance with the
                           respective safeguard guidelines.

                           Following the major adverse impacts of the 2012 floods, including severe damage to houses and
                           livelihoods, the Government together with UN agencies took emergency measures to relocate
Public Disclosure Copy




                           people who had suffered from the floods to areas that were considered safer instead of continuing
                           to shelter them in schools. As compensation for resettlement, these people received a plot of land
                           at the resettlement site, and assistance with relocation. Various NGOs have assisted the population
                           as well as the host communities by contributing social infrastructure such as a school, clinic/
                           medicine dispensary, drinking water, and construction of permanent housing. There is no legacy
                           issue with the resettlement, since it was conducted prior to and irrespective of the involvement of
                           the Bank. However, the future project activities may take place near or within the resettlement site
                           since locations are not know yet and therefore it is important to analyze the impacts of
                           resettlement and how the people are managing now to address any potential perceptional risk
                           issue. This will help to assess how to best contribute to reducing their vulnerability and ensuring
                           they are not adversely impacted by the project. This analysis is being done through a social
                           assessment of the relocation program and the results will be used when deciding on specific
                           locations for activities.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             The project is in environmental category B, which signifies that impacts are site-specific and
                           manageable to an accepted level. It is not anticipated that any serious indirect or long term
                           environmental or social impacts will be caused by the project. The projectis expected to bring
                           positive benefits to communities, and individuals as the risk of major losses due to flooding will be


                                                                     Page 7 of 12
                           diminished. Women, in particular, are expected to benefit from this project because they are often
                           among the vulnerable groups most affected by adverse natural and man-made adverse events. The
                           project is expected to improve the food security status of households, by providing better
Public Disclosure Copy




                           protection against flooding of urban and rural areas, consequently reducing the risk of losing their
                           livelihoods and assets.

                           Other socio-economic and environmental benefits directly or indirectly related to project’s
                           investments include the following specific positive impacts:
                           •        The realization of dikes, control structures and retention ponds allow better control of
                           water runoff at both streams (Sirba and Goroubi ) at the level of runoff ( thus reducing flood risks).
                           •        In urban areas, the renovation of cobbled streets and rehabilitation of roads destroyed by
                           floods will facilitate the free movement of goods and people and greatly reduce the stress of travel
                           -related cuts routes.
                           •        The rehabilitation of watersheds and treatment koris (i.e., biological protection etc.) will
                           not only significantly reduce water erosion, but also allow a gradual recovery and re-vegetation of
                           degraded lands, thus resulting in reduced siltation of rivers and ponds.
                           Potential project investment risks may include:

                           •        Construction/rehabilitation of storm water drainage infrastructures may pose some
                           problems: risk of disruption of certain commercial and craft activities and destruction of property
                           installed on the ROW. In the operational phase, the wrong choice or timing outlets could cause
                           flooding downstream. Also, the lack of cleaning and maintenance of drainage channels can cause
                           their transformation into real garbage dumps and waste of all kinds, even preventing the normal
                           flow of runoff, which can cause flooding. These infrastructures can also be used as a receptacle of
                           domestic wastewater or even illegal connection of septic tanks, if sustained awareness of the local
                           population is not assured.

                           •        Construction of food control micro-dams on the Sirba and Goroubi may cause some
                           negative effects on the aquatic environment, especially on the spawning grounds. In ecological
Public Disclosure Copy




                           terms, the risk relates to migration constraints of aquatic wildlife, if crossing structures are not
                           developed. From public health standpoint, there is risk of development of vector borne diseases
                           due to the permanence of water retention plans.

                           •        Increased use of fertilizers and pesticides, as a result of agricultural intensification and
                           diversification, may cause: (i) Pollution of water and soil; (ii) public health risks due to (a)
                           ineffective use of pesticides on the part of local agricultural producers and (b) the proliferation of
                           waterborne diseases due stagnant water bodies or the presence of ineffective drainage system in
                           agricultural perimeters.

                           The safeguards instruments prepared under the project include ample provisions/measures to
                           address all these potential risks. In addition, feasibility studies for the rehabilitation/construction
                           of infrastructures will take into account design-related risks/impacts and provide mitigation
                           measures commensurate to those impacts.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            Alternatives to reduce the disaster related risks are minimal, given the vulnerability of the
                           population as demonstrated by the major losses suffered due to the recent floods, which in turn add
                           to the high level of poverty and overall vulnerability in the country. Niger is likely to face further


                                                                       Page 8 of 12
                           negative consequences of climate change, including changes in the intensity, duration, and
                           frequency of droughts, floods and heat waves. During the feasibility studies, alternatives to
                           minimize negative environmental and social impacts related to anticipated project activities will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessed.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The Government of Niger has previously successfully implemented Bank-financed projects for
                           which Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs), Environmental and Social
                           Management Frameworks (ESMF), and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) were prepared and
                           approved by the Bank. Further training and capacity building on safeguards policies will be
                           provided to the project management unit by Bank’s safeguards staff to ensure successful
                           implementation and supervision of the safeguards instruments. Implementing agency of the project
                           has recruited a safeguards expert for the project management unit to ensure proper implementation
                           and supervision of environmental and social issues. More specifically:

                          The project Steering Committee will bring together and ensure that all institutions involved have a
                          role to play, according to a monitoring work plan and intervention timetable and deliverables. The
                          Committee will decide on broad strategic directions for the implementation of the project and the
                          implementing rules thereto.

                          The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) will hire an Environmental and Social expert (SEA / PIU)
                          who will coordinate the close monitoring of environmental and social aspects of project activities
                          work of the Project and assure the interface with other actors involved in project safeguard
                          function.

                          The beneficiary communes and technical services, responsible for the implementation (i.e.,
                          DGGR, etc.)will designate Social and Environmental Focal Points, who will participate in the
                          supervision of works. The Communes will also participate in awareness and sensitization
Public Disclosure Copy




                          campaigns, as well as in the establishment of claims and conflicts management commissions.

                          The Bureau des Evaluations Environnementales et des Etudes d’Impacts (BEEEI), the National
                          Environmental Agency (NEA), and its decentralized structures, will assure the external monitoring
                          of the implementation of the of the ESMF, RPF and PMP, including ensuring and validating that
                          the provisions of the ESMF and RPF, leading to further sub-projects environmental and social
                          assessments, are followed (i.e., sub-projects categorization, review, clearance and monitoring of
                          the sub-project-specific EIAs/EMPs and RAPs), on behalf of the Government. Overall project
                          environmental and social safeguards compliance, with national laws and regulations and
                          applicable World Bank operational policies and procedures, will be devolved to BEEEI. External
                          safeguards monitoring of project activities, will also involve and benefit from technical
                          backstopping of other institutions, such as: Ministry of Health, Ministry of Agriculture, Plant
                          Protection etc.

                          With this operation, the Project is not only building on many years of experience implementing
                          Bank-funded projects, but also on lessons learned from implementation of those operations. This
                          provides the Project Team and relevant actors a good framework for smooth implementation of
                          safeguards measures. The safeguard instruments include further provisions for capacity
                          strengthening at all levels for the successful implementation of the project safeguard measures, in
                          compliance with national and World Bank safeguard policies.


                                                                     Page 9 of 12
                           Support will also be provided by World Bank supervision teams. The supervision missions will
                           always include the environmental and social safeguards specialists on the team. To ensure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           effective World Bank supervision, the Project Environmental and Social Unit will prepare and
                           update detailed reports on the implementation of ESMF, RPF and PMP, as well as activity-specific
                           EMPs and/or RAPs, whichever is applicable, before World Bank supervision missions.
                           Appropriate budget for supervision will be included in the Project financial evaluation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The preparation of the safeguard documents (i.e., ESMF, RPF, and PMP) followed a broad-based
                           and in-depth consultation approach that included interviews with relevant project stakeholder
                           groups, including: the steering committee, local communities, mayors, potential project affected
                           people, Ministry of Agriculture, the BEEEI etc, This consultation approach will be carried on
                           throughout project implementation and supervision.

                           The project will benefit the communities in four regions of the country, in both rural and urban
                           areas. Throughout the development of the ESMF, PMP and RPF stakeholder consultations,
                           including with flood affected communities in different regions, local and central level authorities
                           have been undertaken. Key issues raised included information on environmental impacts, most
                           effective ways to prevent future losses due to floods, and possible resettlement issues arising from
                           potential land acquisition.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         27-Sep-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      15-Oct-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Niger                                                               14-Oct-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         27-Sep-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      15-Oct-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Niger                                                               14-Oct-2013
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         02-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      15-Oct-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Niger                                                               14-Oct-2013
                           Comments:


                                                                     Page 10 of 12
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?


                                                                     Page 11 of 12
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Sylvie Debomy,Jean Baptiste Migraine
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)              Date: 07-Mar-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Maria Angelica Sotomayor Araujo      Date: 07-Mar-2016
                            Manager:                   (PMGR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
