                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA15050
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Oct-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Oct-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Philippines                        Project ID:   P153153
                            Project Name:      HARVEST PROJECT (P153153)
                            Task Team          William R. Sutton,Nataliya Mylenko
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          21-Nov-2016              Estimated     13-Dec-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GFA02                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       320.00           Total Bank Financing:    130.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                                   63.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     130.00
                              Bilateral Agencies (unidentified)                                                         127.00
                              Total                                                                                     320.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to increase private investment in agribusiness for job creation
                           and income-generating opportunities for the rural population in the Project Area.
                            3. Project Description
                           A. Lending Instrument

                           The project would be co-financed by IBRD and JICA. The IBRD part of the project would be funded


                                                                       Page 1 of 20
                         through an Investment Project Financing (IPF) instrument. The IBRD loan of US$130 million would
                         be made to the Land Bank of Philippines (LBP) as the Borrower, with the Government of Philippines
                         providing the sovereign guarantee for repayment. JICA would provide a loan of US$120 million
Public Disclosure Copy




                         equivalent in Japanese Yen to LBP with sovereign guarantee. LBP will on-lend proceeds of IBRD
                         and JICA loans to end-borrowers for subprojects that meet eligibility criteria set out in the Operating
                         Policy Guidelines (OPG) agreed by IBRD, JICA and LBP. JICA will provide a grant of JPY800
                         million (US$7 million) to finance Component 2 of the project.

                         The project period is expected to be 6 years (with implementation commencement by March 2017
                         and completion by March 2023), with project closing in September 2024. The IBRD and JICA loans
                         would leverage a total investment of about US$313 million, and the JICA grant of US$7 million
                         would finance capacity building, institutional development and M&E activities under the project.
                         The total project cost is estimated at US$320 million.

                         B. Project Components

                         Component 1: Investment Development Fund. US$250 million; IBRD loan of US$130 million, and
                         JICA loan of US$120 million equivalent: The proposed project will provide a line of credit to LBP
                         to on-lend to eligible sub-borrowers. Sub-loans would be demand-driven and made to end-borrowers
                         meeting a set of eligibility criteria provided in the Operating Policy Guidelines (OPG). Three main
                         potential categories of end-borrowers (with no formal allocation for any single category) have been
                         identified for project financing:

                         (a)      Large Agri-business Enterprises: This covers centrally managed sub-projects and private
                         entities leasing land from local owners for an extended period (15-20 years under some present
                         arrangements), carrying out land preparation and planting activity, hiring local community members,
                         including landowner family members as per local labor and wage laws, and deploying incentive pay
                         structures and partnership arrangements. The financing would cover land preparation and planting
                         expenses including in-estate infrastructure development such as access roads, captive power
Public Disclosure Copy




                         generation, etc. for new or expansion investment. This category also includes financing processing
                         plants sourcing inputs from the Project Area. The project would support private sector operations
                         which embrace the out-grower or contract farming approaches and other models maximizing the
                         benefits to landowners and local communities through improved compensation and incentive
                         structure mechanisms.

                         Based on assessment of investor demand in consultation with JICA and LBP pipeline for large scale
                         investments includes up to US$300 million potentially eligible sub-projects from 6 investors. All
                         proposed projects are greenfield investments involving international investors with established track
                         records in the industry and interested in growing and processing operations primarily for export
                         markets. One potential proponent, Al Sahar, has applied for a loan to the LBP for a US$65 million
                         banana growing operation. The firm is established with equity paid in and has initiated operations,
                         including land identification and preparation. Other potential investors expressed interest in
                         opportunities for investment in the Project Area at the senior management level though have not yet
                         provided financing proposals to LBP nor submitted proposals to RBOI.

                         (b)     Cooperatives and farmer organizations: Sub-loans to cooperatives or farmer organizations
                         would be for either direct investment through tripartite agreements or for on-lending to member
                         farmers for both existing and newly formed cooperatives. About 500 sub-projects are projected to be
                         financed, each with an average sub-loan size of about US$150,000, totaling to a lending of US$75

                                                                      Page 2 of 20
                         million (PhP 3.5 billion). With an expected end-borrower contribution of about 20%. Land Bank has
                         an outstanding portfolio of US$14 million to 233 cooperatives and farmer organizations (US$35
                         million approved value). Pipeline assessment identified a potential investor interest in grower
Public Disclosure Copy




                         arrangements through cooperatives from at least two investors. Potential demand for financing of
                         cooperatives through tri-party agreement for these projects is estimated at US$45 million.

                         (c)      Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises: This category will offer income generation
                         opportunities to those who have no access to land or do not propose to engage in agriculture. This
                         would support agriculture or agri-business by providing ancillary or tertiary services along the value
                         chain (cold storage, post-harvest facilities, farm inputs and supplies, repairs and maintenance,
                         connectivity to markets, among other interventions). About 1,000 sub-projects are projected to be
                         financed, each with an average sub-loan size of about US$5,000 (actual loan amount could be
                         higher), totaling to a lending of US$5 million. Currently the LBP portfolio in ARMM through
                         conduit refinancing for small value loans is PhP 1.3 billion (US$27 million). While the majority of
                         retail loan refinancing accounts for salary and trader loans, there is a scope to scale up on-lending
                         operations to support MSMEs, including in rural areas.

                         Component 2: Capacity Building and Institutional Development, M&E; JICA Grant JPY 800 million
                         (US$7 million): This component would be executed by JICA in close coordination with LBP and
                         World Bank. The component would finance the following three groups of activities:

                         (a)      Capacity building of Cooperatives (producers? associations/farmer organizations) and
                         MSMEs: Activities would include: (i) training needs assessment and development of applicable
                         training modules for end-borrowers and sub-projects financed under the project; (ii) establishment of
                         a mechanism for collaboration on technical training and market linkage among LBP, training
                         providers, relevant stakeholders such as Department of Trade and Industry, Department of Agrarian
                         Reform, Department of Agriculture, Cooperative Development Authority, and other relevant
                         organizations in the Project Area, e.g., the Regional Board of Investments, Bangsamoro
                         Development Authority, etc.; and (iii) assistance, facilitation and/or capability building to the end-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         borrowers, particularly of the farmers groups (cooperatives, producers? associations and groups, and
                         MSMEs) through organizational/enterprise development activities such as, but not limited to,
                         enterprise-based training and establishment of market linkages between producer groups/ultimate
                         buyers or processors/manufacturers, and technical and/or legal assistance in their land deals with big
                         companies.

                         (b)      Deepening outreach and access to financial services: Activities would include: (i)
                         preparation of marketing plans/kits on information dissemination strategies/activities such as posters,
                         flyers, leaflet/brochure, and rollout program road-shows; (ii) development of databank that will
                         capture vital information, e.g., producers, buyers, processors, integrators, traders/exporters, suppliers
                         and service providers including products requirements, product with market potentials, emerging
                         trends in marketing, training support, and other support services or link the municipal, provincial,
                         regional and national players including importers in the Project Area; and (iii) assistance to LBP for
                         the enhancement in existing Purchase, Technical and Marketing Agreement or similar marketing
                         instruments between and among cooperatives, producers associations and groups, and SMEs and
                         large agribusiness enterprises (anchor firms).

                         (c)     Support to LBP for project management and supervision: Activities would include: (i)
                         provision of staff and/or equipment at the Lending Center level to increase the number of sub-
                         projects financed under the project; and (ii) strengthen LBP➢❨ s project management and

                                                                       Page 3 of 20
                         supervision in the areas of project management, environmental and social safeguards compliance;
                         and monitoring & evaluation of KPIs and reporting. The project would support mid-term and final
                         project completion assessments. In addition, it would also support two external audits of a sample of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the sub-projects to ascertain compliance with environmental and social safeguard requirements under
                         the project.

                         Eligible HARVEST sub-borrowers are composed of 1) large-scale agribusiness enterprises and
                         private anchor firms, cooperatives and farmers/producers organizations and micro-, small- and
                         medium- enterprises (MSMEs). Sub-loans may be used for capital investments in productive assets,
                         associated working capital needs, production, processing, manufacturing, distribution, and
                         agribusiness related infrastructure, for the following subproject types:

                         -      Agriculture/Aquaculture
                         -      Crop Production
                         -      Poultry and Livestock Production
                         -      Fish Production and Fishery Development
                          -     Development/Rehabilitation of Plantation Crops
                         -      Food/Agro-Processing
                         -      Farm Machinery and Equipment
                         -      Agriculture-related services ?service-oriented subprojects that support agriculture-related
                         economic activity in the countryside such as warehousing, slaughterhouse, cold storage, agricultural
                         machine shop, etc.
                         -      Product Distribution/Packaging/Trading
                         -      Rural and agriculture-related infrastructure such as power generation, irrigation facilities, etc.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Physical Context
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed ➢❨ Project Area➢❨ for HARVEST is the present geographical area of the
                         Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (ARMM) (consisting of Basilan, Lanao del Sur,
                         Maguindanao, Sulu, Tawi Tawi, and the City of Marawi); the Municipalities of Baloi, Munai,
                         Nunungan, Pantar, Tagoloan and Tangkal in the province of Lanao del Norte and all other barangays
                         in the Municipalities of Kabacan, Carmen, Aleosan, Pigkawayan, Pikit and Midsayap that voted for
                         inclusion in the ARMM during the 2001 plebiscite; the cities of Cotabato and Isabela; and such other
                         areas as the Bank and the Borrower shall agree. ARMM is an autonomous region of the Philippines,
                         located in the Mindanao island group of the Philippines. The region has a total land area of 12,288
                         kmÂ² and composed of five predominantly Muslim provinces, namely: Basilan (except Isabela City),
                         Lanao del Sur, Maguindanao, Sulu and Tawi-Tawi. The regional capital is at Cotabato City, although
                         this city is outside of its jurisdiction. The ARMM spans two geographical areas: Lanao del Sur and
                         Maguindanao (except Cotabato City) in south western Mindanao, and the island provinces of Basilan
                         (except Isabela City), Sulu and Tawi-Tawi in the Sulu Archipelago. A major portion of the
                         region➢❨ s area is classified as rural to peri-urban with approximately half classified as forest lands.

                         An important geographic feature of the region is the river basins that encompass the area. The river
                         basins are composed of watersheds that collect and provide water to streams and rivers eventually
                         draining to receiving bodies like lakes, marshes or the sea. The mainland provinces of the region are
                         located within the Mindanao River Basin, the second largest river basin in the country, and span
                         across four regions in Central and Southern Mindanao including ARMM. Major rivers within the


                                                                      Page 4 of 20
                         region include the Ambal-Simuay River System originating from Lanao del Sur and the Buluan-
                         Malungon River, originating from the far southeastern portion of Mindanao. A characteristic feature
                         and associated with the Mindanao river basin is the Ligawasan Marsh. This wetland is composed of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         three marshlands: Ligawasan, Libungan and Ebpanan Marshes which together with other minor
                         swamps and marshes, have a combined area of approximately 285,000 hectares. These marshes serve
                         as the receptacle of the Mindanao river basin such that with persistently heavy rainfall, the marshes
                         merge, breach their banks and swell to about 350,000 hectares. There are also lakes located in the
                         region. The largest of these are Lake Lanao and Lake Buluan with areas of 34,000 and 6,134 hectares
                         respectively. These bodies of water are considered to be major lakes in the Philippines and are the
                         third and sixth largest lakes in the country.

                         Approximately half of the total land area of the region is considered forestland. The Forestry
                         Statistics for 2012 from the Forest Management Bureau estimate that of the 1,293,552 hectares in the
                         ARMM, 51% or 665,151 hectares are classified as forestland. The overall forest cover (as
                         percentage of the forestland) of the region has increased between the period of 2003 and 2010 to
                         approximately 21%.

                         There are ten (10) protected areas in the region with specific legal declarations and totaling
                         approximately 184,000 hectares. The biggest of these are the Lake Lanao Watershed Reservation
                         with a total area of 180,460 hectares and the South Upi Watershed Forest Reserve with 1,894
                         hectares. There are also other proclaimed watershed reservations that are not part of the protected
                         areas system such as the Kabulnan Watershed and the Dimapatoy Watershed in Maguidanao. The
                         region has approximately 3,232 km of coastline and around 18,420 hectares of ocean waters. The
                         Sulu Sea belonging to the Sulu-Sulawesi (Celebes) marine ecoregion is the most prominent marine
                         ecosystem in the region. This large marine ecosystem is one of the most diverse and productive in the
                         world and was recently recognized as a marine biodiversity hotspot for the variety of habitats it
                         supports, from reefs to the mangroves.

                         Tri-People and Poverty Contexts
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In 2010 ARMM registered a total population of 3,248,787. The people have been generally described
                         to include the: (i) Moros or Muslims, (ii) Lumads, and (iii) settlers who are mostly Christians from
                         Luzon and the Visayas. The Muslims comprise the overwhelming majority in the five provinces and
                         one city of ARMM. Based on the combined databases of the Office of Southern Cultural
                         Communities (OSCC) in ARMM and the National Commission on Indigenous People (NCIP) in
                         Basilan, the total population of indigenous people in ARMM in 2010 was 606,452 or 18.6% of the
                         total population in the same year. In 2012 the region posted the highest poverty incidence among
                         families across all regions in the country. As of first semester of 2012, poverty incidence is at 46.9
                         and subsistence incidence is at 20.4, which means that about 46.9% of every 100 families are poor,
                         with their income incapable of providing the basic food requirements. Among the five provinces,
                         Lanao del Sur had the highest poverty incidence of 68.9, followed by Maguindanao at 57.8. Three of
                         the five provinces of ARMM had the lowest Human Development Index (HDI) across provinces in
                         the whole country in 2009.

                         Conflict Context

                         Due to its protracted nature, the conflict in and around the Project Area has mutated in various forms.
                         Vertical conflict (state versus rebel groups) is primarily between the government and the MILF, but
                         other armed groups such as the remnants of the Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF), the

                                                                      Page 5 of 20
                         Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters (BIFF), and elements of the Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) pose
                         challenges to state authority. Horizontal conflicts abound such as political elites competing for key
                         electoral positions in the government or control over scarce resource in the area, inter-ethnic
Public Disclosure Copy




                         competition (IPs versus Moros, Maranaos versus Maguindanaoans), or inter-communal conflict
                         (Christians versus Moros, MILF versus MNLF). Many of these horizontal conflicts are lumped
                         together under the phenomenon of "rido" (clan wars). International Alert and WB (2014) noted that
                         the incidences of horizontal conflicts outnumber those of vertical conflicts particularly when the
                         peace negotiations occurred between GPH and the MILF and after the signing of the FAB in October
                         2012. However, they admonished that the decline in the incidence of vertical conflict and a rise in
                         horizontal conflict should similarly be a cause of concern because the latter can easily transform into
                         vertical conflicts given the interwoven nature of personal relationships in the Bangsamoro. The
                         "feudalistic nature" of its society enables a prominent clan member who holds political power to use
                         state resources against his enemy who will conveniently form an alliance with rebel groups to
                         counter the overwhelming force of his rival.

                         Political-Economy Context

                         In most of the proposed Bangsamoro territory there is an intimate relationship between those who
                         exercise political control and the local business leaders. In many LGUs the most prominent
                         businesses are those owned or controlled by the families that are also the elected LGU leaders. This
                         intertwining of politics and business presents multiple risks for investors. Some existing investors
                         have adapted to this marriage by entering into arrangements that further consolidate local control of
                         political and security controls together with their business investments - for example inviting local
                         LGU leaders to become partners in a new business can be a form of insurance. However there are
                         risks associated with this strategy, including the political, security and business implications when
                         elections bring about a change in local leadership. There is also a risk that strengthening local
                         political and business control of one family may impact on transparency and accountability at the
                         local level, and may ultimate curb democratic principles. Aligning with one political grouping or
                         another at a local level is a threat to other groups, given that sources of income are limited at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         local level, and any successful business that produces a return has the potential to shift the balance of
                         power at election time in favor of one group over another. Businesses that require access to large
                         tracts of land find this more difficult to achieve than those that do not, given that local political
                         leaders exert control over large areas and tend to veto powers over new investments in their area.
                         There tends to be less risk for investments that focus on processing rather than production.

                         The clan is a mechanism within the society of dispensing opportunities, providing social protection
                         and bestowing privileges to family and community members. Important economic and political
                         matters that affect the life of the community will have to pass the approval of the dominant clan
                         before their introduction and implementation in the community. While the system affords an
                         unconventional social protection mechanism particularly for the very poor members of the
                         community, it also has its negative aspect in the form of elite capture of most of the benefits of
                         development assistance. Because of their monopoly control of both economic and political powers in
                         their respective communities, these clans have become virtual gatekeepers in their respective
                         communities. There are two perspectives on the dominance of datus and clan leaders in
                         administering land rights and land use among members of the communities or clans. In one
                         perspective, the dominance of datus is viewed to facilitate the entry of economic development
                         opportunities and the mobilization of the support of the whole community. In another perspective,
                         the dominanc e of datus is viewed to have caused the displacement and further disempowerment of
                         many small farmers, including indigenous people.

                                                                       Page 6 of 20
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Gerardo F. Parco (GEN2B)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Roberto B. Tordecilla (GSU02)

                         6. Safeguard Policies     Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental             Yes        The project is categorized as an FI because it involves
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                financial intermediation by LBP. The anticipated
                                                              environmental and social impacts of the subprojects vary
                                                              largely in terms of scale, magnitude and influence areas.
                                                              Potential subprojects to be financed from large
                                                              agricultural enterprises are likely to belong to Category A
                                                              owing to their likely scale and extent of impacts. Sub-
                                                              projects from Cooperatives and MSMEs will likely
                                                              belong under Category B or C.
                                                              The potential environmental and social impacts and risks
                                                              are considered as high based on the scoping exercise
                                                              captured in the Environmental and Social Scoping Report.
                                                              The environmental risks identified are those related to: (a)
                                                              forestland conversion and habitat loss including those on
                                                              marine and coastal ecosystems; (b) pollution and use of
                                                              pesticides;(c) waste generation from farm and processing
                                                              operations; (d) soil degradation and erosion; and (e)
                                                              affecting water availability for other uses. These risks are
                                                              compounded by a system of environmental governance
                                                              and institutions that are relatively nascent and needing
                                                              strengthening.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              The social risks include among others the intertwining of
                                                              politics and business presents multiple risks for investors
                                                              such as the risk of strengthening local political and
                                                              business control of one family or clan on transparency and
                                                              accountability at the local level, and may ultimately
                                                              adversely impact local communities and vulnerable
                                                              groups. Depending on the nature of the agribusiness
                                                              project or venture, land acquisition may be indispensable.
                                                              Doing this in the context of a problematic and
                                                              complicated state of land administration system in the
                                                              Project Area (judicial, administrative, and customary
                                                              ownership) with the dominance of few powerful
                                                              individuals or groups/clans, and the presence of many
                                                              poor small landowners and landless families, access to
                                                              land for agribusiness enterprises could result in
                                                              displacement or involuntary resettlement. Disputes over
                                                              land ownership and use are the most significant risks for
                                                              agri-business investments and for affected communities in
                                                              the Project Area.



                                                               Page 7 of 20
                                                        The assessment and mitigation of anticipated impacts will
                                                        be done through the Environmental and Social
                                                        Management Framework (ESMF) that has been
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        developed by LBP. Apart from the above mandatory
                                                        compliance requirements, the industry best practices will
                                                        be tapped to promote good practices and sustainability.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   The Project Area is known to host various critical and
                         4.04                           non-critical natural habitats. Within the region are ten (10)
                                                        declared protected areas, marine sanctuaries and key
                                                        biodiversity areas. The total area of declared terrestrial
                                                        (and aquatic) protected area is 184,000 hectares excluding
                                                        the marine protected areas. There are also additional sites
                                                        considered as key biodiversity conservation areas
                                                        however with no legislated protection scheme. The
                                                        projects that will be supported by the fund facility may
                                                        have direct impacts on these natural habitats or induce
                                                        indirect or residual impacts on these habitats. The specific
                                                        locations and details of the impacts are not known at this
                                                        stage and therefore comprehensive screening for further
                                                        impacts and the corresponding mitigation measures will
                                                        be undertaken as part of the ESMF preparation. However,
                                                        a large proportion of land and marine areas in the Project
                                                        Area are classified as protected areas and there is
                                                        therefore a significant risk to manage to avoid that
                                                        projects may have direct and residual impacts on these
                                                        areas. Measures to address impacts on non-critical natural
                                                        habitats will also form part of the ESMP or as stand-alone
                                                        management plan depending on the complexity.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes   Almost half of the total land area of the Project Area is
                                                        classified as forestland consisting of closed forest, open
                                                        access forest, mangroves, and brushlands. In the total
                                                        forestland of the region, the overall forest cover is
                                                        approximately 21% as of 2010. The forest cover may
                                                        have been reduced even more with the continuing
                                                        forestland conversion, clearing and exploitation. The
                                                        forestland under specific management scheme like
                                                        Integrated Forest Management Agreement (IFMA) and
                                                        Community Based Forest Management Agreement
                                                        (CBFMA) account for approximately 64,915 hectares
                                                        while areas set aside for conservation and protection
                                                        (including protected areas and watershed reserves) total to
                                                        192,491 hectares. The remaining 61% of the forestland is
                                                        open-access that can be potentially exploited or misused.

                                                        The intensification of agricultural production may build
                                                        additional pressure on further clearing and conversion of
                                                        forestlands in the future. There may be residual and


                                                         Page 8 of 20
                                                       indirect impacts on the forest areas. The ESMF shall
                                                       specify detailed screening for subprojects for their
                                                       potential impacts on the forests and the forest-dependent
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       communities including the measures to address these
                                                       impacts. Measures to address the impacts will be part of
                                                       the ESMP if there are potential impacts on forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes   The establishment of large scale production of limited
                                                       species of agricultural crops can involve the application
                                                       pest management measures including chemical controls.
                                                       While some agricultural production processes may
                                                       involve the use of integrated pest management (IPM),
                                                       chemical controls may still be potentially used to manage
                                                       pest population. The project may result to increase in the
                                                       use of pesticides within the influence area due to
                                                       expansion of crop lands, diversification of crops and,
                                                       intensification of planting practices. Related to the use of
                                                       chemical controls is the exposure risks from the aerial
                                                       spraying. While definitive exposure and toxicological
                                                       studies of aerial spraying of pesticides specific to the
                                                       region still need to establish environmental and health
                                                       impacts, this issue clearly presents environmental and
                                                       health risks to the communities.
                                                       To address the anticipated increase in the utilization of
                                                       pesticides, a Pest Management Plan (PMP) shall be
                                                       prepared as part of the ESMP or a stand-alone plan based
                                                       on WB Policy 4.09 and BP 4.01 Annex B Environmental
                                                       Assessment - Application of EA to Projects Involving
                                                       Pest Management The PMP shall take into account the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       pest management practices used in plantations and other
                                                       agribusiness ventures. The plan will also include an
                                                       assessment of the applicability and practicability of
                                                       proposed pest management measures including the
                                                       current policy environment. Good and replicable practices
                                                       (and alternative to aerial spraying) will be identified for
                                                       some plantations that have complied with local ordinances
                                                       banning aerial spraying as the mode for applying
                                                       pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural      Yes    The Environmental and Social Scoping Report identified
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11          the Project Area as having indigenous peoples or Lumads
                                                       comprising a sizeable portion of its population. The areas
                                                       surrounding Cotabato City as well as other settlements
                                                       represents some of the old and traditional township sites
                                                       that developed out of the trading posts between Muslim
                                                       and Chinese traders. Also regarded as among the cultural
                                                       resources are burial grounds and mosques.

                                                       There is a possibility that due to plantation establishment,


                                                        Page 9 of 20
                                                        land preparation, excavation work, properties of
                                                        historical, cultural or religious importance may be found.
                                                        During construction, the landscape of the sites may also
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        be affected and structural damage to old structures may
                                                        result from vibrations, earth moving and excavation of
                                                        adjacent areas. The mitigation measures will be included
                                                        in the ESMP of subprojects including the procedure to
                                                        handle chance finds.

                                                        The ESMF includes procedures to address impacts
                                                        associated with OP 4.11, including chance finds
                                                        procedures (ESMF Annex 9) and a list of ineligible
                                                        activities, including in areas with sacred grounds and
                                                        burial sites of indigenous communities and international
                                                        and local cultural and heritage sites (ESMF Annex 2).
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   The ARMM has a registered total population of 3,248,787
                         BP 4.10                        described to include the: (i) Moros or Muslims, (ii)
                                                        indigenous peoples or Lumads, and (iii) settlers who are
                                                        mostly Christians from Luzon and the Visayas. The
                                                        Muslims comprise the overwhelming majority in the five
                                                        provinces and one city of ARMM. However based on the
                                                        combined databases of the Office of Southern Cultural
                                                        Communities (OSCC) in ARMM and the National
                                                        Commission on Indigenous People (NCIP) in Basilan, the
                                                        total population of indigenous people in ARMM in 2010
                                                        was 606,452 or 18.6% of the total population.

                                                        One particular group affected by land disputes
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        (contrasting statutory and customary systems) are the
                                                        Indigenous Peoples (IPs). The primary conflict trigger
                                                        involving IPs is land related issues. With the complex
                                                        land conflict context, there is strong apprehension among
                                                        stakeholders that the entry of large agribusiness
                                                        corporations will threaten the security of tenure of the IPs
                                                        who live in and have claims over 380,612 hectares of land
                                                        in Maguindanao alone. The ESMF incorporates an IP
                                                        Planning Framework (IPPF) to promote and protect the
                                                        rights and welfare of IPs in areas where they are found
                                                        present or to which they have collective attachment. . The
                                                        project will contract third parties to provide legal
                                                        assistance for affected IP communities.

                                                        The IPPF includes provisions to address both OP 4.10 and
                                                        the national legislation requirements. The project will
                                                        support cooperatives and small holders that may benefit
                                                        indigenous peoples both in terms of financing under
                                                        Component 1 and capacity building under Component 2.



                                                        Page 10 of 20
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   Depending on the nature of an agribusiness project or
                         OP/BP 4.12                     venture, land acquisition may be indispensable. Doing this
                                                        without proper safeguards in the context of a problematic
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        state of the land administration system in the Project
                                                        Area, with the dominance of a few powerful individuals
                                                        or groups/clans, and the presence of many poor small
                                                        landowners and landless families, could risk displacement
                                                        or involuntary resettlement and adverse social impacts.

                                                        Disputes over land use are the most significant risk for
                                                        agri-business investments in the future Project Area. The
                                                        Project Area includes a number of areas within the current
                                                        ARMM and neighboring municipalities and provinces
                                                        where conflicts over land have occurred regularly.

                                                        The Project does not intend to fund land acquisition. The
                                                        ESMF includes a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                                                        that provides clear measures, procedures, and institutional
                                                        arrangements to ensure land acquisition by sub-project
                                                        proponents meets the requirements and objectives of OP
                                                        4.12 and 4.10. It is not expected that land for investors
                                                        will be assembled through the use of government powers
                                                        of eminent domain. Instead, it is expected that land will
                                                        be acquired through transactions such as lease, sale,
                                                        usufruct, etc. The RPF stipulates that it applies to such
                                                        transactions due to risks associated with poor land
                                                        information, potential displacement of non-transacting
                                                        persons, and potential associated social impacts. The RPF
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        also provides guidance on entitlements and other
                                                        measures to address impacts on the different categories of
                                                        project-affected people like landowners with titles,
                                                        landowners without titles, renters, tenants, informal
                                                        settlers, IP groups, etc.

                                                        For land that was acquired prior to the first identification
                                                        mission by the WB and JICA (September 3, 2014), such
                                                        land may nonetheless be associated with lingering
                                                        grievances, unresolved disputes and negative
                                                        consequences for affected people that can pose serious
                                                        risks for the project going forward. Consequently, for all
                                                        prior acquisitions, LBP shall (in collaboration with the
                                                        proposed sub-borrower) attempt to determine whether or
                                                        not the acquisition of land and resettlement was carried
                                                        out in accordance with applicable national laws and
                                                        regulations and the objectives of the RPF; whether there
                                                        are any outstanding claims, grievances or risks associated
                                                        with land acquisition; whether the acquisition was



                                                        Page 11 of 20
                                                                       accompanied by appropriate consultation; and whether
                                                                       people affected by the acquisition received fair
                                                                       compensation and opportunities to at least restore their
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       livelihoods. If necessary, additional mitigation measures
                                                                       will be developed and implemented.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        Yes            There may be subprojects that may involve irrigation
                            4.37                                       systems with potential dam construction or rehabilitation.
                                                                       These dams are typically considered as small dams as
                                                                       defined under OP 4.37 (i.e., dams with a height of less
                                                                       than 15 meters) and are most likely to be ogee weirs for
                                                                       run-of-river irrigation systems or dirt dams for small
                                                                       water impounding. The sub-borrowers will need to
                                                                       exercise due diligence in the design, construction, and
                                                                       operation of small dams including the inclusion of generic
                                                                       dam safety measures designed by qualified engineers.

                                                                       For HARVEST the following considerations on the
                                                                       application of the policy include: (a) the Project will not
                                                                       fund large, high-risk dams (i.e., over 15 meters in height)
                                                                       located in an area of high seismicity, or with the presence
                                                                       of sensitive receptors downstream; (b) dam design should
                                                                       be done and/or approved by a qualified engineer, and (c)
                                                                       the specific EAs of subprojects involving dams should
                                                                       include a risk assessment of dam failure and
                                                                       corresponding mitigating measures in the ESMP. Any
                                                                       subproject involving dams will be prior reviewed by the
                                                                       World Bank for safeguards.
                            Projects on International   No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project will support the establishment and expansion of agribusiness in the Project Area. The
                              types and levels of agribusiness operations that will be established will vary; however, initial
                              interests identify production of commodity crops as one of the potential operations in the region.
                              The envisaged agribusiness operations may generate potential environmental and social impacts
                              with area of influence anticipated to be wide and far-reaching. Due to the anticipated scale of
                              operations, some of these impacts could be significant, multi-faceted, and potentially affecting the
                              biophysical conditions as well as social fabric of the area. The Environmental and Social Scoping
                              undertaken for HARVEST identified potential environmental and social risks and impacts. The
                              environmental risks and potential impacts of agribusinesses vary according to the types of
                              subprojects, practices and the absorbing capacity of the environment. The identification and


                                                                        Page 12 of 20
                         assessment of potential environmental impacts cover activities such as farming and production
                         systems (preparation and management), post-production processing including extraction and
                         purification, and agribusiness support facilities. The potential environmental impacts and risks are
Public Disclosure Copy




                         high and, based on the Environmental and Social Scoping conducted by LBP, include: (a)
                         forestland conversion and habitat loss including those on marine and coastal ecosystems; (b)
                         pollution and use of pesticides;(c) waste generation from farm and processing operations; (d) soil
                         degradation and erosion; and (e) affecting water availability for other uses. These risks anticipated
                         to be generated by the subprojects are compounded by a system of environmental governance and
                         institutions that are relatively nascent and needing strengthening. Environmental governance in
                         ARMM for the most part has been devolved to the ARMM and the local governments and the
                         capacity of the institutions will need to be strengthened in terms of policy development,
                         implementation of projects and programs, and enforcement of regulations.

                         The potential social impacts and risks are high too. Land acquisition is an indispensable part of all
                         agribusiness projects or ventures. Doing this in the context of a problematic and complicated state
                         of land administration system (judicial, administrative, and customary ownership) with the
                         dominance of few powerful individuals or groups/clans, and the presence of many poor small
                         holders, landless families and indigenous people, access to land for agribusiness enterprises could
                         result in displacement or involuntary resettlement and social impacts on such groups. Disputes
                         over land ownership and use are the most significant risks for agri-business investments in the
                         region.

                         In most of the proposed Project Area, there is an intimate relationship between those who exercise
                         political control and the local business leaders. In many local government units, the prominent
                         businesses are those owned or controlled by the families that are also the elected leaders. This
                         intertwining of politics and business presents multiple risks for investors. There is a risk that
                         strengthening local political and business control of one family may impact on transparency and
                         accountability at the local level, and may ultimate compromise the governance of the area.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         That the clan is a mechanism within the society of dispensing opportunities, providing social
                         protection and bestowing privileges to family and community members is a reality. Important
                         economic and political matters that affect the life of the community have to pass the approval of
                         the dominant clan before their introduction and implementation in the community. Due to their
                         monopoly control of both economic and political powers in their respective communities, these
                         clans have become virtual gatekeepers of economic development in the communities. Violence
                         often occurs when the control over a territory by a dominant clan is challenged by another rival
                         clan in the area.

                         The assessment and mitigation of anticipated impacts at the sub-project level will be done through
                         the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that has been developed by LBP.
                         Beyond the transition period and after peace has stabilized, the region could offer scope for
                         significant private sector agri-investment. The project would bring in international best-practice
                         approaches to identification of environmental and social impacts and determining mitigation
                         actions that could be mainstreamed by the government in their future development guidelines.

                         The likely impacts of projects in the pipeline are also considered based on the initial preliminary
                         assessment of investor demand and identification of a potential pipeline that includes several
                         subprojects by large agricultural enterprises (LAE) proponents. The proposed projects would be
                         greenfield investments in crop growing and processing operations primarily for export markets. As

                                                                   Page 13 of 20
                           an indication, one of the potential proponents has identified an agribusiness operation in
                           Maguindanao involving the establishment of over 1,200 hectares of banana plantation and
                           associated facilities including postharvest structures, energy and irrigation systems, warehouses,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and others. This proposed subproject is initially assessed as Category A and required by the
                           Philippine EIS System to undertake a comprehensive environmental and social impacts
                           assessment. Other potential investors expressed interest in opportunities for investment in the
                           Project Area. These potential subprojects are expected to have similar scale and scope of
                           operations involving land identification, preparation and planting activities, post-harvest
                           processing, in-estate infrastructure development such as access roads, on-farm irrigation and
                           drainage, and other facilities. Subprojects proposed by MSMEs and cooperatives are likely to be
                           classified as belonging to Category B and C as the scale and footprint of operations will likely to
                           be smaller and the anticipated environmental and social impacts are likely to be less adverse,
                           reversible and mitigated.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The environmental risks and potential impacts from farming and production systems, post-
                           production processing, and agribusiness support facilities were identified in the Environmental and
                           Social Scoping Report and include namely:
                           - Forest/land conversion and loss of natural habitats and biodiversity;
                           - Overfishing and loss of marine resources;
                           - Soil degradation and erosion;
                           - Lower water availability due to irrigation needs;
                           - Degraded water quality from application of fertilizers, pesticides and other agrochemicals and
                           processing facilities;
                           - Liquid and solid waste, and
                           - Health impacts from exposure to agrochemicals and other pollutants.

                          Identified social risks and potential impacts are:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          - Displacement of indigenous people;
                          - Infringement of tenure rights and involuntary resettlement given the need for land of large
                          agribusiness;
                          - Increase in land conflicts relating to land tenure;
                          - Insignificant economic improvement due to low wage rate and land rent;
                          - Less participation and benefit of women and other vulnerable people; and
                          - Further disempowerment of the poor if without an effective system for receiving and redressing
                          grievances from the communities.

                           Positive social impacts identified include among others:
                           - Generated jobs and increased economic opportunities in poor communities;
                           - Restored productivity of lands abandoned because of armed conflicts;
                           - Enhanced confidence in farming due to improved farming technology and sure market
                           introduced by large agri-business companies; and
                           - Added social services provided to host communities.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Alternatives will be assessed during sub-project review when deemed relevant to avoid and
                           minimize adverse impacts or optimize benefits and opportunities.



                                                                    Page 14 of 20
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP) is a government financial institution with the mandate of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           promoting countryside development. LBP supports the priority sector development particularly the
                           farmers and fisherfolk, micro, small and medium enterprises, and activities such as livelihood and
                           agribusiness development, agricultural and rural infrastructure, and other agricultural- and
                           environment-related projects. LBP adheres and actively promotes environmental protection and
                           sustainable development by incorporating effective environmental management practices in all its
                           agrarian and banking operations, services and decisions.

                          The LBP has been the designated financial intermediary of various projects by the World Bank
                          and JICA and has a good level of understanding of the environmental and social safeguards
                          requirements of the two institutions. For example, LBP capacity in implementing social and
                          environment safeguards was assessed to be satisfactory in the implementation of two World Bank-
                          supported projects ? the Water Districts Development Project (WDDP) and the Support for
                          Strategic Local Development Investment Project (SSLDIP). As the financial intermediary for
                          HARVEST, LBP will implement the project in accordance with the Loan Agreement and the
                          Operating Policy Guidelines for the project and ensure compliance with the environmental laws
                          and regulations of the Philippine Government and the environmental and social safeguards
                          policies of the WB and JICA using the guidelines of an Environmental and Social Management
                          Framework (ESMF). As such, LBP takes the lead in designing, developing, and administering the
                          ESMF and accompanying frameworks on resettlement and indigenous peoples, with the guidance
                          from the World Bank and JICA, including subproject screening, protocols and provisions for
                          monitoring and evaluation, audits, training and capacity building on safeguards targeting specific
                          stakeholders, and general oversight.

                          A Project Management Office (PMO) for HARVEST will be established within the LBP and will
                          include environmental and social specialists to guide and provide sub-borrowers with the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          necessary assistance in carrying out the environmental and social assessments and other
                          safeguards instruments and attaining compliance to the environmental and social safeguards
                          requirements of the ESMF, resettlement and indigenous peoples frameworks, and current national
                          and local policy requirements.

                          Currently, the Environmental Program and Management Department (EPMD) of LBP carries out
                          the environmental due diligence process. The EPMD undertakes environmental and social
                          assessments, performance monitoring and audits as well as environmental compliance of projects
                          based on identified and assessed environmental and social risks. Unlike its practice on
                          environmental safeguards, LBP develops and establishes social safeguards policy and guidelines
                          when required by partner donor agencies, such as the World Bank and the Japan International
                          Cooperation Agency. In preparation for HARVEST, LBP EPMD staff worked with safeguards
                          specialists of World Bank and JICA to conduct the Environmental and Social Scoping Report and
                          prepare an ESMF with a strong social safeguards focus. A Resettlement Policy Framework and an
                          Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework are embedded into the ESMF. EPMD staff have attended
                          safeguards training conducted by the bank, the latest of which was in September 2015 where two
                          EPMD staff joined a week-long training on Involuntary Resettlement offered by the Philippine
                          Learning Center on Environment and Social Sustainability, a joint training outfit of the Bank with
                          ADB, AusAID, JICA and the University of the Philippines College of Engineering.



                                                                    Page 15 of 20
                          Project training on the screening, identification and management of social safeguards and land
                          issues in a context of post-conflict project implementation will be provided to LBP to strengthen
                          its capacity to adequately take into account complex social impacts such as anticipated in some
Public Disclosure Copy




                          sub-project in HARVEST. Such training will be provided as long as needed in the first year of the
                          project and include the LBP Lending Centers who will undertake first level project screening and
                          directly supervise and monitor disbursements of the sub-projects. This will be undertaken as part
                          of the technical assistance under Component 2 of the Project and also utilizing current available
                          resources such as the Philippine Learning Center on Environment and Social Sustainability. A
                          mentoring program by the EPMD will also be initiated to enhance the understanding of
                          environmental and social risks and in undertaking the project screening process.

                           The Bank will provide a no objection to all screening of Category A and Category B sub-projects.
                           The Category will be reviewed and cleared by the RSA in the first years of implementation. The
                           RSA will clear all safeguards instruments of Category A sub-projects.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The Environmental and Social Scoping benefited from the series of consultations with
                           stakeholders. From August 2014 to July 2015, a total of 18 consultation sessions were held
                           attended by participants from different national government agencies, community representatives,
                           and civil society. Separate consultations were also held with other special interest groups such as
                           the indigenous peoples, contract growers, and private sector operating in the Project Area. Key
                           agencies consulted included the Bangsamoro Development Authority, Office of the Southern
                           Cultural Communities, DENR, BFAR, Cooperative Development Authority, Department of
                           Agriculture, Philippine Army, and the Department of Agrarian Reform. Among the community-
                           based organizations consulted were the farmers➢❨ cooperatives and contract growers. Separate
                           sessions with leaders of indigenous communities and non-government organizations supporting IP
                           concerns and rights in the region.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          During the consultations and through facilitated discussions, key environmental and social issues
                          related to agribusiness operations in the region were noted from the stakeholders. Among the
                          issues that were raised included land ownership and tenure, employment, fair business practices,
                          and benefit sharing with the communities. Other issues raised focused on the welfare of the
                          indigenous peoples and communities and how the benefits will trickle down to them. Discussions
                          with private sector provided insights into the good practices in environmental management and
                          corporate social responsibility programs. Specific issues were raised on instances of flooding of a
                          particular community in Maguindanao Province which the community attributed to the land
                          clearing operation of the private sector. There were also issues raised on the aerial application of
                          pesticides and pollution brought about by post-harvest and processing plant. In Zamboanga City,
                          where consultation with representatives from the ARMM islands of Sulu, Tawi-tawi, and Basilan
                          were held, issues raised were those on conflicts between commercial and municipal fishing
                          operations. The consultation sessions were documented and recorded. Specific concerns of
                          stakeholders were noted and included in the Environmental and Social Scoping Report and
                          addressed in this ESMF.

                          ?       Key informant interviews with officials of government line agencies in ARMM (i.e.,
                          Department of Agrarian Reform, Department of Environment and Natural Resources, Department
                          of Trade and Industry, Cooperative Development Authority, Department of Agriculture and
                          Fisheries, Regional Commission on the Bangsamoro Women, Office of Southern Cultural


                                                                    Page 16 of 20
                           Communities, and National Commission on Indigenous People)

                           ?       Focus group discussions (FGDs) with: (i) indigenous people, farmers➢❨ cooperatives and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           associations, academe, non-governmental organizations and local government officials in the
                           mainland and island provinces; and (ii) Mindanao Coalition of Development NGO Networks
                           (MINCODE), MASS-SPECC, and Federation of Co-operatives in Mindanao

                           ?         Field visit to agribusiness companies during the safeguard scoping mission, i.e., La
                           Frutera, Inc. and Agumil, Inc. in Buluan, Maguindanao; and Matling Corp. in Malabang, Lanao
                           del Sur, Permex Producer and Exporter Corporation in Zamboanga City, Unifrutti Corp. in
                           Bukidnon; and interviews with former and current contract growers of Dole South Cotabato,
                           Stanfilco in General Santos City and Pioneer Hi-Bred Phils. The visited agribusiness companies
                           represent medium and large-scale enterprises working under various tenurial arrangements
                           (nucleus plantation, contract-growing, cooperatives-managed, etc.) across the Project Area
                           provinces. Interviews with their senior managers and key personnel were undertaken during the
                           visits to gain insights on the unique challenges (e.g. land, security, support facilities and
                           infrastructures, availability of skilled personnel, local, regional and national government
                           regulatory practices, etc.) that they face in working in conflict areas pertinent to the location where
                           their firm is situated and how they were able to successfully address these challenges. A review of
                           the firms➢❨ environmental and social management practices was also an important agenda of the
                           field visit.

                           The project has multiple key stakeholders. These are the communities, farmer groups and
                           cooperatives, indigenous peoples and women, different associations including non-government
                           organizations and the academe, various government department and agencies, local government
                           units, etc. The LBP through its Lending Center has initiated the communication process during
                           project preparation and intends to continue during the operational phase.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The subprojects that will be supported under HARVEST will be required to undertake their own
                           specific public consultation following the requirements of the World Bank, JICA and the
                           Government. It is expected that more specific issues will be gathered during the consultation that
                           will feed into the subproject-specific environmental and social assessment instruments. LBP will
                           consult project-affected groups and other stakeholders on the subproject's environmental and
                           social aspects, and will take their views into account. LBP through the sub-borrower will initiate
                           these consultations as early as possible, and for meaningful consultations, provide relevant
                           material in a timely manner prior to consultation, in a form and language(s) understandable and
                           accessible to the groups being consulted.

                           The safeguard instruments, namely the ESMF including the RPF and the IPPF have been disclosed
                           in country and electronically at the World Bank?s Infoshop on August 2015. Updates of the
                           safeguard instruments will be re-disclosed both in-country and at the Infoshop. The World Bank
                           also require all other safeguards documents including subproject specific documents/mitigation
                           plans prepared subsequently to be disclosed at the LBP public library. The LBP sub-borrower
                           prepares these as separate and freestanding documents. All Category A projects? safeguards
                           documents will be disclosed in the WB Infoshop
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other



                                                                      Page 17 of 20
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                    13-Aug-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                 24-Aug-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                    18-Aug-2015
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                    13-Aug-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                 24-Aug-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                    18-Aug-2015
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                    13-Aug-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                 24-Aug-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                    18-Aug-2015
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                    NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                 NA
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats


                                                                     Page 18 of 20
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

                          3220 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                          6400 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          and constraints been carried out?



                                                                     Page 19 of 20
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                             Have dam safety plans been prepared?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                             Bank?
                             Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: William R. Sutton,Nataliya Mylenko
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                             Date: 14-Oct-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Shobha Shetty (PMGR)                          Date: 17-Oct-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                     Page 20 of 20
