The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
China-Guangdong Agricultural Pollution Control Project (P127775)




                        Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                    Restructuring Stage


         Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Oct-2016| Report No: ISDSR20445




                        Regional Vice President:    Victoria Kwakwa
                               Country Director:    Bert Hofman
                 Senior Global Practice Director:   Juergen Voegele
                    Practice Manager/Manager:       Nathan M. Belete
                             Task Team Leader:      Jiang Ru
           The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           China-Guangdong Agricultural Pollution Control Project (P127775)



I. BASIC INFORMATION

1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

Project ID                                                     Project Name
P127775                                                        China-Guangdong Agricultural Pollution Control Project
Task Team Leader(s)                                            Country
Jiang Ru                                                       China
Approval Date                                                  Environmental Category
27-Dec-2013                                                    Partial Assessment (B)
Managing Unit                                                  Is this a Repeater project?
GFA02


PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

Total Project Cost                                             Total Bank Financing
208200000.00                                                   213300000.00
Financing Gap
-5100000.00

Financing Source                                                                                         Amount
Counterpart Funding                                                                                108200000.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                       100000000.00
Trust Funds                                                                                          5100000.00
Total                                                                                             213,300,000.00


2. PROJECT INFORMATION

 Current Project Development Objective
 The proposed development objective is to reduce water pollutant releases from crop and livestock production in
 selected areas of Guangdong Province.




3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION
        The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        China-Guangdong Agricultural Pollution Control Project (P127775)



The proposed project is designed as a fully blended IBRD and GEF project. The total project cost is expected to be
US$213.3 million, of which US$100.0 million will be financed through an IBRD loan, US$5.1 million through a GEF grant,
and the remaining US$108.2 million from counterpart funds from the provincial government and project beneficiaries.
The GEF project concept was approved by the GEF Council in November 2011 as part of a Regional Program – Scaling Up
Partnership Investments for Sustainable Development of the Large Marine Ecosystems of East Asia and their Coasts (GEF
ID# 4635). The proposed project has four components: (1) Environmentally Friendly Crop Production; (2) Livestock
Waste Management; (3) Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), Capacity Building and Knowledge Management; and (4)
Project Management.

Component 1. Environmentally Friendly Crop Production. Four subcomponents of this component are: (a) soil nutrient
management; (b) integrated pest management (IPM); (c) conservation agriculture (CA) pilots; and (d) implementation
support to project farmers. Subcomponent (a) supports (i) development and dissemination of sound soil nutrient
management plans through soil nutrient sampling and analysis; and (ii) promotion, through the provision of subsidies, of
use of various technical measures to improve application and utilization efficiencies of fertilizers based on soil nutrient
management plans including application of formula fertilizers; application of slow release fertilizers; development of
fertigation facilities in vegetable and orchid farms; and adoption of three control techniques (control of fertilization,
crop establishment, and pests) on rice paddies. Subcomponent (b) will support (i) upgrading of pest monitoring and
early warning systems; and (ii) promotion of integrated pest management practices for key cropping systems through
the provision of subsidies for professional pest management services, and for the acquisition of pesticides and related
equipment for smallholders. Subcomponent (c) will support CA pilots to demonstrate the use of no-till or limited tillage
technologies and practices for typical cropping systems in Guangdong. Finally, Subcomponent (d) will provide (i) field
technical support to project beneficiaries, in particular smallholders, in crop production practices promoted by the
project; (ii) sub-financings to eligible Village Committees to finance part of their incremental operating costs for
organizing project beneficiaries in their villages carrying out in project activities; and (iii) sub-financings to project
beneficiaries to encourage them to go through the certification process for Safe Agricultural Products or Green
Agricultural Products.

Component 2. Livestock Waste Management (LWM). This Component provides sub-financing to beneficiary farms to
partially finance (a) the construction and operation of livestock waste management facilities to promote the proper
collection and treatment of pig manure; and (b) the incremental costs incurred in the construction of pilot high-rise pig
production facilities.

Component 3. Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), Capacity Building and Knowledge Management (KM). Component 3
will have three subcomponents: (a) M&E; (b) Capacity Building; and (c) KM. Subcomponent (a) will support monitoring
and evaluation of project activities, including of monitoring of environmental and social safeguards, and measuring
impacts of various Project activities. Subcomponent (b) will finance (i) acquisition of monitoring equipment and
monitoring vehicles to enhance the capacity of Guangdong Department of Agriculture (DOA) to monitor agricultural
pollution; (ii) carrying out of technical and policy studies to explore policy and technical measures to reduce, control and
monitor agricultural pollution in Guangdong Province; (iii) provision of training to project stakeholders to improve their
technical capacity to properly implement project activities; and (iv) project stakeholders’ attendance in domestic and
international learning events on agricultural pollution control. Subcomponent (c) will support knowledge management
activities to summarize and disseminate lessons and experiences derived from project implementation.

Component 4. Project Management. This component will support activities to strengthen the institutional capacity of
the PMO and the PMUs for the implementation of the Project, including the provision of Incremental Operating Costs.
        The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        China-Guangdong Agricultural Pollution Control Project (P127775)



4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
   KNOWN)
Component 1 activities will be carried out at Huiyang District, Huicheng District and Boluo County of Huizhou
Municipality and Engping City, Kaiping City and Taishan City of Jiangmen Municipality. Component 2 activities
will be carried out in 300 pig farms province-wide. At appraisal, 17 farms from Huizhou, Jiangmen and
Heyuan Municipalities are identified. After the proposed restructuring, implementation of Component 1
activities will be expanded to 22 new counties: Longchuan and Zijin of Heyuan Municipality; Jiaoling,
Xingning, Dapu, Pingyuan, and Wuhua of Meizhou Municipality; Haifeng and Lufeng of Shanwei Municipality;
Gaozhou, Huazhou and Xinyi of Maoming Municipality; Deqing of Zhaoqing Municipality; Yangshan, Qingxin
and Lianshan of Qingyuan Municipality; Leizhou and Lianjiang of Zhanjiang Municipality; Luoding, Xinxing,
and Yu'nan of Yunfu Municipality.



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


 Name                                                         Unit
 Songling Yao                                                 GSU02
 Yiren Feng                                                   GEN2A


6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED

Safeguard Policies                       Triggered             Explanation

                                                              The project is designed to reduce agricultural pollution
                                                              and improve the environment of the project areas. As
                                                              such, its successful implementation will generate
                                                              positive environmental benefits. Specifically, proposed
                                                              investments under Component 1 will reduce non-point
                                                              pollution from crop production through adoption of
                                                              environmental friendly crop production technologies
                                                              and practices. And the proposed activities under
Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP
                                         Yes                  Component 2 will improve rural environmental
4.01)
                                                              conditions through financing of on-farm small size pig
                                                              waste management facilities (mainly based on bio-
                                                              digestion technologies) to properly collect and treat pig
                                                              wastes. Therefore, OP 4.01 is triggered.

                                                              The Project is categorized as a “Category B? project
                                                              based on types, locations, sensitivity and scales of the
                                                              proposed activities as well as the nature and
        The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        China-Guangdong Agricultural Pollution Control Project (P127775)



                                                              magnitude of positive and negative environmental
                                                              impacts associated with these project activities. For
                                                              both Components 1 and 2, no sensitive locations and
                                                              environmental issues are expected. The project’s
                                                              adverse environmental impacts related to the
                                                              construction of small-scale biogas facilities will be
                                                              short-term, temporary and site specific. With
                                                              mitigation measures implemented, such adverse
                                                              impacts will be avoided, eliminated entirely or
                                                              mitigated to an acceptable level.

                                                              EA instrument: A EMP is prepared with the following
                                                              EA instruments:
                                                              For Component 1
                                                              - ECOP (Environmental Codes of Practice) as
                                                              standardized mitigation measures for each type of
                                                              investments activities under Component 1;

                                                              For Component 2,
                                                              - Environmental Management Framework (EMF)
                                                              prepared for the pig farms to be identified during
                                                              project implementation;
                                                              - A set of design standards for livestock waste
                                                              management facilities;
                                                              - A LWM plan (LWMP) for each type of LWM facilities;
                                                              - Supervision/monitoring programs.

                                                              All EMP activities are fully budgeted under the project.

                                                              For the proposed restructuring, the project will expand
                                                              the scope of environmentally friendly crop production
                                                              activities under Component 1 from the original six
                                                              counties to 28 counties without any change to the
                                                              originally approved activities. The environmental
                                                              impacts and mitigation measures remains the same as
                                                              included in the ECOP of the EMP approved by the WB.
                                                              As the new project counties will include two new crops
                                                              (tangerine and grapefruit), the PMP has been updated
                                                              accordingly to address the pesticides issues related to
                                                              the two crops (see OP4.09 for details).

                                                              The policy is not triggered as the project will not
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)          No
                                                              involve any sensitive locations.
        The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        China-Guangdong Agricultural Pollution Control Project (P127775)




                                                              The policy is not triggered as the project doesn't
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                   No
                                                              involve forests resources.

                                                              This policy is triggered as Component 1 will promote
                                                              IPM practices, including the use of biological and low
                                                              toxicity, low residual pesticides and safe pesticide
                                                              application equipment.

                                                              A Pest Management Plan (PMP) has been prepared to
                                                              describe the range of pest and disease control and
                                                              management methods with an emphasis on IPM
                                                              approaches and the scope of the recommended
                                                              applications under various conditions. The PMP also
                                                              provides a list of pesticides and herbicides that may be
                                                              used under the project in compliance with World
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                Yes
                                                              Health Organization's recommended categories. The
                                                              PMP includes detailed provisions on training of project
                                                              stakeholders       and     a    monitoring      program.
                                                              Implementation of the training and monitoring
                                                              programs is budgeted in the project cost.

                                                              The proposed restructuring will include new counties
                                                              with two new crops (tangerine and grapefruit). The
                                                              originally approved PMP has been updated to cover
                                                              pest management activities, mitigation measures, the
                                                              monitoring plan, the training, the dissemination
                                                              activities, and budgets related to the two new crops.
                                                              This policy is not triggered as Component 1 will support
                                                              activities on existing agricultural lands while
                                                              Component 2 will support construction of small size
                                                              biogas facilities at existing commercial pig farms that
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP                          have licenses and permits issued by EPBs and other
                                         No
4.11)                                                         relevant government agencies.

                                                              Chance finds during construction may occur, and
                                                              relevant clauses will be included in all bidding
                                                              documents and construction contracts.
                                                              At appraisal, this policy was not triggered as the Task
                                                              Team’s screening and a social assessment conducted
                                                              by the Guangdong Social Science Academy concluded
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)        Yes
                                                              that there was no minority village found or collectively
                                                              attached to the original project areas.
        The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        China-Guangdong Agricultural Pollution Control Project (P127775)



                                                              At the proposed restructuring, it is confirmed that one
                                                              of the 22 new counties - Lianshan County - is an ethnic
                                                              minority autonomous county. As such, the
                                                              restructuring triggers OP 4.10, indigenous People. An
                                                              ethnic minority development framework (EMDF) has
                                                              been prepared accordingly.
                                                              It is confirmed that project activities in the first year of
                                                              implementation will not involve any land acquisition or
                                                              resettlement issues. However, physical construction
                                                              activities under Component 1 may involve small-scale
                                                              land acquisition issues and/or candidate pig farms
                                                              under Component 2 may have unresolved land issues
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)   Yes                 even though all investment activities will be carried out
                                                              within the farms. Therefore, this policy is triggered.

                                                              A RPF was prepared to address any land related issues
                                                              under the project. During implementation, specific
                                                              Resettlement Plans (RPs) in line with the RPF will be
                                                              prepared if needed during the project implementation.
                                                              The policy is not triggered as the project does not
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)             No                  finance construction or rehabilitation of any dams as
                                                              defined under this policy.

Projects on International Waterways                           The policy is not triggered as the project does not
                                          No
(OP) (BP 7.50)                                                involve trans-boundary rivers.


                                                              The policy is not triggered as the project does not
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60) No
                                                              involve any disputed areas.



 II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A. SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES

 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
   potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
   Component 1 supports activities to reduce the use, improve the utilization, and reduce the releases of excessive
   pesticides and nutrients from croplands. Component 2 supports the construction of livestock waste management
   facilities at existing commercial pig farms licensed/permitted by local environmental and other relevant government
   agencies. Therefore, for both components, no sensitive locations and environmental issues are expected.

   Some negative and short-term construction and long-term operational impacts may result from project
   implementation. Construction of project financed facilities will lead to limited negative impacts on soil erosion,
       The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       China-Guangdong Agricultural Pollution Control Project (P127775)



  ambient air, water, acoustic environments, solid wastes etc. These negative impacts will be small in size, short-term,
  temporary and site-specific. During the operation phase of these facilities, there will be long term impacts such as
  wastewater discharge, livestock wastes disposal, operation and maintenance of biogas facilities. Such impacts will be
  small in scale and be mitigated fully with proper operation and maintenance of project financed livestock waste
  management facilities.

  Project implementation was initiated in 2014 with six counties included for Component 1 activities, including
  Huicheng, Huiyang, Boluo counties of Huizhou City, and Taishan, Kaiping, Enping counties of Jiangmen City. Overall
  safeguard compliance has been Satisfactory throughout the implementation period. No RAP has been prepared as
  project implementation so far has not involved any land acquisition activities.

  Based on the actual implementation progress and financing demands for different project activities, the proposed
  restructuring would entail (a) an expansion of project areas of Component 1 from 6 counties to a total of 28 counties
  in Guangdong; (b) adjustments of funding allocations among project components; (c) an extension the project closing
  date by 18 months from December 31, 2019 to June 30, 2021; and (d) adjustments to target values of selected
  intermediate results indicators. As one of the new counties - Lianshan - is a designated Ethnic Minority Autonomous
  County, OP4.10 is triggered. An EMDF has been prepared. EMDP will be prepared based on the EMDF for qualified
  project villages in the county. At the time of this restructuring, no such villages have been identified for planned
  activities in CY 2017.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  By reducing pollution discharges from project sites, it is expected that project interventions in the long term will
  generate significant and positive environmental benefits. The EA estimated that the pollutants discharged by livestock
  farms will be reduced significantly, with the completion of construction and operation of the project, the total
  pollutants reduction from livestock farms will be 45,000 tons COD, 5,000 tons ammonia, 14,000 tons BOD, and 240
  tons total phosphorus annually. These targets remain unchanged after the proposed restructuring.

3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  As a pollution control project, the selection of technical approaches for both Components 1 and 2 activities has fully
  considered all available technical options/alternatives.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  Environment:

  At appraisal, mitigation measures identified in the EMP - including ECOPs for crop activities under Component 1 and
  EMF and Livestock Waste Management Plan for under Component 2 - have been fully incorporated into project design
  and the PIM to address potential negative impacts associated with project financed facilities. Farm specific EMPs were
  prepared for the 17 farms confirmed for the first year of project financing. In addition, a PMP was prepared to guide
  pest management activities under Component 1 of the project with recommended IPM based pest management
  methods, allowed pesticides, and recommended application approaches. Implementation of the EMP and PMP was
  budgeted in the project cost.

  Since project launching in 2014, environmental and PMP monitoring data have been collected and analyzed by
  qualified monitoring institutions per the EMP and PMP requirements. Bank supervision has confirmed that the
  implementation of EMP and PMP is in compliance with the project's environmental safeguard requirements.
       The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       China-Guangdong Agricultural Pollution Control Project (P127775)




 At the proposed restructuring, two new crops, tangerine and grapefruit, will be included in the new project areas. The
 PMP has been updated accordingly to guide pest management practices for the two new crops in the new project
 areas.

 Social
 At appraisal, a RPF was prepared to address possible land issues under this project with a plan that abbreviated RPs
 will be prepared in line with the RPF if land issue is identified during implementation. In addition, a SA identified
 concerns of project beneficiaries. Results of the SA were fully incorporated into project design. Specific gender
 indicators are included in the Results Framework and will be closely monitored under Component 3. An independent
 agency will perform social monitoring of project implementation.

 Project implementation so far has not had any land acquisition activities. The external social monitor and Bank
 supervision have confirmed that social safeguards requirements are in compliance.

 At this restructuring, OP 4.10 is triggered as one of the new project countries - Lianshan - is an Ethnic Minority
 Autonomous County with mainly Zhuang and Yao Minorities. As project site of the county is not finalized, an EMDF
 was developed in accordance with applicable state and local laws and regulations, and the Bank’s Operational Policy
 OP4.10. As needed, site specific EMDP will be prepared based on EMDF. The Bank will clear EMDP and supervise
 EMDP implementation.




5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
 an emphasis on potentially affected people.
 During the preparation of EMP, SA and RPF, public consultations including expert consultations, questionnaires,
 meetings and interviews, have been conducted with the different stakeholders of the proposed project. This included
 persons of different gender, socioeconomic and educational backgrounds, groups, and occupations. Totally about
 1,153 people have been consulted in the EMP process; and a total of 1,239 farmer households, 154 firms, from 190
 villages in 20 townships of 6 counties participated in the social consultation process. The project information was
 disclosed at project towns/villages, communities, and government websites. The majority of those consulted
 expressed strong support for the project. The EMP/SA/RPF incorporated countermeasures to address the concerns of
 the people consulted. Such countermeasures are also fully incorporated into the project design.

 In accordance with the Bank’s information disclosure policy, on January 15, 2013 the EMP and PMP were made
 available in the project areas and on the websites of the local government agencies, and are accessible at PMO and
 PMUs. RPF was disclosed in country on DOA’s project website on February 22, 2013. The EMP, PMP, SA and RPF were
 disclosed at the World Bank InfoShop on February 22, 2013. After project appraisal, the final EMP, PMP, SA and RPF
 were disclosed locally and in InfoShop.

 For the proposed restructuring, the revised PMP was disclosed on November 28, 2016 on the project website and
 physically in the new project counties. The EMDF was disclosed on November 10, 2016 on the project website and
 physically in the concerned Lianshan County.
           The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           China-Guangdong Agricultural Pollution Control Project (P127775)




 B. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS


Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other


Date of receipt by the Bank                                    Date of submission to Infoshop
21-Jan-2013                                                    22-Feb-2013
For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


“In country? Disclosure
Country                                                        Date of Disclosure
China                                                          15-Jan-2013
Comments




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                    Date of submission to Infoshop
16-Jan-2013                                                    22-Feb-2013
“In country? Disclosure
 Country                                                         Date of Disclosure
 China                                                           22-Feb-2013
 Comments




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                    Date of submission to Infoshop
08-Dec-2016                                                    05-Feb-2017
“In country? Disclosure
Country                                                        Date of Disclosure
           The World Bank                                                                       RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           China-Guangdong Agricultural Pollution Control Project (P127775)



China                                                          10-Nov-2016
Comments
Virtually on the project website and physically in the concerned Lianshan county.


Pest Management Plan

Date of receipt by the Bank                                    Date of submission to Infoshop
21-Jan-2013                                                    22-Feb-2013
“In country? Disclosure
 Country                                                        Date of Disclosure
 China                                                          15-Jan-2013
 Comments
 The updated PMP was received by the Bank on November 22, 2016, locally disclosed on November 28, 2016, and
 submitted to InfoShop on February 5, 2017.


C. COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL


OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment

Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                 Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review and
                                                                                                  Yes
approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                Yes



OP 4.09 - Pest Management

Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                                        Yes

Is a separate PMP required?                                                                       Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or PM? Are
PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the project team include a              Yes
Pest Management Specialist?


OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
         The World Bank                                                                     RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         China-Guangdong Agricultural Pollution Control Project (P127775)



Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate) been
                                                                                              Yes
prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager review
                                                                                              Yes
the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
                                                                                              Yes
approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Practice Manager?


OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework (as
                                                                                              Yes
appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager review
                                                                                              Yes
the plan?




The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information

Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?            Yes
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and
language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local          Yes
NGOs?


All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared
                                                                                              Yes
for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?            Yes
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of
                                                                                              Yes
safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and
                                                                                              Yes
the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?


 III. APPROVALS


                                            Jiang Ru
  Task Team Leader(s)
                                            Wendao Cao
      The World Bank                                                                   RESTRUCTURING ISDS
      China-Guangdong Agricultural Pollution Control Project (P127775)



Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager                Nathan M. Belete                 14-Mar-2017
