                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC15568

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Oct-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Jul-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                             Project ID:      P153548
                            Project Name:       Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction and Risk Reduction Project (P153548)
                            Task Team           Madhu Raghunath
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           03-Dec-2015                       Estimated        10-Mar-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GSU08                             Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Other social services (20%), General education sector (20%), Rural and Inter-
                                                Urban Roads and Highways (20%), Sanitation (20%), Water supply (20%)
                            Theme(s):           Natural disaster management (60%), City-wide Infrastructure and Service
                                                Delivery (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (10%), Oth er environment
                                                and natural resources management (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    327.50                       Total Bank Financing:         300.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              Borrower                                                                        27.50
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                          300.00
                              Total                                                                          327.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed objective is to build disaster resilient infrastructure and strengthen risk reduction and
                           emergency preparedness.
                           C. Project Description
                         a.      Overview

                         On April 20, 2013, almost five years after the 2008 Great Wenchuan Earthquake, the magnitude 7.0
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Lushan earthquake struck China¡¯s Sichuan province, with its epicenter in the Lushan County in the
                         Ya¡¯an Municipality. Thirty-two counties (cities, districts) in Ya¡¯an, Chengdu, Leshan, Meishan,
                         Ganzi, Liangshan, Deyang of Sichuan Province were impacted, with a total 2.184 million people
                         affected. Compared to the Wenchuan earthquake, while the scale of the Lushan earthquake was
                         smaller, the 2013 earthquake caused similar type of damage, disruptions to infrastructure and impact
                         on the province¡¯s population, including collapsed and severely damaged infrastructure, public
                         service facilities and municipal services. Multiple landslides and damages damaged key roads.
                         Frequent aftershocks of high magnitude caused further damages.

                         Efforts to rescue people from collapsed buildings in the affected region were hindered as more
                         remote communities in the mountains were cut off due to blocked roads and collapsed bridges.
                         Similar to the Wenchuan earthquake, there were many landslides and rockslides in the Longmen
                         Mountains, where Ya'an is located. During the emergency and relief period, traffic had to be
                         regulated by restricting most roads to one-way traffic which resulted in long round-trips for
                         emergency responders and rescue workers, delaying provision of emergency help. It was reported
                         that parts of Baoxing County, Ya'an, were isolated by landslides and rescue teams were delayed for
                         33 hours. Water service, electrical power, and telecommunications were interrupted by the Lushan
                         earthquake. More than one month after the disaster, their restoration was still in progress. The
                         underground water system was severely damaged and temporary above-ground pipes had to be laid
                         to provide emergency water service.

                         The proposed project targets Qionglai City (Chengdu Municipality) and Ya¡¯an Municipality. These
                         areas are exposed not only to earthquake hazard but also other geological hazards such as landslide
                         and slope instability, as well as flooding. Being located between Chengdu Plain and Qinghai-Tibet
                         Plateau, also on an intersection where three seismic fault zones (Longmen Mountain, Xianshui River,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Anning River) meet, the area is covered with high and steep mountains, deep valleys and fragmented
                         rock formations. Located 15km from the epicenter of the Lushan earthquake, Qionglai City has a
                         population of 660,000. Qionglai City covers an area of 1,384 sq. km with jurisdiction of 24 towns, 6
                         of which were severely affected by the earthquake. The road network in Qionglai¡¯s western regions
                         suffered serious damage (350 km of rural roads), resulting in economic losses of approximately US
                         $48.4 million. Landslides crippled traffic and severely hampered the emergency response after the
                         disaster. The Ya¡¯an Municipality is a prefecture-level city in the western part of Sichuan province,
                         with an area of 15,300 sq. km. and population of 1.57 million (1.52 million of whom were affected
                         by the Lushan earthquake). There were 176 fatalities and 12,136 injured as a result of the 2013
                         earthquake. Urban and rural infrastructure was significantly damaged by the earthquake. This
                         vulnerability demonstrates the need for the infrastructure investments under this project to be
                         designed in consideration of the prevalent hazards to which the project localities are exposed to.

                         In order to improve the resilience of critical urban and rural infrastructure and design risk reduction
                         measures, it is crucial to conduct a comprehensive, multi-hazard assessment of the risk to
                         infrastructure in the project areas. This is proposed as a project component, which is pending
                         confirmation by the Sichuan authorities. Developing a risk reduction investment plan and feasibility
                         studies for the selected sectors and facilities, this component would also serve to inform and
                         prioritize future risk reduction investments in the project municipalities.
                         b. Proposed Components
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project components are as follows:

                         Component 1. Upgrading and risk reduction of rural roads.

                         This component will finance upgrading and rehabilitation of Rural Roads in the Chengdu and Ya¡¯an
                         Municipalities.

                         Component 2. Upgrading of Priority Urban Infrastructure and Strengthening the Emergency
                         Preparedness.

                         This component will finance critical urban infrastructure including evacuation areas, emergency
                         shelter, flood protection, water treatment plant and urban roads with associated water supply, storm
                         water and sewerage pipelines .

                         Component 3. Technical Assistance for Strengthening of Disaster Management and Preparedness.

                         This component will pilot the development of integrated multi-hazard (seismic, flood, landslide) risk
                         information systems to support early warning, disaster emergency contingency planning, and risk
                         based asset management and urban infrastructure planning.

                         Component 4. Project management and capacity building.

                         The component will finance training, capacity building, survey and design, and construction
                         supervision costs of sub-projects
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Since 2008, strong earthquakes in Sichuan have diminished the stability of slopes throughout the
                         Longmen Mountains, which increases the province¡¯s exposure to secondary geological disasters
                         like landslides. Similarly, the integrity of infrastructure that was not visibly damaged during the
                         Wenchuan and Lushan earthquakes may have been compromised by the strong ground motions
                         associated with these events. The municipalities¡¯ exposure to flood hazard also needs to be
                         considered in the technical design of the proposed investments. In order to improve the resilience of
                         critical urban and rural infrastructure and design risk reduction measures, it is crucial to conduct a
                         comprehensive, multi-hazard assessment of the risk to infrastructure in the project areas. This is
                         proposed as a project component, which is pending confirmation by the Sichuan authorities.
                         Developing a risk reduction investment plan and feasibility studies for the selected sectors and
                         facilities, this component would also serve to inform and prioritize future risk reduction investments
                         in the project municipalities.

                         c.      Selection Criteria

                         These proposed investments will be finalized according to the following selection criteria, as
                         discussed and agreed with Sichuan authorities: i) all proposed investments should form an integral
                         part of the Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction Master Plan, the Project of Overall Planning and
                         Implementation Covering Reconstruction after Lushan Earthquake (Sichuan Development and
                         Reform Commission Investment No. 315), and relevant sectoral plans; ii) all infrastructure
                         investments should enhance urban infrastructure service quality and comply with relevant local urban
                         development plans; iii) investments should address both reconstruction needs (¡°building back better¡
                         ±) and long-term socio-economic development, and iv) investments should contribute to risk
Public Disclosure Copy




                         reduction in the project municipalities as well as build local capacity for long-term disaster risk
                         management.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project areas are located in western Sichuan Province, with the urban infrastructure component
                         to be implemented in 5 counties and 2districts of the Ya¡¯an Municipality, and the rural road
                         component to be implemented in Qionglai City (Chengdu Municipality) andtwo counties (Tianquan
                         and Yingjing) of Ya¡¯an. Qionglai City is located in the west of Chengdu Plain and borders Ya¡¯an
                         to the southwest. While Qionglai's topography transitions from plain to mountains from east to west,
                         Ya¡¯an is mostly mountainous.

                         The project area experiences strong monsoonal influences, with rainfall heavily concentrated in the
                         summer, classified as a humid subtropical climate with long, hot, humid summers and short, mild to
                         cool, dry and cloudy winters. Water resources are abundant. Annual average temperatures range from
                         14.1~17.9 degrees Celsius, while annual average precipitation is about 1,800mm.

                         The project area has a long history of human development, with agricultural production as the
                         predominant economic activity. The population is concentrated in small towns that are mostly
                         located in valleys or small plains in the mountainous area. Given its natural conditions, the project
                         areas are in good ecological condition, with extensive and robust surface vegetation. For example,
                         Ya¡¯an has a surface vegetation of 63%. However, the project localities are exposed not only to
                         earthquake hazard, but also other geological hazards such as landslide and slope instability, as well
                         as flooding.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                         A provincial-municipal-county/district project management hierarchy is in place. At the provincial
                         level, there are two Project Management Offices (PMOs). The rural road component will be managed
                         by the Sichuan Provincial Highway Administration Bureau (SPHAB). SPHAB has no World Bank
                         project experience but has been implementing a large ADB-financed road project to rehabilitate and
                         reconstruct 368 high-priority earthquake damaged roads in the nineteen worst-affected counties of
                         Sichuan Province after the 2008 Wenchuan earthquake (Emergency Assistance for Wenchuan
                         Earthquake Reconstruction Project). The project was classified as Environmental Category B. For the
                         urban infrastructure components, Sichuan Urban PMO has extensive experience and is currently
                         managing two World Bank projects, including the Wenchuan Earthquake Reconstruction Project.

                         At country/district level, capacity for implementing safeguards policies is limited. Two counties have
                         prior World Bank project experience from having been involved in the Wenchuan Earthquake
                         Reconstruction Project implementation since 2009. The Sichuan Urban PMO provided safeguards
                         training in March 2015 to county/district staff, and worked together with the PMO on project
                         safeguards screening tables, demonstrating progress on safeguards capacity-building efforts.

                         Both provincial level PMOs have assigned dedicated safeguards staff for project preparation.
                         Similarly, each county/district has assigned dedicated safeguards staff. Qualified Environmental
                         Assessment and RAP consultants will be engaged to prepare safeguards instruments in accordance
                         with the World Bank¡¯s policies and domestic regulations
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Meixiang Zhou (GSURR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Ning Yang (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies         Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment   Yes         The project is anticipated to have environmental and
                           OP/BP 4.01                             social impacts mainly during construction. Based on
                                                                  the initial screening and scoping, the potential
                                                                  environmental and social impacts are of limited scale
                                                                  and intensity, and can be effectively controlled
                                                                  through proper design and construction management.
                                                                  Thus, the project is classified as Environmental
                                                                  Category B.

                                                                  Environmental screening: The rural road component
                                                                  will include improvement of 4 low-volume roads
                                                                  with total length of 47.7 km (two county roads and
                                                                  two village roads). The existing road widths
                                                                  (3.5-5.5m) will be expanded by 1-3m. These roads
                                                                  serve as critical and, in some cases, are the only
                                                                  access roads for remote villages. Based on the
                                                                  information provided by the counterparts as well as
                                                                  field observations, the main environmental issues are
                                                                  associated with construction activities, including
                                                                  clearing of vegetation and soil erosion associated
                                                                  with excavation and filling operations, temporary
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                  traffic blockage, and pollution to small rivers and
                                                                  creeks. Although the number of households along the
                                                                  roads that were visited does not appear to be high, at
                                                                  certain sections, construction activities may cause
                                                                  disturbance to the population, such as noise, dust and
                                                                  safety issues to nearby households if not well
                                                                  controlled. Road alignments should be carefully
                                                                  planned to minimize cutting, filling and disposal of
                                                                  material. In addition, adequate drainage is critical to
                                                                  minimize environmental impact and flooding during
                                                                  road operation, and warrants particular attention
                                                                  during design and construction.

                                                                  The urban infrastructure component will be
                                                                  implemented in built-up or suburban areas of several
                                                                  towns in 7 counties/districts in the Ya¡¯an
                                                                  Municipality, including roads, small sized bridges,
                                                                  embankment, runoff channel, emergency shelters and
                                                                  one water supply plant. Specific activities may
                         include: 1) urban roads including subsurface water
                         supply, drainage and wastewater networks and two
                         small-sized bridges; 2) subsurface networks under
Public Disclosure Copy




                         existing roads that do not currently have such
                         networks; 3) flood/drainage channel improvement
                         and rehabilitation; 4) emergency evacuation areas
                         with emergency facilities; and 5) a new 4000 t/d
                         water treatment plant (WTP) in the Baoxing county.
                         Based on field observations, the proposed activities
                         are of limited scale; the main environmental issues
                         may include social disturbance to nearby
                         communities, such as noise, dust, traffic blockage,
                         and safety issues; water pollution, management of
                         construction wastes and sediments as result of earth
                         works and flood/drainage channel rehabilitation. In
                         comparison, the new WTP in Baoxing may have
                         more significant impacts. The task team was
                         informed that the WTP¡¯s raw water will come from
                         creeks and springs in the mountainous area, where
                         such water resources are abundant. The trunk mains
                         from the WTP to distribution networks is included in
                         the project. No major facilities, such as dams, will be
                         needed.

                         Overall, the project environmental impacts and risks
                         are rated as moderate. Following domestic
                         regulations, environment impact assessment should
                         be carried out given the diversity of types and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         locations of the project activities. The recommended
                         Environmental Assessment (EA) instruments include
                         an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and an
                         Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for
                         component 1 and component 2 respectively. For each
                         specific type of activity, the EMPs should be
                         organized to include specific environmental codes of
                         practices to be followed by contractors during
                         construction. In addition, subproject selection criteria
                         and design shall take environmental considerations
                         into account. These may include environmental
                         sensitivity of proposed activities, proper
                         determination of scale (to minimize land taking and
                         ecological footprints to the extent possible), good
                         environmental design such as robust road drainage in
                         hilly areas and minimization of material borrowing
                         and spoil disposal. The project EA will also take into
                         account additional environmental enhancement
                         activities to the extent possible, including (a)
                                                             Ensuring the proper mix of structural and non-
                                                             structural measures for slope stabilization which has
                                                             been proven to be more cost effective than structural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             or vegetative measures by themselves. (b)Ensure the
                                                             use of native vegetation. TA component should
                                                             include proper assistance in these stabilization
                                                             techniques. (c) Ensuring strict environmental
                                                             supervision during construction to guarantee
                                                             adherence to codes of practice; and (d) Ensure proper
                                                             communications for communities affected by
                                                             construction activities regarding work schedules and
                                                             disruption of services.

                                                             The Social Assessment (SA) will be a separate report
                                                             prepared by social assessment consultant; and its key
                                                             findings and recommendations will be incorporated
                                                             into the EIAs.

                                                             Information disclosure and public consultation will
                                                             be carried out during EA preparation, through
                                                             questionnaire survey, group meetings and interviews.
                                                             Public opinions should be incorporated into project
                                                             technical design and EA. The full draft EA should be
                                                             disclosed locally prior to project appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD   Based on the initial screening, there are no critical
                                                             habitats or environmentally sensitive areas such as
                                                             natural reserves or forest parks that will be affected
                                                             by the project. Most activities will take place in built-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             up or suburban areas. Construction of rural roads will
                                                             result in a limited amount of vegetation clearing. A
                                                             small scale water treatment plant will use surface
                                                             water or springs as raw water sources, which are
                                                             abundant in the hilly areas and will not impact water
                                                             ecology substantially. Overall the project is not
                                                             anticipated to result in significant loss, conversion or
                                                             degradation of natural habitats. Further survey and
                                                             assessment will be conducted during project
                                                             preparation to determine whether the policy will be
                                                             triggered. The EIAs will closely look into the
                                                             potential natural habitat issues, and as needed, carry
                                                             out alternative analysis, develop avoid/mitigate/
                                                             offset hierarchy to mitigate any impacts on natural
                                                             habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No    The project will not affect any forests. The policy is
                                                             not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No    The project will not result in use or procurement of
                                                             pesticides. The policy is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources    TBD   Initial survey shows that there are no significant
                         OP/BP 4.11                           cultural relics or other types of PCRs in the project
                                                              area of influence. Further survey and assessment will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              be conducted during project preparation. The EIAs
                                                              will closely look into the physical cultural relics
                                                              issue through survey and consultation following the
                                                              policy requirements during the project preparation,
                                                              which will provide rationale for the policy triggering.
                                                              Chance-find procedures will be included in the
                                                              EMPs.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No    The social screening at the project concept stage
                         4.10                                 suggests that there is no indigenous community or
                                                              people within the proposed project sites. Most of the
                                                              project activities and works are in built-up and
                                                              suburban areas. Even the rural roads selected for this
                                                              project are existing roads identified for
                                                              reconstruction, upgrading, or expansion which will
                                                              be only widened by 1-3 meters of existing road
                                                              where required. The proposed rural roads or urban
                                                              infrastructure under the project do not pass any
                                                              ethnic community according to information
                                                              available. A full Social Assessment (SA) will be
                                                              conducted to determine in more details the social
                                                              aspects of the project and adequately address social
                                                              impacts and risks in relation to poverty, gender
                                                              issues, and involuntary resettlement. The Social
                                                              Assessment will include a more detailed screening
                                                              for the presence of national minorities covered by OP
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              4.10. Citizen engagement will be promoted through
                                                              public consultation and relevant social action plan.
                                                              Based on the results of the full SA, the team will
                                                              come to a conclusion on whether or not the Bank OP/
                                                              BP 4.10 policy is triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   The proposed project will support the construction of
                         BP 4.12                              civil works under component 1 and 2. By the PCN
                                                              stage, the project is estimated to require for
                                                              Acquisition of 101.5 mu (7 ha) land and demolition
                                                              of 7590 square meters houses (including 5590 square
                                                              meters of the state-owned buildings, and 2000 square
                                                              meters affecting 20 farm households). The project
                                                              construction include 1) urban roads possibly causing
                                                              limited house demolition in new construction of
                                                              facilities for subsurface water supply, drainage and
                                                              wastewater networks; 2) subsurface networks under
                                                              existing roads that do not currently have such
                                                              networks; 3) flood/drainage channel improvement
                                                              and rehabilitation, two small bridges; 4) emergency
                         evacuation areas with emergency shelters; and 5) a
                         new 4000 t/d water treatment plant in the Baoxing
                         county. The proposed limited scale and demands for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         land acquisition and resettlement will be
                         manageable. The negative impacts will be mitigated.
                         The infrastructure to be supported under this project
                         consist of 47.709 km of roads which include
                         expansion of existing roads, 1.12km of embankment,
                         3.3km of floodway, 1 water supply plant, and 11
                         emergency shelters. The final figures of the above
                         land and resettlement demands will be further
                         confirmed during project preparation. In the
                         meantime, the project will also maximize the positive
                         social impacts in poverty reduction, risk reduction
                         and inclusive development.

                         Suggested social safeguards instruments include a
                         Social Assessment (SA) and a Resettlement Action
                         Plan (RAP) for each project county or district. An
                         overall SA report and a consolidated RAP combining
                         respective county/district RAPs will be prepared
                         separately under the implementation of two
                         provincial PMOs including the PMO of SPHAB for
                         their respective project part. Both PMOs will hire an
                         experienced professional consulting team to address
                         issues of land acquisition, compensation and
                         livelihood restoration, resettlement for project-
                         affected people and communities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Furthermore, subproject selection criteria and design
                         shall take social impacts and risks into consideration
                         to avoid or minimize negative social impacts of the
                         project. Where possible and applicable, these may
                         include (i) land demands and provision; (ii) risk-
                         informed future development needs and trends of
                         local social economic development; and (iii)
                         providing inclusive development opportunities for
                         the bottom 40% of income groups (poor areas and
                         population, including men and women) by targeting
                         project works and services to poor areas and
                         communities, engaging local citizens..

                         The provincial PMOs will need to build the capacity
                         of county or city PIUs in in order to finalize the list
                         of subprojects, identify needs for land for civil
                         works, optimize the location and scale of project
                         works, and address social impacts.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         The project will not involve dams. The policy is not
                                                                                                                        triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects on International      No                                                      The project is location does not involve any
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   international waterways. The policy is not triggered.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The project is located in the central region of the
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                country and does not involve any disputed areas. The
                                                                                                                        policy is not triggered.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 10-Mar-2016
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Safeguard Preparation Plan > Target date March 1, 2016
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Madhu Raghunath
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Josefo Tuyor (SA)                                                                                                       Date: 22-Oct-2015
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)                                                                                                 Date: 22-Oct-2015
                                 Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
