                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                                         Report No.:ISDSA21729
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated:                 24-Mar-2017
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed               03-Mar-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                          Moldova                      Project ID:              P148537
    Project Name:                     Modernization of Government Services in the Republic of Moldova
                                      (P148537)
    Task Team Leader(s):              Maya V. Gusarova,Sandra Sargent
    Estimated Appraisal               13-Feb-2017                  Estimated Board          14-Aug-2017
    Date:                                                          Date:
    Managing Unit:                    GGO15                        Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                                                                       Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00(Rapid No
    Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                              Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           23.00                         Total Bank Financing: 20.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                       Amount
    BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                          3.00
    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                       5.00
    International Development Association (IDA)                                                                15.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                               0.00
    Total                                                                                                      23.00
    Environmental Category:           C - Not Required
    Is this a Repeater project?       No

    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The project development objective is to improve access, efficiency and quality of delivery of selected
    government administrative services.
    3. Project Description
    The project will achieve its development objective through the following four components:

    Component 1: Administrative Service Modernization


                                                    Page 1 of 7
This component will support improvements in government services processes to address excessive
administrative requirements, inefficiency of public institutions, ineffective communication and other
deficiencies, creating barriers for citizens and businesses in accessing government administrative services. This
component will support activities under the following subcomponents:

Subcomponent 1.1 Business Process Reengineering. The objective of this subcomponent is to redesign up to 21
selected central administrative services provided to citizens and businesses in order to reduce administrative
burden of access and prepare for digitization of services under Component 2. The sub-component will support
the following activities: (i) Inventory of existing services; (ii) Comprehensive service analysis including legal,
technical, administrative, and procedural steps including links and required IT systems and changes; (iii) To-be
process maps, requirements and work plan for reengineering services for delivery through a digital platform;
(iv) Creation of service standards for each service reformed under the project, including development of a
methodology to design and measure service standards in a uniform manner; v) Development of supporting
documents to implement the to-be maps; and (vi) monitoring, evaluation and reporting systems to measure the
impacts of reengineering.

Subcomponent 1.2 Reform Management and Coordination. This subcomponent will develop capacity for reform
management, develop a coordination mechanism and support change management. Change-management is a
key success factor for public sector reform projects. The following activities will be supported: (i) technical
assistance for reform management and a functioning coordination mechanism; (ii) technical assistance to change
management, which would include, among others, development and implementation of a Change Management
Strategy and Action Plan; (iii) leadership training, institutional communication; and (iv) Social Inclusion and
Citizen Engagement Checklists ensuring compliance of selected government services in regard to social
inclusion and citizen engagement requirements.

Subcomponent 1.3 Expanding Access Points for Central Government E-Services. The subcomponent facilitates
access to government administrative services at the local level through the creation of Unified Centers for
Service Delivery (CUPS) across Moldova and supporting capacity building to promote citizen-centered
facilitation services at CUPS. This subcomponent will support the following activities: (i) development of a
feasibility study for CUPS; (ii) piloting of CUPS through different delivery systems including Novateca
Libraries, Joint Information and Service Bureaus, post offices, and other access points. This may include
purchase of equipment and small scale refinishing civil works to bring consistent look and branding for pilot
CUPS, as confirmed by the feasibility study; (iii) evaluation of the pilots results; (iv) development of an
institutional framework for CUPS; (v) roll out of CUPS at the national level.

Subcomponent 1.4 Citizen Feedback and Outreach. This subcomponent focuses on mainstreaming citizens-
centric approaches and socially inclusive citizen engagement in the project. The activities will include: (i) an
annual customer survey will measure citizen satisfaction with services provided through the CUPS and the
unified call center as well as e-services more broadly; (ii) regular online and offline citizen feedback
mechanisms as routine procedure to evaluate the citizen-centric redesign, quality, accessibility and
responsiveness of government administrative services; (iii) development of online and offline gender-sensitive
and socially inclusive life scenarios combining relevant services into groups for citizens convenience; (iv)
comprehensive, socially inclusive, and gender-sensitive citizen outreach through a public awareness campaign
to inform all citizens, and specifically targeting women and socially vulnerable groups, about CUPS, available
services the new version of the service portal, and the life scenarios, including brochures, print, newspaper,
radio, video and other channels. This activity also includes hands-on training for service providers staff on
specific topics related to e-governance platforms, e-services, citizen-centric redesign, and opportunities and
skills for citizens participation, particularly participation of socially vulnerable groups.

Component 2: Digital Platform and Services


                                                 Page 2 of 7
This component will support the digitization of selected reengineered administrative services; complete and
strengthen a common infrastructure and mechanisms for rapid deployment of ICT-enabled administrative
services; and introduce government wide IT Management and Cyber Security standards and procedures. It will
finance the acquisition of additional shared computing infrastructure elements, digitization of 21 government
services needed to deliver Government services electronically and development of IT Management and Cyber
Security standards and procedures, as well as a learning management system to mainstream them within the
government.

Subcomponent 2.1: Digital Platform and Services. This subcomponent will digitize reengineered government
services. Digitization will lead to a significant reduction in time, effort and resources spent by citizens accessing
government services. More specifically, this subcomponent will support the following activities: (i)
development of methodology for administrative services digitization; (ii) digitization of up to 21 government to
citizen (G2C) and government to business (G2B) services that have undergone reengineering; and (iii) Quality
Assurance and User Acceptance Testing (UAT). A precondition for digitization is that only services that have
previously been reengineered and have no roadblocks regarding approval of adjusted legal framework will be
selected.

Subcomponent 2.2: Digital Infrastructure. Under the completed Governance e-Transformation Project (GET),
the Government established a robust Digital Infrastructure. This includes both Government cloud computing
platform (MCloud) and platform-level services which are based on common functions, such as authentication or
electronic payments. The activities proposed under this subcomponent will: (i) upgrade the existing
infrastructure, extend its functionality, and test it by service users; (ii) establish a unified call center for citizens,
businesses, and government to access information on services, to support requests and problem solving, and to
solicit citizen feedback, including socially vulnerable groups, on their needs and concerns to improve
administrative services and make them more accessible for all types of vulnerable groups.

Subcomponent 2.3: IT Management and Cyber Security. The successful implementation of Digital Services
component requires a government-wide standardized approach to a full cycle IT management. The objectives of
this subcomponent are to develop government IT Management and cloud security processes and standards and
implement them across government. A cyber security awareness program for citizens will be developed as well.

Component 3: Implementation of a Service Delivery Model

This Component supports the alignment of institutional and staff capabilities of key government agencies with
the new citizen-centric model and digital administrative service delivery arrangements, implemented under
Components 1 and 2. Implementation of this Component will be managed and coordinated by the unit of the
State Chancellery responsible for human resources policy coordination and management in public service.

Subcomponent 3.1: Institutional Capability Development. This subcomponent will ensure that the required
capabilities, structures and human resources are in place and aligned to the improved and digitized business
processes of selected services. This will be achieved through the following activities: (i) institutional capability
reviews, assessing the capacity development needs in line with the new model of the service delivery; (ii)
analysis organizational structures and staffing arrangements and their alignment with business processes; and
(iii) advisory services on management of staffing adjustments such as reassignment of staff, training,
prequalification, natural attrition (including retirement), and early retirement.

Subcomponent 3.2: Capacity Development. The project will support the development of an effective Learning
and Development system focused on the needs of the new model for administrative services, building on
existing strengths and tools. The following activities will be supported under this sub-component: (i)


                                                    Page 3 of 7
strengthening learning and development system for administrative service delivery; (ii) development of the
internal training capacity through internal trainers development and creation of training packages in classic and
e-learning format and (iii) training on citizen-centric service redesign and customer service (including gender
aspects and awareness of the needs of socially vulnerable groups) and the effective internal use of digital
platforms by civil servants involved in the delivery of services reengineered and digitized under the project. The
project will also fund similar training for staff employed in unified service centers (CUPS).

Subcomponent 3.3: Enhancing Performance in Service Delivery. In order to align incentives with service
delivery objectives, performance objectives and indicators will have to be defined, understood and monitored
for institutions, management and staff. The sub-component will support the following activities: (i) development
of institutional Performance Frameworks that cover objectives and performance indicators at the institutional
level, as well as the periodic completion of Social Inclusion and Citizen Engagement Checklists and can be
cascaded to structural units for each entity covered under the project; (ii) a performance management system for
CUPS staff; (iii) a mechanism for review and continuous improvement; and (iv) training of managers and staff
for effective performance management.

Component 4: Project Management

This Component will finance the project implementation unit (PIU), based in E-Government Center and will co-
finance the core E-Government Center management team.

Sub-Component 4.1: Project Management Unit. The E-Government Center designated staff will serve as the
Project Implementation Unit for MGSP dealing with fiduciary functions. The PIU staff will assist with
preparation of budgets, procurement plans, detailed bidding documents and bid evaluation reports, contract
management, disbursement and financial reporting. The sub-component will finance operating costs, including
translation, vehicle operation and maintenance, communication and insurance costs, banking charges, rental
expenses, office (and office equipment) maintenance, utilities, software licenses, document duplication/printing
and consumables.

Sub-Component 4.2: E-Government Center Management. E-Government Center core management team will
provide day-to-day support to the State Chancellery inthe implementation of the Project. The E-Government
Center will be the lead institution for implementation of the Government Services Modernization Action Plan
for 2017-2021. The E-Government Center will be responsible for defining the technical approach and
implementing activities of the Action Plan.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The project will be implemented country wide while the new IT equipment will be installed in the existing
government offices.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Arcadii Capcelea( GEN03 )
 Jelena Lukic( GSUGL )
 Sandra Kdolsky( GSU03 )
6. Safeguard Policies That Might Apply
Safeguard Policies                             Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01            No              This policy is not triggered. The project is not
                                                               expected to have any adverse social or

                                                 Page 4 of 7
                                                        environmental impacts. All new equipment to be
                                                        purchased will be installed within the existing
                                                        government offices at the national and local levels.
                                                        The project may include only refurbishment or
                                                        small civil works with some construction impacts
                                                        associated with the piloting and roll out of the
                                                        CUPS, which are located in existing buildings, to
                                                        provide a consistent look and better conditions for
                                                        the citizen. These works would be minor indoor
                                                        activities, would not involve remodeling of the
                                                        building or replacement of its roof, and so generate
                                                        some minor impacts which can easily mitigated by
                                                        applying good construction practices. Operations
                                                        Manual will include provisions to identify potential
                                                        impacts and mitigation measures to be included in
                                                        contracts for these small scale works, if their need
                                                        is confirmed during the project implementation.
                                                        Respectively, the project has been assigned
                                                        Category C, and therefore, no Environmental
                                                        Assessment is required.

                                                        Social inclusion and citizen engagement are
                                                        mainstreamed in the project design. The project
                                                        design includes measures in the Component 3 to
                                                        minimize effects of service reengineering and
                                                        digitization on service employees. It is estimated
                                                        that the risk of collective redundancy is low In
                                                        instances, where there may be a residual risk of
                                                        staff reductions, this will be managed in accordance
                                                        with applicable labor law, civil servants law, any
                                                        existing collective agreements, and all other
                                                        applicable national legislation as well as good
                                                        international practice. Should any collective
                                                        redundancies are to occur, the Borrower will
                                                        prepare social mitigation plan acceptable to the
                                                        Bank. The social mitigation plan will include the
                                                        budget to implement any consultation,
                                                        compensation, and grievance mechanism as
                                                        proposed in the plan.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              No
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      No
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                No


                                          Page 5 of 7
        Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No
        7.50
        Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60       No
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
    any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    The project will not support any land acquisition. The project is not expected to have any adverse social or
    environmental impacts. All new equipment to be purchased will be installed within the existing government
    offices at the national and local levels. The project may include only refurbishment/small civil works with some
    construction impacts associated with the piloting and roll out of the CUPS, which are located in existing
    buildings, to provide a consistent look and better conditions for the citizen. These works would be minor indoor
    activities, would not involve remodeling of the building or replacement of its roof, that would generate some
    minor impacts which can easily mitigated by applying good construction practices. Operations Manual will
    include provisions to identify potential impacts and mitigation measures to be included in contracts for these
    small scale works, if their need is confirmed during the project implementation.
    2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
    project area:
    The project is gender sensitive. Citizen and engagement and social inclusion are mainstreamed in the project
    design. The design of the Component 3 - Implementation of a Service Delivery Model includes measures to
    minimize any negative impacts of service reengineering and digitization on service employees. These measures
    include development of Learning and Development system for staff, advisory services on management of
    staffing adjustments such as reassignment of staff, training, prequalification, natural attrition (including
    retirement), and early retirement. It is estimated that the associated risk of collective staff redundancies is low.
    3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
    NA
    4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
    borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
    The Project does not trigger any safeguards policies. The Borrower will make all efforts to avoid staff
    redundancies through implementation of measures included in the project design. In instances, where there may
    be a residual risk of staff collective redundancies, this will be managed in accordance with applicable labor law,
    civil servants law, any existing collective agreements, and all other applicable national legislation as well as
    good international practice. Prior to implementing staff redundancies associated with the project, the Borrower
    will prepare social mitigation plan (retrenchment plan) which will be subject to Bank review and approval.
    5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
    safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
    In instances requiring the social mitigation plan (retrenchment plan) preparation, the Borrower will carry out
    consultations with affected workers’ representatives and trade unions. The social mitigation plan will be
    disclosed at the level of the organizational entity who will implement the social mitigation plan.
    .




     B. Disclosure Requirements
     If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
    issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.


                                                      Page 6 of 7
    If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::
    NA. The project is not expected to have any adverse social or environmental impacts.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the    Yes []        No []         NA     [X]
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a         Yes []        No []         NA     [X]
 public place in a form and language that are understandable
 and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional     Yes []        No []         NA     [X]
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been           Yes []        No []         NA     [X]
 included in the project cost?
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project       Yes []        No []         NA     [X]
 include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
 related to safeguard policies?
 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed      Yes []        No []         NA     [X]
 with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
 the project legal documents?


         III. Approval
         Task Team Leader(s):           Name:Maya V. Gusarova,Sandra Sargent
         Approved By:
         Practice Manager/Manager:      Name: Adrian Fozzard (PMGR)         Date: 24-Mar-2017




                                                 Page 7 of 7
