                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC9978

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Apr-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Apr-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                            Project ID:      P149485
                            Project Name:      Ningbo Sustainable Urbanization Demonstration Project (P149485)
                            Task Team          Paul Procee
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          08-Sep-2015                      Estimated        31-Dec-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSURR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Public administration- Financial Sector (15%), Urban Transport (45%), General
                                               water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%)
                            Theme(s):          Pollution management and environmental health (10%), Urban planning and
                                               housing policy (25%), Municipal finance (15%), City-wide Inf rastructure and
                                               Service Delivery (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    300.00                     Total Bank Financing:        150.00
                            Financing Gap:         150.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        150.00
                              Total                                                                        150.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The objective of the project is to demonstrate more sustainable urbanization approaches for small
                           towns by improving transport connectivity and resilience to floods.
                           C. Project Description
                         1.           The project is being designed following a framework approach. During project
                         preparation, the overall objectives, scope and framework for identification, preparation and
                         implementation of infrastructure investments will be prepared and agreed with the municipal and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         county governments. The first batch of specific infrastructure investments will be identified and
                         appraised during project preparation. The size of the first batch will depend on the indebtedness
                         capacity and financial sustainability of Xiangshan County (preliminary financial assessment indicates
                         that the first batch will be around US$ 50 million in IBRD financing). Subsequent phases of
                         financing will be triggered on the basis of good progress with the implementation of the previous
                         batch of subprojects, identification of eligible projects in line with the PDO and adequate capacity of
                         the County to manage and finance additional subprojects. Other counties in Ningbo Municipality
                         could be considered in future batches of the project. Infrastructure investments will be selected based
                         on eligibility criteria under the following project components focusing on urban livability, public
                         transportation and flood risk management:

                         2.       Component 1. Urban livability. This component will focus on an integrated approach to
                         create a more livable urban environment by enhancing clean transportation choices and connecting
                         people to jobs, employment centers, educational institutions and health care facilities and improving
                         access to public spaces. Eligible investments include: (i) improvements to pedestrian and bicycle
                         infrastructure; (ii) rehabilitation and construction of urban streets; (iii) improving public spaces
                         including landscaping and scenic beautification of the inner city; (iv) developing safer street
                         crossings; (v) intelligent transport systems, (vi) improvements in access and connectivity between
                         walking, biking and public transport; (vii) traffic management and safety measures. Special attention
                         will be given to the affordability of different transportation options and improving the access of
                         migrants and low-income households and students to employment centers and educational
                         institutions.

                         3.        Component 2. Public transportation. This component will focus on investments to improve
                         the access, quality and efficiency of the urban bus system. The bus operations in the county have
Public Disclosure Copy




                         very low ridership and the connectivity between local and regional transport being reviewed and
                         support will be provided to improve bus service capacity and reliability; increase coverage and
                         accessibility of the system. Eligible investments include new and replacement buses and related
                         equipment, rehabilitation and new bus stops, intermodal terminals and bus depots and maintenance
                         facilities. These investments are closely linked to Component 1 and ensure an integrated system is
                         created that would increase overall efficiency of the urban transport system within the city by better
                         integrating non-motorized systems at the neighborhood level with public bus systems for longer-
                         distance trips within the county.

                         4.           Component 3. Flood Risk Management. This component will focus on reducing the
                         vulnerability of the county to the risks of floods. A combination of structural and non-structural
                         measures will help the city better prepare and protect critical assets and vulnerable people to
                         potential floods in the future. An important aspect will be to increase opportunities for the water to
                         infiltrate into the ground rather than (or before) channeling it to the fixed capacity drains and pipes.
                         Infiltration trenches, filter strips, vegetated swales and planter beds all work by retaining water.
                         Eligible investments will be designed with the following principles and features: protection of natural
                         water systems, reduction of storm water runoff and peak flows, protection of water quality and
                         ecosystem by increasing filtration and retention, and upgrade of flood protection and drainage
                         infrastructure. The subcomponent will also assist in the emergency preparedness and response
                         systems, urban planning and protection of green space.
                         5.          Component 4. Technical Assistance and Capacity Building. This component is closely
                         linked to the previous components and aims at creating more livable local communities and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         supporting local governments in finding cost-effective solutions based on sound financing plans.
                         This component is divided into the following subcomponents:

                         - Subcomponent 4.1. Sustainable local development and planning. This subcomponent will support
                         local governments in reviewing and possibly updating policies, codes, and capital investment plans
                         to integrate transportation, housing, and economic development; support local real estate markets;
                         and stimulate private investment. Activities can include analyzing and reviewing local master plans,
                         zoning codes, and building codes, either on a county level or in a specific community, district, or
                         corridor to promote mixed-use development, affordable housing, the reuse of existing buildings and
                         structures for new purposes, and street and corridor revitalization.

                         - Subcomponent 4.2. Capital Investment and Asset Management. Given the large fixed asset
                         investments made by counties in the last decade, annual spending on managing and maintaining
                         these assets will increase substantially in the near and medium-term. Most existing infrastructure is
                         not well operated and maintained and their value is depreciating quickly. There is a lack of incentive
                         in proper asset management and limited knowledge of full project-cycle asset management. This
                         component will support counties in Ningbo to develop information and tools for full-cycle
                         management of infrastructure assets, including asset inventory, valuation, planning and budgeting. It
                         will be complemented by capital investment plans that help municipal governments focus on local
                         development goals and public service needs, encourage more efficient program administration,
                         identify the most economically sound means of funding, and enhance credit ratings.

                         - Subcomponent 4.3. Innovative financial mechanisms for public service delivery. This component
                         will help develop innovative financing mechanisms to improve the public finance systems and attract
                         private investments in infrastructure and service delivery. Options that will be considered are
                         concessions, PPPs, public-private finance facility at Ningbo municipal level will be evaluated, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Capital Investment and Asset Management Plan will be established for both the transport and water
                         sectors.

                         - Subcomponent 4.4. Project Management and Supervision. This subcomponent will support the
                         implementation of the OM and strengthen the institutional capacity of the implementing agencies.
                         Specifically, it supports (i) monitoring and evaluation activities; (ii) training and study tours to
                         enhance both project management skills and the technical capacity of the PMOs and implementation
                         agencies at all levels; (iii) financial management, procurement, safeguards, supervision and other
                         consulting services; and (iv) additional operating costs. An Operational Manual (OM) will be
                         prepared for the selection, appraisal and supervision of subprojects during project implementation.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         6. Ningbo Municipality is located in the Northeast part of Zhejiang Province, just 2 hours south of
                         Shanghai. It is bounded on the east by the East China Sea and on the north by Hangzhou Bay. Its
                         land area is 9,816 square kilometers, with 1,562 km of coastline. The city proper of Ningbo is
                         sandwiched between the ocean and low-lying mountains to the southwest, with coastal plain and
                         valleys in between. The here are 531 islands in the municipality and important peninsulas include the
                         Chuanshan Peninsula and the Xiangshan Peninsula.
                           7. Ningbo has a humid subtropical climate with four distinctive seasons, characterized by hot,
                           humid summers and chilly, cloudy and drier winters (with occasional snow). The city receives an
                           average annual rainfall of 1,440mm and is affected by the plum rains of the Asian monsoon in June,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           when average relative humidity also peaks. From August to October, Ningbo experiences the effects
                           of typhoons, and is affected by an average of 1.8 storms annually, though the city is not very often
                           struck directly by these systems.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           8. The Ningbo PMO (NPMO) has extensive experience preparing and implementing World Bank
                           projects. It is working closely with County PIUs on the preparation of this project and ensuring the
                           project complies with the Bank??s Safeguards policies and procedures. The NPMO will continue
                           supporting the project and building the capacity of the county level agencies. In addition,
                           experienced consultants have been hired to prepare the Environmental and Social Assessment and
                           relevant documents, including the Environmental Management Plan (EMP), Resettlement Action
                           Plan (RAP), and Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF). Surveys with potential
                           beneficiaries and project affected people are being conducted to ensure selected investments and
                           alternatives take into account the local needs and requests.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Aimin Hao (GSURR)
                           Xin Ren (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         Yes            Since the project will focus on regeneration of old
                           OP/BP 4.01                                      cities, all sub-projects will be located in built-up
                                                                           urban area. With the types of activities as described
                                                                           under component 1-3, environmental impacts will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           mostly relate to construction, such as noise and dust,
                                                                           construction waste disposal and temporary storage
                                                                           on-site, borrow pits and disposal off-site, small
                                                                           vegetation loss, soil erosion at water front work,
                                                                           sewage discharge, traffic impact, social and business
                                                                           disturbance and traffic safety. These impacts are of
                                                                           temporary nature, mostly site-specific, few if any of
                                                                           them are irreversible and in most cases mitigation
                                                                           measures can be designed more readily than for
                                                                           Category A projects. Therefore, a category B is
                                                                           proposed, but will be revisited prior to quality
                                                                           enhancement review (QER) when more information
                                                                           becomes available.

                                                                           Since not all sub-projects will be identified during
                                                                           appraisal, an Environment and Social Management
                                                                           Framework (ESMF) will be prepared that describes
                                                                           the environmental and social screening, preparation,
                                                                           implementation, and monitoring process of sub-
                                                             projects according to the the relevant World Bank
                                                             safeguard policies. An Environmental Impact
                                                             Assessment (EIA) report and Environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared for the
                                                             identified subprojects.

                                                             Based on the results of impacts screening, alternative
                                                             analysis, and baseline definition, key impacts will be
                                                             assessed thoroughly and mitigation measures
                                                             developed. Off-site impacts, such as a borrow pit,
                                                             disposal site, will be addressed. Those non-OP4.12
                                                             impacts, such as potential disturbance to local
                                                             communities and customs, livelihood impacts and
                                                             safety concerns shall be addressed. Both construction
                                                             and operational impacts shall be considered.

                                                             As per World Bank policy OP4.01 and national
                                                             regulations, at least two rounds of public consultation
                                                             are needed. People to be consulted include: local
                                                             affected communities (men and women)/ institutions/
                                                             businesses, local governments and authorities, etc.
                                                             Means of consultation include public meetings,
                                                             individual interviews and questionnaire surveys. The
                                                             mission emphasized that draft full EIA reports shall
                                                             be disclosed.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD   Although the current identified subprojects are all
                                                             within the urban built up area of Xiangshan County,
                                                             systematic survey during the project preparation is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             needed to understand if any future subprojects might
                                                             have an impact on sensitive areas such as nature
                                                             reserves or important habitats. The Environmental
                                                             and Social Management Framework (EMSF), will
                                                             include procedures to identify and assess the
                                                             potential impacts of subprojects on important
                                                             habitats and ecosystems, including migratory
                                                             channels, spawning/breeding/feeding/wintering
                                                             grounds, and endangered, protected or rare species.
                                                             In particular, investments under Component 3 (flood
                                                             control) will be designed with the principles of
                                                             protecting natural water systems, water quality and
                                                             ecosystem by increasing filtration and retention and
                                                             upgrading the flood protection and drainage
                                                             infrastructure.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No    The project will not involve any forestry related
                                                             activities.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No    The project will not result in the use or procurement
                                                             of pesticides. The policy OP 4.09 is not triggered.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources                                 Yes                        A survey of physical cultural resources shall be
                                 OP/BP 4.11                                                                             conducted through field investigation and
                                                                                                                        consultations with the local cultural relics bureau as
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        well as communities during the EA preparation.
                                                                                                                        Relevant measures and procedures will be included
                                                                                                                        in the EMP and EMSF in case physical cultural
                                                                                                                        resources might be uncovered or affected during
                                                                                                                        construction in particular.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    TBD                        Selected project investments are all in the existing
                                 4.10                                                                                   urban area of the county seat, however, as the project
                                                                                                                        locations are not finalized at this stage, it is too early
                                                                                                                        to conclude that there will be no minority village in
                                                                                                                        the project areas. Therefore, the policy application
                                                                                                                        will be decided in the next stage, depending on
                                                                                                                        further screening of minority issues during the social
                                                                                                                        assessment. In addition, the ESMF will also include
                                                                                                                        screening procedures to assess and manage ethnic
                                                                                                                        minority, resettlement, gender and vulnerable groups.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                Yes                        The project will finance the construction of roads,
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                transport and water related infrastructure and
                                                                                                                        facilities all of which might require land acquisition
                                                                                                                        and resettlement. OP/BP 4.12 will be triggered and a
                                                                                                                        Resettlement Plan (RP) prepared accordingly. Since
                                                                                                                        not all sub-projects will be identified during
                                                                                                                        appraisal, an RPF as part of the ESMF will also be
                                                                                                                        prepared.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        The SA will consider gender, poverty and other
                                                                                                                        relevant social issues in the resettlement process. The
                                                                                                                        EMSF and RP will include procedures to assess and
                                                                                                                        implement land acquisition and resettlement
                                                                                                                        activities in accordance to Bank Safeguard policies.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         The project will not involve any dams. The policy is
                                                                                                                        not triggered.
                                 Projects on International      No                                                      This policy is not applicable and triggered.
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      This policy is not applicable and triggered.
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 14-Aug-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      All safeguard related studies, including the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), the
                                      Environmental Management Plan (EMP), the Social Assessment (SA), the Resettlement Action



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             Plan, and the Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF), will start in March and
                             should be completed by August 2015.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Task Team Leader(s): Name: Paul Procee
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                            Date: 07-Apr-2015
                           Practice Manager/    Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)                       Date: 07-Apr-2015
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
