INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA12482
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-May-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Liberia                     Project ID:  P153124
Parent        P133445
Project ID:
Project Name: Liberia: LACEEP Additional Financing (P153124)
Parent Project Liberia Accelerated Electricity Expansion Project (LACEEP) (P133445)
Name:
Task Team       Clemencia Torres De Mastle
Leader(s):
Estimated       23-Mar-2015                 Estimated     15-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEEDR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (80%), General energy sector (20%)
Theme(s):       Managing for development results (30%), Infrastructure services for private
sector development (10%), City-wide Infrastructure and S ervice Delivery (60%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      60.00             Total Bank Financing:    60.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                  60.00
Total                                                                        60.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
Page 1 of 12


﻿A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The project development objectives are to increase access to electricity and strengthen
institutional capacity in the electricity sector.
B. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
3. Project Description
Key Challenges: To support the GoL's ambitious goals for an accelerated expansion of electricity
services in Liberia until 2030. The proposed project focuses on three of the most pressing issues that
need to be addressed for the electricity sector in Liberia to be able to embark on a sustainable
development path. The first aspect is the expansion of the transmission and distribution grid that
today is limited in Monrovia and practically nonexistent in the rest of the country, in order to provide
access to electricity services. The second issue is the importance of creating the conditions that will
facilitate the shift from diesel to HFO-based thermal generation for the country to effectively benefit
from the price differential of the two fuels on the international market. Finally, the third aspect is the
strengthening of the institutional capacity within the government to lead the development of the
electricity sector.
The original project consists of the following three components:
Component 1: Extension of electricity transmission and distribution systems (estimated cost: US$
19.72 million).
This sub-component will provide access to electricity to about 10,300 new users located not only in
Monrovia but also outside of the capital, along the corridor to the town of Kakata. The new users will
represent a diverse mix of residential users (from low to higher income), small business, institutional
consumers and a few agro industrial customers. The objective of this component is to continue the
expansion of services to the population in general, while reaching out in particular in Monrovia to 40
to 50 business and institutional customers with a demand larger than this of residential users.
Broadening the base of customers will contribute to improve LEC's financial performance while
achieving the goal of expanding services to the population.
The scope of work under this component is based on the short-term investment program defined by
MLME and LEC that aims at extending electricity services both in Monrovia and to three economic
corridors outside the capital: Kakata, Bomi Hills and the airport. In particular, the proposed project
will finance the transmission and distribution investments for the corridor of Monrovia-Kakata and
the investments for extending the services in Monrovia at the distribution level. The component is
divided into three sub-components, according to the implementation arrangement needed for their
implementation as follows:
- Sub-component 1-A. Extension of transmission and distribution system to Kakata. The sub-
component will finance (i) the construction of a 66 kV sub-transmission line between the Paynesville
substation in Monrovia and the town of Kakata; (ii) the construction of a 66/22 kV substation in
Kakata; (iii) the construction of both 22 kV and low voltage distribution lines, including the
connections to new consumers along the Monrovia-Kakata corridor and in the town of Kakata.
- Sub-component 1-B. Extension of the distribution system in Monrovia. This sub-component
will finance the extension of electricity services within the service area of the management
Page 2 of 12


﻿contractor. This will include the infrastructure for distribution lines from Paynesville and its
surrounding in about nine communities, as well as the connection of 40 to 50 large customers in
various parts of the city.
- Sub-component 1-C. Preparation and implementation of the component for the extension of
transmission and distribution systems. This includes detailed design, safeguards instruments and
other preparatory consultancies for the transmission and distribution investments. This also includes
the hiring of consultants with financial management and procurement expertise to strengthen the
Project Implementation in LEC and the possibility of hiring additional experts if need arises after the
management contractor has departed in 2016.
Component 2. Construction of HFO facilities for off-loading, transport and storage, of (HFO) and
support for optimization of HFO procurement (estimated cost: US$10.56 million)
This component supports Government strategy of shifting generation capacity from diesel to HFO-
based thermal generation to reduce the cost of electricity. Increasing generation capacity with
thermal plants running on HFO to expand services and reduce the cost of electricity is only possible
however, if there is a reliable and sufficient supply of HFO at prices significantly cheaper than diesel.
There are both physical and commercial aspects in the optimization of the supply of fuel. This
component supports both aspects of the process.
On the physical side, the component finances the construction of facilities to offload, store and pump
HFO from sea tankers with capacity in the range 30,000 - 40,000 tons, in order to minimize unit
price of freight. The HFO will be offload at the BOMC Pier of the China Union concession and will
be transported about 1.5 kilometers to a large storage tank in Bushrod Island on LEC's premises. A
legal agreement between the GoL and the concessionaire China Union will govern the access and use
of the pier facilities and an agreement between the Government and LEC will ensure that the
facilities are properly operated and maintained.
On the commercial side, the component provides technical assistance to the GoL to optimize its
procurement of fuel in the international markets and define the most adequate fiscal regime for
importing and selling HFO used in electricity generation for LEC. In parallel with the support
provided under the LACEEP, the first Poverty Reduction Support Credit (PRSC-1), currently under
preparation also supports this open, competitive approach to the procurement of HFO and includes a
condition to the effect in the Matrix of Policy actions, whereby an open competitive procurement
process of HFO used in electricity generation for LEC would be implemented by December 2014 to
ensure the lowest CIF cost of the fuel. If completed on time, HFO will be available when the various
HFO-based generation plants currently in the pipeline will come into operations.
This component is thus composed of the following activities:
- Sub-component 2-A. Construction of HFO transport and storage facilities. This sub-
component will support: (i) construction (supply and installation) at the Bong Mining Company site,
adjacent to the pier or to the existing storage tank, of a pump station to transport HFO to the storage
tanks located at the Bushrod Island site; (ii) construction of a pipeline connecting the Bong Mining
Company and the Bushrod island HFO storage tanks; and (iii) construction of a new storage tank at
Bushrod Island site, with capacity of approximately 16,200 cubic meters, equivalent to the
consumption of generating plants totaling 30 MW at base load during 3 months (180 m3/day x 90
days).
Page 3 of 12


﻿-      Sub-component 2-B. Detailed design and supervision of HFO Infrastructure investments.
This sub component will finance the consultancy services needed to prepare the component, such as
the detailed engineering design, preparation of bidding documents, and the contract of the owner's
engineer who will supervise construction works.
-      Sub-component 2-C Technical assistance to the government for optimizing the procurement
of HFO. The project will finance technical assistance to the government to (i) optimize the
procurement of HFO in international markets; (ii) define a pricing regime for HFO used in electricity
generation and a fiscal regime for HFO imports and sales.
Component 3. Technical Assistance to MLME. Support for the expansion of supply options and for
the strengthening of the sector's institutional capacity (estimated cost: US$ 4.72 million).
This component provides support to MLME in specific areas where the Ministry has a key
responsibility, as the entity responsible to lead the development of the electricity sector. It will also
support the overall strengthening of MLMEs' institutional capacity. In particular, this component
supports the Government's decision to attract private investments into generation as a way of
leveraging the large needs for public funds in transmission and distribution. The nature of such
specific transaction may include the sale to LEC of surplus electricity generated by large
concessionaires or by greenfield plants (independent power producers or IPPs), depending on the
best option identified under the LCPDP. In all cases, attracting the private sector into the business of
supplying electricity to LEC may require the use of credit and risk mitigation mechanisms. The use
of such mitigation mechanism, if needed, could also be an option for the procurement of HFO for
electricity generation. This component also provides institutional support to MLME to strengthen its
capacity to fulfill its core responsibilities and implement the project. It will include specifically the
following activities:
-      Sub-component 3-A Technical assistance to attract private investment for electricity
generation. Activities under this component will assist MLME in the legal, technical and commercial
structuring of the transaction.
-      Sub-component 3-B Training and provision of short term expertise and financing of selected
studies, including (i) the hiring of different experts such as senior financial management expert and a
senior procurement specialist, and (iii) studies needed for the medium-term development of supply
options, notably in hydroelectricity.
-      Subcomponent 3-C. Cost of managing the project, including the audit. This sub-component
will provide the resources needed based on the financial and procurement assessment of MLME to
implement the components under its management.
The proposed Additional Financing continues the Bank's support to the ambitious development
agenda of the Government in the electricity sector and for the accelerated and sustainable expansion
of electricity services in Liberia. It has two main objectives: (i) to increase access to electricity; and
(ii) to increase institutional capacity in the electricity sector.
To this end, the proposed activities will be linked to two of the existing components of the LACEEP.
The proposed AF will therefore include the following additional activities under existing project
components:
Page 4 of 12


﻿Component 1: Extension of electricity transmission and distribution systems and connection of new
users (US$53.00 million, IDA Credit):
This component aims to increase access to electricity in the North-West part of the Greater
Monrovia, as the capital has the highest density of population, and in Bomi County, a region with an
important economic potential.
(i)    Sub-component 1-A. Electrification of Greater Monrovia (North-West). The component will
finance the provision of electricity services to new users (including industries) in various
communities in the Greater Monrovia. It will include the construction of new and rehabilitation of
existing transmission and distribution networks (substations and lines), and the construction of the
connections of all new users. The objective of the works is to electrify several residential
communities, as well as commercial and industrial areas in Greater Monrovia. It will make it
possible to connect about 30,000 new customers in all categories, including a prospective industrial
demand of up to 16.5MW with about 13 industrial users in the areas served by the Gardnerville,
Stockton Creek and Virginia substations
(ii)   Sub-Component 1-B. Electrification of the Monrovia-Bomi-Kle Corridor. This sub-
component aims to build the main electricity transmission and distribution infrastructure of the
corridor, as well as to connect about 6,800 new users in the economic zone of Bomi County. The
portfolio includes households, small commercial and several larger potential customers such as large
palm oil plantations and some mines. The potential demand in this region could reach up to 46.5
MW. Although it is unlikely that all these firms will shift from self-supply to LEC's services in the
short-term but at the same time, the electrification of the Monrovia Bomi corridor is expected to have
an immediate positive impact on the economy in the county. This sub-component will enable access
to cheaper electricity for the large consumers in the Monrovia-Bomi corridor, such as agriculture and
industrial firms and mines. LEC will have the chance to incorporate wealthy medium and large users
to its customers' portfolio, if the utility is able to provide reliable and good quality services. The
electrification of the Monrovia-Bomi corridor will also facilitate the connection to the national power
system of low-cost generation based on renewable resources, such as the 10-15 MW HPP to be
eventually financed by the Scale-Up Renewable Energy Program (SREP).
(iii)  Sub-Component 1-C Project Management. This sub-component will cover the cost of
preparing, managing and auditing the project. It will include the financing of the necessary
preparatory and safeguards studies, the costs of supervising the works. It will also provide the
resources needed by LEC to manage the implementation of the components, based on the financial
and procurement assessment of the utility.
Component 3: Support for the strengthening of LEC's commercial capacity (US$7.00 million):
This component supports LEC to strengthen commercial management and operations and build the
local capacity within the utility to ensure sustainability of the results.
(i) Sub-Component 3-A: Incorporation of modem management systems in LEC. This sub-
component will strengthen LEC's commercial department to improve its performance and the
company's operational and financial viability through the incorporation of a state-of-art commercial
management system (CMS), and of an "Incidents Management System (IMS)" to support effective
and timely attention and resolution of customers' complaints related to outages and other incidents in
Page 5 of 12


﻿electricity supply.
(ii)   Sub-Component 3-B: Technical assistance to LEC. This TA will help to build local
management capacity within LEC at the medium and top levels to ensure the sustainability of its
operations once the management contract ends. In particular, it will support the appointment of
young Liberian professionals to form the counterpart teams of the contractors that will implement the
CMS and IMS and become in the future the members of a new management team that will run LEC
with efficiency, transparency and accountability using those tools.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project location (including Additional Finance activities) is the Greater Monrovia area. The
economic corridor included for electrification in this project goes from Monrovia to Kakata. Under
the additional finance (AF), a 50 km transmission line will be constructed from Bomi County to
Paynesville station in Monrovia, and there will be expansion of the distribution network from this
transmission line in order to connect new electricity users along the corridor. As in the original
LACEEP, the new AF intensification of electrification activities will also proceed in various areas of
Greater Monrovia but may include additional industrial users served by the Gardnerville, Stockton
Creek and Virginia substations, and others to be determined during project preparation. Exact
locations of the distribution line routes are not known as of yet, which is why the safeguard
instruments are an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF), which will be updated to reflect the AF activities and re-disclosed.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          While the general site of some of the works is known (e.g.
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                Component 2), the scope and types of the works are yet to
be finalized. Thus, the project builds on the
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) prepared for the energy sector in the context of
the Liberia Electricity System Enhancement Project
(LESEP) by the implementing agency LEC. This
document contains the provisions necessary to guide the
preparation and implementation of activities in the energy
sector. The ESMF has been updated to reflect LACEEP
project details (including the AF) and has been consulted
upon and disclosed both in-country and in the World
Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal. One year after
effectiveness, there is significant progress in
implementation of the Project. The Environmental and
Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for the extension of the
network and the Oil Spill Response Plan for the
construction of the HFO transport and storage facilities
are about to be finalized. The Borrower remains fully
committed to the project, and has taken steps to ensure
timely compliance with the disbursement conditions of
the project, which require that the firm offloading the
Page 6 of 12


﻿HFO at the port commits to enforce the environmental
safeguards established in the ESIA, and that LEC is able
to serve efficiently newly connected users along the
Monrovia-Kakata corridor.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   No           In the immediate project area there are no untouched
4.04                                  natural habitats. The project is located in an urban and
peri-urban area.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No           There are no forests in the immediate project area.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No            No pesticides will be used or procured in the project.
Physical Cultural        Yes          The LACEEP ESMF includes a "chance-find procedure"
Resources OP/BP 4.11                  which will be included in all construction contracts.
Physical Cultural Resources which might be affected are
some graves in the Right-Of-Way for the Kakata
transmission line. Contractors will be instructed to avoid
these graves.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes          The policy applies to electricity distribution and
OP/BP 4.12                            transmission activities, where civil works may require
land acquisition that leads to involuntary resettlement and/
or losses of assets, restrictions of access to resources or to
livelihoods. Since the process for undertaking a technical
design, including location of the network facilities, will be
finalized during implementation phase, the Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF) prepared for LACEEP has been
updated, consulted upon, and disclosed before appraisal.
The RPF contains guidance on preparation of potential
Resettlement Action Plans (RAP), which might need to be
prepared, consulted upon, disclosed and implemented in
the future, as appropriate. Since the effectiveness of the
parent project, a RAP is being prepared for the Monrovia
- Kakata corridor as per the RPF provisions. The RAP for
the HFO transport and storage facilities is also being
finalized.
Safety of Dams OP/BP     No           The project does not include or depend on any dam.
4.37
Projects on International  No         The project does not depend on water from an
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                  international waterway.
Projects in Disputed     No           There are no disputed areas in the project area.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Page 7 of 12


﻿1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The AF activities will be the same type (electrification/distribution and transmission lines) as those
in Component 1 of the parent project therefore the impacts are expected to be the same as those
described in the following paragraphs.
Under Component 1, extension of electricity transmission and distribution systems, the exact
locations for new lines and subsequently the exact scope and type of impacts are not known. OP
4.01 is thus triggered to cover the environmental impact, related to the installation of the
distribution equipment, the fuel supply lines and storage facilities. The environmental impacts are
expected to be limited due to the use of existing rights of ways and premises in the urban and peri-
urban areas of Monrovia. The proposed project will build on the safeguards instrument prepared
previously for the energy sector in the context of the Liberia Electricity System Enhancement
Project (LESEP) by the implementing agency LEC, which is the Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF). This document contains the provisions necessary to guide the
preparation and implementation of activities in the energy sector and it includes a "chance find
procedure" to ensure compliance with OP 4.11. This ESMF has been updated to reflect the
LACEEP project details and has been consulted upon and disclosed both in-country and in the
World Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal. The implementing agencies of the Project, the Ministry
of Lands, Mines and Energy (MLME) and the Liberia Electricity Corporation (LEC), will be
responsible for the implementation of both the ESMF and the RPF.
OP 4.12 is triggered to cover clearance of land for the network right of way (RoW) under
component 1, which may require some land acquisition leading to relocation and displacement of
households and/or assets. In case any land acquisition or compensation becomes necessary, the
costs will be covered by the Borrower. The project has prepared before appraisal a Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF) with guidelines for completion of a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), as
needed, in case any land acquisition, and/or restriction of access to resources should occur.
Similarly to the ESMF, the RPF also builds upon the sector-wide RPF previously prepared for
Liberia. The updated document which reflects the activities under the AF, was consulted upon and
disclosed both in-country on April 21, 2015, and in the World Bank InfoShop on April 15, 2015
prior to appraisal.
Under Component 2, sub-component 2-A covers the construction of HFO off-loading and
transport facilities at the pier in the Port of Monrovia port as well as the construction of new
storage tanks in Bushrod Island. There is no land acquisition or restriction of access to resources
anticipated at these locations. Similarly, the construction of a small diameter new pipeline of
around 1.5 km length that will connect the pier, the new storage tanks and Bushrod Island thermal
plant, is not expected to involve any land acquisition or restriction of access to resources as it is
within an existing RoW on which there are no settlements. The Bushrod Island thermal plant site
is located on the premises of the Liberia Electricity Corporation (LEC) and there is no
encroachment at this location.
The environmental impacts related to the AF activities include site-specific, short-term, limited
construction related impacts. Other impacts related to the original LACEEP project activities
include anticipated HFO thermal power plant operations, mostly air pollution by NOx and
particles. The ESMF includes hazardous wastes management practices during construction and
operation and other related measures regarding the management of public/occupational health and
Page 8 of 12


﻿safety issues. These might include issues such as potential PCB contamination from existing
facilities. An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and Environmental and Social
Management Plans (ESMPs) will be prepared for the project as needed after the application of
screening procedures. The ESIA/ESMPs preparation will be guided by the World Bank approved
ESMF for the original project. The ESIA/ESMPs will be prepared, reviewed and cleared by the
Bank, and disclosed in-country and in the InfoShop before any construction starts. The ESMF
which has been prepared for the project will be updated to reflect the Additional Finance activities,
consulted upon and redisclosed both in-country and in InfoShop.
One year after effectiveness, there is significant progress in implementation of the Project. The
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for
the extension of the network and the Oil Spill Response Plan for the construction of the HFO
transport and storage facilities are about to be finalized. The Borrower remains fully committed to
the project, and has taken steps to ensure a timely compliance with the disbursement conditions of
the project, which require that the firm offloading the HFO at the port commits to enforce the
environmental safeguards established in the ESIA, and that LEC is able to serve efficiently newly
connected users along the Monrovia-Kakata corridor. The ESIA and OSRP were reviewed by the
Bank. Once finalized, they will be disclosed in-country and in InfoShop before any construction
starts.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The AF activities are still Category B like the project as a whole. It is not anticipated that any
serious indirect or long term environmental or social impacts will be caused by the project. The
project is expected to bring positive benefits to communities, individuals and businesses. The
environmental concerns arising from the possible construction of the transmission networks
include minor loss of vegetation cover in the peri-urban areas in the Monrovia vicinity, noise, dust
and waste generation as well as occupational/public health and safety issues. When in operation,
the distribution line would need to be monitored to evaluate safety, visual intrusion, and problems
associated with repair and maintenance etc.
The area around the existing HFO tanks, which will be demolished and reconstructed by the
LESEP project that is implemented simultaneously with LACEEP, at Bushrod Island is polluted
with HFO. This HFO pollution happened during the civil war due to neglect of the facilities. All
the HFO polluted soil will be taken out before the construction of the tanks can start and will be
stored in a concrete confined area or treated to international standards. The exact method of
disposal has still to be determined, but the method selected will be in compliance with World Bank
Safeguard Policies and Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines of April 2007. The risks of
the existing polluted area and the disposal of HFO polluted soil are local and manageable. The
risks of a HFO spill during operation will be small and the HFO spill with local and are related to
filling the HFO storage tanks at the port from moored vessels, transport through the HFO pipeline
of around 35 cm diameter and 1.5 km length and HFO storage in the new tanks in Bushrod Island.
Despite the advances in the project, the team is also aware that the current emergency situation in
the country due to the Ebola outbreak could delay, or at least slow down the pace of
implementation in the short and medium term.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The line routing for the proposed networks has not been finalized. During the feasibility study,
Page 9 of 12


﻿alternative routing to minimize environmental and social impacts will be assessed. In particular,
the project will ensure that the routing will avoid densely populated areas, especially avoiding
areas where institutional structures (e.g. schools, churches and health centers) may be displaced
and where graves might be affected (a chance-find procedure will be included in all contractor
contracts).
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The implementing agencies of the Project, the Ministry of Lands, Mines and Energy (MLME) and
the Liberia Electricity Corporation (LEC), will be responsible for the implementation of both the
ESMF and the RPF, in their respective components, that is component 1 for LEC and the other
components for MLME. LEC has started to set up a separate environment and social coordinating
team. The LEC has also hired several consultants who have been engaged to prepare RAPs and
ESIAs. To ensure smooth implementation of safeguards instruments, the project will provide
capacity building similar to the technical assistance programs to LEC that have been set up for
similar electricity sector projects in Liberia previously (e.g. LESEP and LESEP II), which are
proceeding well.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project will benefit the communities in and around the Monrovia urban center, including the
peri-urban areas in the outskirts of the city as well as Kakata and the population along the corridor
to Bomi County. In addition to households who will greatly benefit from improved electricity
access, the other beneficiaries would be small businesses and industries who have expressed
demand for more reliable electricity. Government agencies and social infrastructure (schools,
health centers, churches, a water treatment plant) are also expected to benefit from increased
energy access. Throughout the updates of the ESMF and RPF, extensive stakeholder consultations,
including with community and greater Monrovia urban leaders, have been undertaken by LEC.
Key issues raised included information on environmental impacts, how monitoring of
environmental impacts would be managed, and possible resettlement issues arising from
construction of the HFO pipeline.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                27-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             15-Apr-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Liberia                                                    21-Apr-2015
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                27-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             15-Apr-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Liberia                                                    21-Apr-2015
Comments:
Page 10 of 12


﻿If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [    ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [   ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X]   No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Page 11 of 12


﻿Task Team Leader(s): Name: Clemencia Torres De Mastle
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Meike van Ginneken (PMGR)           Date: 19-May-2015
Manager:
Page 12 of 12


