INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA15329
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Nov-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Nov-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Kenya                     Project ID:  P153493
Project Name: Promoting Biogas as Sustainable Clean Cooking Fuel for Rural Households in
Kenya (P153493)
Task Team       Edward Felix Dwumfour,Juha Antti Kalevi Seppala
Leader(s):
Estimated       29-Jan-2016
Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEN07
Sector(s):      Other Renewable Energy (100%)
Theme(s):       Climate change (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      7.00            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                   0.00
Carbon Fund                                                                7.00
Total                                                                      7.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
Reduction of GHG emissions from improved access to biogas energy as a clean cooking fuel in
livestock-owning rural households in Kenya.
3. Project Description
The project's objective would be to promote the use of biogas as clean cooking fuel in livestock-
Page 1 of 6


﻿owning rural households in Kenya. The program has set up hub offices in Nakuru, Eldoret and
Karatina to be possibly followed by Central, North and South Rift areas. Hub offices serve an area
with a radius of 50 km. These distribution points are selected close to dairy farmers, which are a
main target group. Thus, the biodigesters will be made available to households in a coordinated
fashion to ensure there is access to maintenance hubs within 50 km of the installation location.
With a funding amount of US$7.0 million, the project proposes to reach out to about 6,000-8,000
HHs every year between 2015 and 2024. The project would have multiple development benefits
resulting from substitution of firewood for cooking by clean biogas. These multiple benefits would
include reduced forest degradation and desertification, improved indoor air quality (from reduced
indoor smoke exposure), improved health and reduced hardship for women and children who are
primarily engaged in the collection of firewood in rural areas, increased income and social welfare
improvement for rural HHs, creation of small scale business enterprises, along with contribution to
climate change mitigation.
The proposed project is part of the National Biogas Promotion Program KENDBIP (Kenyan
Domestic Biogas Programme), which in turn is part of the larger Africa Biogas Partnership
Programme (ABPP). ABPP has a target of 100,000 systems installed in Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania,
Uganda, and Burkina Faso and providing half a million people access to a sustainable source of
energy by the year 2017. The KENDBIP program was initiated in Kenya in 2009 with an overall goal
of developing a commercially viable biogas sector in Kenya. Since 2009 to 2013 the program has
managed to install over 11,000 biogas plants of the traditional brick-laid design. The second phase of
the program runs from 2014 to 2017 with a target of installing 27,500 digesters of both traditional
and advanced innovative designs, such as the one promoted by this proposed program.
Biogas systems convert manure and/or organic household waste into methane gas. This gas can be
directly used for cooking. The technology is well-known in Sub-Saharan Africa and Asia, but
traditional brick-laid designs are challenging for large scale implementation. Initially, two types of
biogas systems-the float-drum type and the fixed dome type have been promoted. Although these
systems have been successful elsewhere, adoption in Kenya has been minimal because of expensive
installation costs. SimGas, a private company, has pioneered a new and innovative design for a
biogas system unlike the traditional designs implemented elsewhere in Africa and the developing
world. Unlike traditional biogas systems targeting households, the SimGas system is an innovative
o        in design, is easy to install and can be mass produced to meet the consumer demand quickly. Also,
the system is made of recycled molded plastic that makes it affordable to users which should also
allow for a longer operating life than traditional brick laid designs. SimGas has developed two
proprietary designs of biogas systems: GesiShamba and GesiSafi. GesiShamba is for rural
households and GesiSafi for urban users. The rural Gesi Shamba system is modular and scalable in
1m3 segments from the minimum size of 2m3 even after installation, should the need or opportunity
to produce more biogas arise in a household.
SimGas is the Coordinating/Managing Entity (C/ME), which has developed the Clean Development
Mechanism (CDM) Program of Activities (PoA) "SimGas Biogas Programme of Activities",
registered under the UNFCCC on December 21, 2012. The first CDM Project Activity (CPA)
covering 4,000 rural digesters and 6,000 urban digesters is already being implemented. Additional
CPAs would be included in the PoA once all digesters under the first CPA have been installed. The
project is already generating emission reductions from the biodigesters installed after the registration
of the PoA
Page 2 of 6


﻿Through a carbon finance transaction, the World Bank as Trustee of the Carbon Initiative for
Development (Ci-Dev) intends to purchase carbon credits (Certified Emission Reductions, CERs)
from the CME which are generated by individual households' biogas units under the CDM-PoA.
Carbon payments allow SimGas to sell biogas systems at a discount to consumers and offer a
O
U        warranty during the lifetime of the CDM PoA, supporting the expansion of access to biogas energy
in rural Kenya.
O
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The households throughout Kenya have an opportunity to participate in the program.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Gibwa A. Kajubi (GSURR)
Svetlana Khvostova (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The project will have small scale, site specific
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               environmental impacts related to safety of the biodigesters
operation and sludge management. SimGas has produced
an ESMF/ESMP checklist to ensure that appropriate
mitigation measures are incorporated into the training
materials to be used at the household level. The ESMF/
ESMP was publicly disclosed on October 19, 2015.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
0
Physical Cultural       No
o         Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          The participation of the households is demand driven,
BP 4.10                             however, SimGas will ensure that the biodigester use
materials are available to all communities that express
interest in participating in the program (e.g. means and
language of delivering the project information).
Involuntary Resettlement No         No land acquisition, loss of assets or access to resources is
OP/BP 4.12                          expected during implementation of the project activities.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Page 3 of 6


﻿A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
O
This Program was assigned a Category B as it is likely to have minimal or no adverse
environmental impacts, based on the nature of planned interventions. The project triggers OP 4.01
-Environment Assessment - to guide safe handling and appropriate timing of application of the
bioslurry onto fields with sufficient period of delay between landspreading organic amendments
and crop harvesting. When utilizing the biogas, careful attention should be paid to the safe usage
of the biogas and regular checks made on the digesters and piping for cracks to avoid leakage of
biogas into ambient air. SimGas has internal protocols for safe installation and for providing its
customers with environmental health and safety information together with other technical
documentation (which serves as an ESMF/ESMP for the project). The environmental provisions of
the technical documentation are publicly available in Kenya and have been disclosed in the Bank
InfoShop. SimGas has an established information sharing / grievance redress system for customers
and project affected people, which will be utilized for this project.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Impacts are anticipated to be positive due to reduced demand on non-renewable biomass,
improved indoor air quality and improved access to bioslurry which can be used as an effective
fertilizer.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not applicable.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
SimGas has screened the project according to Kenyan environmental regulations and produced an
Environmental Management Framework with a simple Environment and Social Management Plan
(ESMF/ESMP) checklist in-line with World Bank policies and procedures to ensure that
appropriate mitigation measures are incorporated into the training materials to be used at the
household level, including safe application of bioslurry onto fields. SimGas also has internal
procedures/protocols for the handing over of the biogas systems to customers and for safe
installation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Biogas systems are purchased by individual households to be used on their own property, and
from a safeguards perspective, these are the main stakeholders. As per Clean Development
Mechanism stakeholder consultation requirements, the project organized a stakeholder
consultation meeting on November 29, 2011 at the Methodist Guest House and Conference Center
in Nairobi, Kenya. The meeting provided an opportunity for stakeholders to provide comments
and inputs to the project. Invitations for the meeting were extended through personal email
invitations and a public notice published in the Daily Nation newspaper on 22 November 2011.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                07-Oct-2015
Page 4 of 6


﻿Date of submission to InfoShop                             19-Oct-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Kenya                                                      20-Nov-2015
Comments: Disclosed in Kenya at SimGas website http://www.simgas.com/newsandoffers/
kenya-biogas-project-esmf-esmp/item97 and copy also provided to National
Environment Management Authority (NEMA).
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes[X]  No[  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes[X]  No[      NA
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Edward Felix Dwumfour,Juha Antti Kalevi Seppala
Approved By
Page 5 of 6


﻿Practice Manager/    Name: Sanjay Srivastava (PMGR)          Date: 18-Nov-2015
Manager:
Page 6 of 6


