INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
,2   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Dec-2015
6               ~Report No.: JSDSC 15426
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Western Africa              Project ID:   P154482
Project Name:    Sahel irrigation Initiative Support Project (P154482)
Task Team        Francois Onimus,Elisee Ouedraogo
Leader(s):
Estimated        15-Jun-2016                 Estimated     04-Oct-2016
Appraisal Date:                              Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWAO7                         Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Irrigation and drainage (70%), Agro-industry, mareting, and trade (10%),
Vocational training (10%), General water, sanitation and f lood protection sector
(10%)
Theme(s):        Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Water resource management (30%),
Regional integration (10%), Climate change (10%), Land administration and
management (10%)
Financing (In USD Million)
U
Total Project Cost:     173.00             Total Bank Financing:    173.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                 0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                      173.00
Total                                                            173.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
26.    The Project Development Objective is to improve stakeholders' planning, investment and
management capacity for irrigation service and increase irrigated areas in selected areas in the six
countries across the Sahel.


﻿27.    Project beneficiaries will include smallholder producers who will benefit directly from
selected investments funded under the project and indirectly from the increased capacity of public
and private providers to deliver enhanced irrigation service. Other beneficiaries include line
ministries and their decentralized services, training and research institutes and their students, public
O
U       and private operators involved in irrigation development and management, consultancy and
construction firms, agribusiness investors, irrigation equipment suppliers and retailers, and
producers' organizations. The number of beneficiaries under each category will be determined during
preparation. Specific attention will be given to gender balance in all project activities.
C. Project Description
30.    The proposed project will be implemented over a period of six year and will have the
following three interrelated components.
31.    Component A: Modernizing the institutional framework (US$19 million). This component
will help improve the enabling environment for irrigation development and management through the
following interventions. It will provide the "foundations" on which the countries can build their
broader investment program.
a.     Strengthen the ministerial department or agency in charge of irrigation in each country in its
planning and oversight role. Multi-country technical assistance will be provided by the regional
level to strengthen the national planning processes through (i) sectoral public expenditure review and
fiscal impact analysis with a view to enhance the dialogue with the ministries of finance, (ii)
stakeholders consultative process to inform the public investment planning process, (iii)
harmonization of implementation policies and procedures using guidelines and technical manuals,
and (iv) identification of new investments and innovative lines of business to be incorporated in the
investment plans. This TA will be complemented with specific studies aiming at filling gaps
identified in regulatory frameworks on land and irrigation management. The planning and
harmonization activities will take into account the regional dimension of the agenda e.g. market
access and shared water resources.
b.     Strengthen the relationships between the Government, the implementing entities (public
agencies for large scale irrigation and various operators for small scale irrigation) and the water user
organizations (WUOs). Regional technical assistance will be provided to design a series of
performance-based agreements linking, for each type of irrigation, the three parties involved in
irrigation development and management and to facilitate the adoption of this approach. These
agreements will clarify the roles and responsibilities of each parties and specify how public funds
would be disbursed based on certain performance indicators related to governance, asset
management, cost recovery, and service delivery. A specific emphasis will be given at maintenance
and renewal financing to ensure the long term viability of the irrigation systems. For the public
agencies managing large scale schemes this will build on already existing agreements (lettre de
mission for Senegal's SAED, contrat plan for Mali's Office du Niger etc.).
32.    Component B: Financing irrigation investment solutions (US$117 million). This component
will be a key element in the overall capacity building strategy by allowing direct application of the
knowledge and institutional strengthening supported under the Components A and C. Component B
will also directly contribute to the expansion of irrigated areas through targeted financing for
irrigation systems with high potential for scaling up but not yet widely disseminated. Investments
will be selected with a view to demonstrate the relevance of the proposed solution i.e. a combination
of services, technology and infrastructure, and financing mechanism. The component will produce
the "bricks" that will be used by the countries to build their irrigation investment portfolio and to
improve the performance of existing systems. All investment financed under this component shall be
of regional interest in terms of their development potential and will contribute to building the
knowledge base and "know-how" at regional level. This component will include the following


﻿interventions.
a.     Updating existing studies and financing new studies for irrigation systems development
covering about 50,000 hectares. The studies will be selected based on their strategic relevance in
supporting the implementation of the various lines of business following the irrigation typology.
Studies would include Strategic Environmental and Social Assessments (SESA), where relevant, i.e.
when there are environmental and social risks associated with scaling up irrigation development.
Groundwater potential maps will also be produced for areas where unsustainable use is a risk.
b.     Modernizing existing, functional irrigation systems by e.g. using flow measurement devices,
replacing open canals with low pressure pipe systems, developing solar pumping etc. and by
providing improved services for operation and maintenance of the schemes. These services may also
include agriculture support to beneficiaries of irrigation infrastructure to improve agricultural and
commercialization practices as well as water resources management. Modernization solutions will
contribute to improve water efficiency and energy efficiency. Implementation will be phased within
each country according to institutional readiness and progress made under Component A.
c.     Financing development of new small to medium scale irrigation systems with proven scale
up potential using harmonized approaches allowing replicability for widespread dissemination. The
subprojects to be financed would cover the range of small to medium scale AWM systems including
(i) improved rainwater harvesting in lowland areas; (ii) individual smallholder irrigation using
adapted technologies; (iii) small- and medium-size irrigation managed by producers' groups and
communities. Countries will have the flexibility to adjust their investment plans to their specific
context (strengths and weaknesses) and in line with the Component A outputs. It is expected that 20
to 30,000 hectares could be developed in total providing benefits to 10 to 15,000 farmers. Exact
numbers will result from the investment choices to be made by the countries during project
preparation. The project aims at implementing improved solutions at a scale sufficient to demonstrate
their competitiveness and their expansion potential but remaining within limits set to avoid any
substantial environmental impacts. The scale shall however allow to establish a wide enough client
base to ensure the viability of various professional services (for maintenance etc.) that will be
established and strengthened to operate the schemes. These considerations will be incorporated in the
local development planning process to be implemented prior to any investment.
33.    Component C: Training, knowledge management and coordination (US$37 million). This
component will provide training and knowledge management services specifically related to the tools
and approaches developed under Component A and applied to the solutions implemented under
Component B for the development and management of irrigation systems. It will also cover the
a project coordination and communication needs and monitoring and evaluation systems as described
below. The regional tools and services supporting the activities described in this component will be
designed with a view to ensure their sustainability post-project through appropriate financing
mechanisms.
a.     Technical assistance for the identification of training needs of various categories of
stakeholders , and working with selected institutes with appropriate capacities to develop the required
training sessions. The training program will be related to the specific skills and services that will be
necessary to deliver the irrigation investment solutions under Component B. Close coordination with
on-going education projects in the target countries will be sought to establish complementarity.
b.     Financing stakeholders' capacity enhancement needs using a demand driven approach.
Operators, investors and producers involved in agricultural water management will be incentivized
and enabled to improve their skills in order to meet minimum quality standards in key functions to
guarantee irrigation performance. These standards will be established at regional level and cross-
fertilization between countries will be sought in the implementation of this training program i.e.
stakeholders from one country would be trained in another country on a specific solution that the
latter country has developed.


﻿c.     Establishment of a regional Knowledge Management (KM) platform including ICT tools,
discussion forums, regional workshops, benchmarking activities, and resources for capitalization and
dissemination of good practices and for research to development linkages. The use of innovative ICT
tools will help ensure a trickle-down effect towards end beneficiaries. Selected research
O
U       dissemination activities would also be financed following regional call for proposals. A specific
focus will be given to improving the performance of public irrigation authorities managing large-
scale schemes in the six countries through benchmarking activities.
d.     Provision of quality enhancement services to support the above interventions and ensure
quality of design and sustainability. This would be done using roster of experts, quality review
panels, peer review system and specific tools like water resources mapping and hydrological
databases.
e.     Improve the commercial environment for the delivery of adapted and competitive irrigation
technologies and associated services (including financial services like leasing for example) for
producers and field operators through a mix of market information systems, technology standards
and quality assurance, and market development support. These activities will be driven at regional
level to obtain economies of scale.
f.     Monitoring and Evaluation at regional and national level. An integrated M&E system will be
developed linking the national systems to the regional one. This system will also be linked to the KM
platform in order to benefit from the qualitative information generated through the latter. Remote
sensing will be used for the monitoring of irrigated areas.
g.     Project coordination and communication at regional and national level, including fiduciary
matters, communication, planning, and the monitoring of safeguards mitigation measures. In
addition, it will include fund raising activities for the irrigation sector and steer the policy dialogue
and advocacy work for improved enabling environment at regional level. Finally, the regional
coordination will manage the partnerships with regional and international partners to gather
continued support to and alignment with the Sahel Irrigation Initiative. This will require a strong
communication effort.
34.    All activities under the project shall be of regional interest. This means that they shall (i)
address an irrigation-related issue that is common to several countries; and/or (ii) contribute - within
and beyond the boundaries of the project - to enhance investment programs and projects of more
than one country; and/or (iii) contribute to enabling the environment and/or enhancing capacity in
more than one country. Therefore, all activities will be implemented following regionally
harmonized approaches framing their implementation with a view to increase their impact and to
a       ensure their replicability from one country to another. These harmonized approaches will also aim at
ensuring sustainability of the tools, methodologies, institutions or investments that will be used to
implement the project.
35.    All three components will be implemented in parallel. However the design of the project will
remain flexible so that the first outputs of the component B can inform the planning and institutional
improvement processes under Component A and help establish the training priorities under
Component C. The investment program under Component B will be established during project
preparation for the first 18 months of the project.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project will be implemented in six countries: Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania, Niger and
Senegal. Detailed locations of project activities are not yet known. Investment projects under
Component B will be identified following a demand driven approach during project implementation;
an in consultation with the partners involved and other relevant programs and projects so as to
develop synergy and build to the extent possible on work already done or planned in these areas.


﻿The areas of intervention are limited to rural areas, and are presumably some of the world's regions
most seriously affected by climate change, with major impacts on water availability.
O
U       The countries are also sharing four basins:
1) The Senegal river basin, shared by four countries: Guinea, Mali, Mauritania and Senegal
2) The Niger River basin which spreads over ten countries, including Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali and
Niger
3) The Volta River Basin shared by six countries: Burkina Faso, Mali, Cote d'Ivoire, Ghana, Benin
and Togo
4) The "conventional" Lake Chad Basin spreading over four countries: Chad, Niger, Nigeria and
Cameroon
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The borrower's institutional capacity for safeguard policies varies tremendously from one country to
another of the six countries participating in the project. Some of the countries have relatively mature
environmental ministries and agencies, sufficient staffing and an adequate regulatory framework,
while other countries institutions are relatively young, understaffed and the legal framework missing
important elements (annexes, executive regulations, etc.).
The regional structure of the project does however envisage that the Permanent Interstate Committee
for Drought Control in the Sahel (CILSS) will have an overall operational management responsibility
from a technical view point. The Committee has the necessary technical knowledge and expertise in
environmental and social issues in the region and as such has the technical capacity to identify and
flag any safeguards related concerns to the implementation of the safeguards instruments for
national-level investments, should any arise during project implementation. The Project also
envisages regional training activities to be coordinated and supported by CILSS and other competent
bodies, and training Safeguard Policies will be among those activities
Each country will be requested to nominate a Safeguards Focal Point at the early stage of
preparation, who will be working in close collaboration with the Project's safeguards specialists The
Safeguards Focal Points will oversee the preparation of the safeguard documents, liaise with local
consultants, provide the necessary inputs, and coordinate the organization of the necessary
consultations with key concerned stakeholders and the in-country disclosure of the safeguards
instruments.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Dahlia Lotayef (GENO7)
Salamata Bal (GSUO1)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The Project is proposed to be classified as a Category
OP/BP 4.01                              B project due to the fact that potential environmental
and social impacts of the irrigation investments to
modernize existing functional irrigation systems or to
develop new small to medium scale ones are


﻿expected to be local, site-specific, and easily
manageable.
A regional Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF), with country specific annexes,
will be prepared, consulted upon and disclosed
before appraisal.
Strategic and/or sectoral impact assessments will be
developed during implementation in conjunction
with the update of existing studies and the
preparation of new ones for irrigation systems
development. Studies would include Strategic
Environmental and Social Assessments (SESA),
where relevant, i.e. when there are environmental
and social risks associated with scaling up irrigation
development. Groundwater potential maps will also
be produced for areas where unsustainable use is a
risk.
The terms of reference for these assessments will be
developed during preparation, and prior to appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes          Although the project is not expected to intervene in
any critically important natural habitat, the exact
sites of the proposed investments are not yet known.
The impacts of severe climate conditions, insecurity
and conflicts situations may lead to expanding
activities in areas requiring specific management
considerations.
The team will also confirm during preparation
whether any potential sites for project
implementation are located within RAMSAR sites,
especially in the Niger Inner Delta. If this is the case,
appropriate mitigation measures will be identified
and integrated in the safeguards documents.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No
Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes          The project does not intend to finance specific
agriculture activities, but the fact that it deals with
irrigation schemes for agriculture purposes implies
the possibility of handling and using pesticides
within the areas of intervention or the areas of
influence of the project. Country specific Pest
Management Plans will be prepared and annexed to
the regional ESMF.
Physical Cultural Resources   Yes          The eligibility criteria for investment projects will
OP/BP 4.11


﻿ensure that no investments are selected in areas with
a cultural heritage potential, but given that the exact
locations of these activities have not yet been
determined, chance-find procedures will be included
in work contracts.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project areas,
4.10                                       as defined by OP/BP 4.10.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes          No physical displacement is anticipated due to the
BP 4.12                                    nature of the project. However the intended
investments and rehabilitation of small to medium
scale irrigation systems to be carried out under the
various subprojects, might create a need to
compensate for the loss of crops or property caused
by the rehabilitation of the irrigation schemes. OP/
BP 4.12 might be potentially triggered as a
consequence of these potential losses.
As the specific subprojects are not yet clearly defined
and the exact sites of the proposed investments are
not yet known, it is not yet certain that the RAPs will
be carried out at the time being. A regional
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) with country
specific annexes, will be prepared, consulted upon
and disclosed before appraisal.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No            The scale and the size of the irrigation investments is
not likely to have any impacts on existing dam
structures, or be affected by these structures. The
proposed screening mechanism of sub-projects and
related impact assessment process will however
include specific instructions to consider the potential
impacts, if any, on existing dams within the area of
influence of the sub-project, as well as the potential
cumulative impacts of sub-projects.
New catchment and storage systems to be considered
for financing by the project will be limited to small
earth dams, for which the project would follow either
the FAO guidelines for siting, design and
construction of such dams (published in 2010) or
other equivalent country specific guidelines which
are acceptable to the World Bank.
Projects on International     Yes          This irrigation project spans over four basins (see
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       details in Section D on Project location), which calls
for the triggering of this policy.
Most of the irrigation withdrawals that would be


﻿financed under the project (some 3500 to 5000 ha for
each of the 6 countries on average) would however
be scattered, ranging from very small to medium
scale and using groundwater or water stored in small
earth reservoirs that capture rainwater. Pumping
water from international rivers may be considered for
some of these small irrigation schemes, and the team
will attempt during the early stages of preparation to
evaluate the quantitative and geographic impact of
these activities onto international rivers and/or
aquifers, based on likely assumptions of what the
project will finance.
Given that: (i) the proposed investments aim at
modernizing existing, functional irrigation systems
and/or the development of new small to medium
scale irrigation systems, and (ii) the project will
update existing studies or finance new ones for
irrigation systems development, but not including
any detailed engineering studies, an exception from
the notification requirement will be sought. No
additions or alterations are expected at this stage
where the investments are mainly to demonstrate
irrigation systems with high scaling up potential,
without actually doing this scaling up.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Jun-2016
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Preparation missions: October 2015 and April 2016
Launch of safeguard related studies: January 2016
Consultations and validation of safeguards instruments: May 2016
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Francois Onimus,Elisee Ouedraogo
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                  Date: 18-Feb-2016
Practice Manager/      Name: Alexander E. Bakalian (PMGR)              Date: 23-Feb-2016
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


