                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                         APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA20483
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Nov-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                               Project ID:   P149528
                            Project Name:       CH-Second Gansu Cultural and Natural Heritage Protection and Development
                                                Project (P149528)
                            Task Team           Ji You,Guido Licciardi
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       25-Mar-2016                 Estimated     23-Feb-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GSU08                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       160.76           Total Bank Financing:    100.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                       60.76
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                         100.00
                              Total                                                                                         160.76
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To conserve cultural and natural heritage, enhance tourism services and improve community services
                           in selected project sites in Gansu Province.
                            3. Project Description
                           The Longdongnan Regional Strategic Planning Study for the Cultural and Natural Heritage
                           Conservation and Sustainable Tourism Development (Longdongnan Regional Study) provided the
                           basis to screen sites for inclusion in the project. The selected sites have a complete set of planning


                                                                         Page 1 of 11
                         tools to expedite implementation, including heritage conservation and development plans at both
                         county and site levels, as well as tourism development plans at both county and site levels. Of the
                         sites identified based on the above, sites with higher development potential, including attractiveness
Public Disclosure Copy




                         for private sector investments, job creation, and income generation for local communities, were
                         prioritized.

                         Six sites have been selected for inclusion in the project as bellow;

                         Kongtong District:       Kongtong Mountain Cluster of Historic Buildings,                    5A
                         Jinchuan County:         Hundred Mile Grottoes Corridor Conservation,            4A
                         Zhuanglang County:       Yunya Temple Cultural Heritage and Scenic Area,                     4A
                         Tanchang County:         Guan'egou Ethnic Cultural and Natural Heritage Conservation,        4A
                         Kangxian County:         Yangba Natural Heritage Conservation,                  4A
                         Hezheng County:          Hua'er Traditional Music Conservation and Inheritance Program       4A

                         The three project components described below would blend investments in sites and communities
                         with capacity building.
                         Component 1: Heritage Conservation and Tourism Services Improvement (Component cost US
                         $117.72 million, IBRD share US$73.77 million). This component will support Carrying out of site
                         conservation and protection activities, construction, upgrading and/or rehabilitation of basic
                         infrastructure and services facilities in Project Sites, consisting of, inter alia:
                         i.)      Protection and conservation of cultural and natural heritage and cultural relics, including
                         studies on Project-related activities and the design of cultural heritage preservation programs;
                         ii.)             Construction, rehabilitation and/or upgrading of tourist roads, footpaths, pedestrian
                         bridges, and scenic lookouts, including associated equipment;
                         iii.)            Provision and upgrading of services including water supply, drainage, wastewater
                         collection and disposal, solid waste collection, power, and tourist signage, including associated
                         equipment;
                         iv.)             Construction and/or rehabilitation of selected scenic areas's administration facilities,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         museums, heritage and service centers, and parking space associated thereto;
                         v.)              Implementation of mitigation measures and works for natural heritage aimed at
                         landslides, floods, and other natural hazards; including associated equipment.
                         vi.)             Development of a tourism information system and website for each of the Project
                         Sites, which is fully integrated with the province-wide Gansu E-Tourism system.

                         Component 2: Community Basic Services Delivery (Component cost US$28.69 million, IBRD share
                         US$17.98 million). This component will support construction, upgrading and/or rehabilitation of
                         basic infrastructure, and provision of basic services to the communities in the Project Sites,
                         consisting of, inter alia: (a) improvement of pavement for village access roads; (b) provision of water
                         supply, wastewater collection and disposal; (c) solid waste collection and sanitation improvements;
                         (d) street lighting; (e) construction of a wastewater collection network in Kongtong Scenic Area; (f)
                         construction of a wastewater treatment plan along with a water collection network in Hua'er
                         Songmingyan Scenic Area; and (g) construction of village classrooms for teaching and practicing
                         local intangible cultural heritage.
                         Component 3: Capacity Building, Institutional Strengthening, and Project Management Support
                         (Component cost US$8.00 million, IBRD share US$8.00 million). This component consists of:
                         i.)      Provision of training to selected Project-related staff, scenic area administrators and
                         operators, as appropriate, on inter alia, cultural and natural heritage protection and scenic area
                         management.

                                                                       Page 2 of 11
                         ii.)     Provision of: (a) training to residents of local communities in the Project Sites on topics
                         related to, inter alia, the start-up or expansion of locally-owned and tourism-related small businesses,
                         business skills for participation in tourism, and protection of intangible cultural practices; and (b)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         technical assistance to local communities for incubating community-level small business associations
                         and cooperatives.
                         iii.)    Provision of Project management support and technical assistance on, inter alia: (a) design
                         review; (b) project management, monitoring and supervision; (c) construction supervision; (d)
                         independent monitoring of the implementation of environmental and social safeguards; and (e)
                         project reporting.
                         iv.)     Carrying out of studies on heritage preservation and the culture of local ethnic minorities, as
                         well as on the overall management of scenic sites (including asset management).
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)


                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Meixiang Zhou (GSU02)
                         Xin Ren (GEN2A)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes            Activities proposed include conservation of cultural relics,
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      rehabilitation of existing roads/paths, and construction of
                                                                     new roads/foot paths, tourism and sanitation facilities in
                                                                     natural reserves, national scenic/geological parks or local
                                                                     drinking water protection area. Given the cultural,
                                                                     historical and natural significance and sensitivity of the
                                                                     sites involved, activities and limited capacity at local
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     level, a category A was assigned.

                                                                     One Environmental Assessment (EA) report has been
                                                                     prepared to consolidate all subprojects➢❨ s domestic
                                                                     EAs. An Environmental and Social Management Plan
                                                                     (ESMP) was developed which includes general mitigation
                                                                     measures and site-specific measures as well as monitoring
                                                                     for each subproject, taking into account the WB's
                                                                     Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines
                                                                     applicable to the project.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP      Yes            Project activities include small scale civil work such as
                          4.04                                       foot paths in peripheral zones of natural reserves of
                                                                     national/provincial level or national scenic/geological
                                                                     parks or provincial drinking water protection areas for the
                                                                     nearby county towns. According to the WB policies, the
                                                                     OP 4.04 is triggered. Relevant mitigation measures and
                                                                     monitoring requirement have been included in the ESMP.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36          No             Not applicable




                                                                      Page 3 of 11
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     Not applicable
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural        Yes   Activities proposed include conservation of provincial
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           and county level physical cultural resources as defined by
                                                        this OP. More details can be seen under II A below. A
                                                        cultural resource management plan has been developed
                                                        and included in the ESMP.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   The Bank OP 4.10 policy is triggered. The project will
                         BP 4.10                        support Tanchang county for ethnic cultural heritage
                                                        protection and Hezheng county for traditional music
                                                        conservation and inheritance. There are various ethnic
                                                        minority groups such as Tibetan, Dongxiang and Hui
                                                        minorities in 1566 households with 6901 people in 7
                                                        villages of these project counties. A social assessment has
                                                        been conducted and confirmed the presence of these
                                                        ethnic minorities which meet the requirements for the
                                                        Bank OP 4.10 IP term only in the identified seven villages
                                                        amongst all the 30 project villages. A free prior informed
                                                        consultation was done with ethnic minorities in all the 7
                                                        project villages, social risks and impacts were assessed,
                                                        an ethnic minority development plan has been prepared to
                                                        mitigate social risks and promote positive social impacts
                                                        and benefits for ethnic minority people. Various activities
                                                        and community-based organizations have been included
                                                        in the EMDP for intangible cultural heritage protection
                                                        and economic opportunities for these ethnic people and
                                                        their communities. According to the SA findings, there
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        will be no other ethnic minorities to be triggered in the
                                                        project areas, so there is no need for an IPPF.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   By project appraisal, through optimization of design and
                         OP/BP 4.12                     selection of location, the project civil works will be
                                                        constructed on existing land in scenic areas which are
                                                        already state owned land or ready-for-use collective land
                                                        for village level infrastructure. However, some of the
                                                        specific locations of land to be used for the project may be
                                                        adjusted during project implementation, such as new
                                                        paths and small bridges, small scale of local cultural
                                                        exhibition centre, and tourism facilities. A resettlement
                                                        policy framework thus has been prepared to address
                                                        potential emerging land demands during project
                                                        implementation. The RPF sets measures and procedures
                                                        to be followed so as to mitigate negative impacts of
                                                        involuntary resettlement.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP     No    The proposed project investment will not involve or link
                         4.37                           to dams defiled in OP/BP 4.37.




                                                         Page 4 of 11
                            Projects on International   No            Not applicable
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed        No            Not applicable
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environment
                              The project will bring overall positive impacts on the environment through the conservation of
                              cultural relics and traditional houses, the upgrading and paving of access roads, building of sewage
                              treatment facilities, and landscaping. Current impacts of local residents and tourists on the
                              environment will be mitigated through the provision of key environmental services such as sewage
                              interception and treatment, solid waste collection and disposal, and power supply. Tourist impact
                              on the sites will be controlled through the provision of fencing, pathways and signage.

                             However, there is risk of damage to physical cultural heritage from repair, reconstruction and
                             inadequate protection of chance-finds during construction. Inappropriate restoration that does not
                             match the original architecture style and color can be a threat too. Similarly, renovation of
                             traditional buildings with inferior materials or without expert guidance may result in the
                             irreversible loss of valuable heritage. This risk will be mitigated through close involvement of the
                             cultural relic bureaus at each level in the design review and approval, and through pre-
                             qualification of contractors for conservation works as well as strict site supervision following the
                             ESMP.

                             The adverse environmental impacts at each site from project works are not significant due to the
Public Disclosure Copy




                             small scale, as shown by experience of the First Gansu project on cultural heritage, and can be
                             readily mitigated or managed. Impacts during construction mainly include damage to cultural
                             resources by improper repair, noise and dust, wastewater discharge, vegetation loss, and off site
                             impacts from borrow and disposal pits on water and soil erosion. Major impacts during operation
                             include air pollution and noise from traffic on new roads, sewage and solid wastes from tourist
                             facilities and home stay, and social and environmental impacts induced by influx of tourists once
                             the project completes.

                             Social issues
                             The project will have significant positive impacts through improvement of cultural heritage
                             protection, local accessibility and support to tourism and community development. Specific
                             positive impacts include improved road accessibility and safety, better tourism services and
                             supporting facilities, as well as new opportunities of employment and income for local people to
                             involve in project construction during implementation and tourism service provision in the long
                             term. There were totally 707,000 people living in poverty by Chinese official poverty line in 2014
                             in the 6 project counties and district, with a poverty incidence of 22%. This accounts for about
                             16.8% of whole Gansu provincial poor people which was 4,170,000 in 2014. The project will
                             make big contributions to local poverty reduction with better facilities, services and income
                             resources for local people in project areas. Negative impacts include risks associated with
                             intervention in 7 ethnic minority villages out of the total 30 project villages, dust and noise

                                                                        Page 5 of 11
                           pollution, temporary and partial roads blockage, and traffic jams during project construction.

                           There are 6901 Tibetan, Hui and Dongxiang minority people present in 1566 households in 7
Public Disclosure Copy




                           villages of Tanchang and Hezheng Counties. There are Tibetan minority people in Luren, Xinping
                           and Yuezangfu villages of Guan-e-gou subproject of Tanchang County. In these village, Tibetan
                           people account for 73 to 100% of the total villagers respectively. In another 4 villages in
                           Songming subproject area of Hezheng County, there are concentrated presence of Dongxiang and
                           Hui ethnic people in project communities, they account for 33 to 86% of total villagers in
                           Dashanzhuang, Cheba, Bianpo and Ketuo villages. These ethnic minority groups all meet the
                           definition of the Bank IP term.

                           In addition, the project will construct some civil works. Although by appraisal the civil works will
                           be all constructed on existing land with no need for additional land acquisition or resettlement.
                           Nevertheless future land acquisition and resettlement which can??t be determined by project
                           appraisal might emerge given possible adjustment of location selected for the civil works during
                           project implementation.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Environment
                           While the project is expected to bring overall positive long-term environmental and social
                           benefits, there are some potential long-term and indirect impacts mainly due to tourism
                           development. Disposal of garbage and manure collected from the tourism area, over influx of
                           tourists that exceed carrying capacity and environmental facilities of scenic areas might have long
                           term impacts on the environment and various protected areas such as natural reserves, drinking
                           water protection zone and geological formation in geo parks. These may threaten the natural
                           beauty or cultural heritage of the site, and the surrounding environment. However, at each site
                           under various protected areas, zoning and their enforcement have been in place for years to control
                           induced development.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Social
                           (1) The change to identified location of civil works during project implementation potentially may
                           cause additional land demanding for involuntary resettlement.
                           (2) Influx of migrant workers during the project construction period and increasing influx of
                           tourists may have some impact on local social security, cultural shocks to ethnic minorities, and
                           even epidemic disease expansion.
                           (3) With the development of the scenic spot attracting more and more tourists, the influx of the
                           external culture and tourism consumers may increase the price of local goods and business moral
                           standards. The issues of value and moral degradation may arise.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The EA process has played a key role in optimizing the project scope and design. Several activities
                           originally proposed were within the control zone of cultural relics, buffer zone of provincial nature
                           reserves and certain zone of national geo parks/wetland (e.g. in Kang County) where the types of
                           activities proposed are not allowed by applicable national regulations. These proposals were either
                           dropped, relocated or adjusted to ensure legal compliance domestically. For acceptable activities
                           proposed, various alternatives, including a 'no project' scenario, have been identified and compared
                           during the EA process in order to avoid or minimize potential adverse environmental and social
                           impacts. Different sites for several subprojects were compared from environmental point of view.

                                                                     Page 6 of 11
                           Different types of latrine available were compared, namely, conventional dry latrine, standard
                           flush toilet, and so called eco-toilet using foam to collect wastes, with recommendations made
                           based on local situation, cost and environmental consideration. Major available technologies for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           small scale on-site sewage treatment were analyzed and compared too. The recommended options
                           are those environmentally sounder, more economically viable and more adapted to local
                           conditions.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Environment
                           Following the requirements of Bank??s safeguard policies and relevant domestic regulations, the
                           Environmental Assessment (EA) was prepared by a certified EA firm with recent experience in
                           other Bank projects. Based on the EA, an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)
                           has been developed, taking into account the applicable WB??s Environmental, Health and Safety
                           (EHS) Guidelines. General mitigation measures were developed into Environmental Code of
                           Practice (ECOP) to deal with civil work impacts common to all subprojects. Site-specific
                           measures were devised to mitigate potential impacts on various protected areas (natural reserves,
                           geo-park, drinking water protection areas etc) identified in the EA process. In addition, the ESMP
                           includes Physical Cultural Resources (PCR) Management Plan, learning from experiences from
                           recent WB projects in China on PCR protection. A social impacts management plan is also
                           included, taken mitigation measures from the social assessment report.

                          The newly appointed provincial PMO has extensive experience in building infrastructure and
                          tourism facilities in the province and project management though little experience with the WB.
                          However, its deputy director was the PMO director for Gansu Cultural and Natural Heritage
                          Protection and Development Project, just completed in 2015, throughout its preparation and most
                          part of its implementation He has adequate experience with the WB safeguard requirements.
                          However, most of the project counties/sites are new to the WB project and their PMOs have little
                          knowledge about the WB safeguard policies and requirements. The Bank team provided training
Public Disclosure Copy




                          on safeguard and will continue capacity building in safeguard preparation and implementation
                          throughout the project cycle. An environmental training plan was designed as part of the ESMP to
                          guide training of all parties involved in the project (PMOs, contractors, supervisors etc) to enhance
                          their capacity to address potential impacts and environmental issues during the implementation.

                          Social
                          To comply with the Bank IP policy requirement, social assessment has been conducted. As part of
                          the SA, free, prior and informed consultations were done with ethnic minority people in the 7
                          ethnic minority villages. Based on the SA, an ethnic minority development plan has been prepared
                          by a professional consulting team under the coordination of the PMO and deemed satisfactory to
                          the Bank requirements. The EMDP includes measures to ensure that project activities shall be
                          fairly offered to all the 7 ethnic communities in a culturally appropriate way and promote benefits
                          and participation of ethnic minority people (both men and women) in the project. Priorities will be
                          given to these ethnic and vulnerable people in project villages in terms of jobs, livelihood
                          development or restoration and other economic opportunities resulting from the project, in
                          particular, ethnic intangible cultural heritage protection and promotion via development of local
                          performing arts and tourism-oriented souvenirs. Also the project will support a number of
                          awareness raising and skills training, hands-on advisory services for local intangible cultural
                          heritage protection and promotion, foster community-based organizations, and promote tourism-
                          related services and local products development for the ethnic communities.


                                                                    Page 7 of 11
                           Implementation of the EMDP will be monitored by the PMOs, the Bank task team and external
                           independent consultants. For the rest 23 project villages, a social action plan has also been
Public Disclosure Copy




                           prepared. and incorporated in the ESMP, FSR and reflected in the project procurement plan with
                           specific activities and budgets. These instruments are to mitigate negative social impacts and risks,
                           and to promote local people's economic opportunities and cultural heritage protection, community-
                           based organizations and tourism service-driven livelihoods.
                           A resettlement policy framework (RPF) has been prepared to address future possible land
                           acquisition and resettlement although all the known locations for the project civil works are on
                           existing ready-for-use land and do not need additional acquisition. The RPF describes the overall
                           legal framework, planning principles, procedures, compensation and rehabilitation approach,
                           consultation and participation requirements, grievance redress mechanisms, organization and
                           monitoring arrangements.

                           The Provincial PMO has some experience in preparing and implementing World Bank financed
                           projects. The Bank team and external social consulting team will provide ongoing training and
                           guidance for PPMO and all the PMOs at local level. The PPMO has also agreed to hire an
                           external social consulting team for technical support in dealing with social aspects of the project.
                           Each PMO has delegated a staff to take charge of social safeguards management. The PMOs have
                           prepared a SA with a social action plan, EMDP and RPF.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Environment
                           For this project, the key stakeholders include local communities who live in and around the project
                           sites. Public disclosure and consultation has been conducted two rounds during EA preparation as
                           per the Bank requirement for category A project. The first round was conducted during November
                           2015 in all project counties and cities as well as at provincial level with project information and a
                           briefing on potential impacts disclosed at official websites of local government/PMOs and notice
Public Disclosure Copy




                           boards of affected communities. The second round was during January- February of 2016 with the
                           full draft EA/ESMP being disclosed at official websites with announcement in local newspaper,
                           TV and notice boards of local communities concerned in all project localities. Public consultation
                           that follow suit was carried out using a combination of questionnaire survey, expert consultation,
                           workshops and public meetings. Public consultations have focused more on affected people
                           instead of local officials. Their concerns and suggestions have been incorporated into the EA and
                           the development of the ESMP. The details on public consultations is available in the EA report.
                           The English version of EA/ESMP was first sent to the Bank Infoshop on 25 January 2016 and re-
                           disclosed later when the EA/ESMP was updated and revised.

                           Social
                           A social assessment report, ESMP, EMDP and RPF were prepared after intensive consultation
                           with local stakeholders in the project areas. These social instruments are planned to disclose
                           locally in PMO's government website on Jan 20, 2016 and made accessible to general public and
                           disclosed in the Bank InfoShop on January 24 and the ESMP on January 25, 2016.

                           Grievance Redress. A mechanism has been established for grievance redress. Grievances can be
                           filed both orally and in writing. Starting at village and neighborhood committee level, the
                           grievances can be elevated to county/district, city level if they are not satisfied with the resolution
                           at the lower level. The affected people could also file their cases in court if they are not happy


                                                                       Page 8 of 11
                           with the resolution by the project authority. All grievances and their resolution will be recorded.
                           This mechanism has been disclosed to the local population.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      18-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   25-Jan-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      05-May-2016
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            20-Jan-2016
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   24-Jan-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            20-Jan-2016
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      09-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   24-Jan-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            20-Jan-2016
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?




                                                                     Page 9 of 11
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?



                                                                     Page 10 of 11
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ji You,Guido Licciardi
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                           Date: 07-Nov-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)                      Date: 07-Nov-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 11 of 11
