                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                        Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSR15877
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Nov-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Nov-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Philippines                                  Project ID:           P101076
                            Project Name:     Climate Change Adaptation Program (P101076)
                            Task Team         Leonardo Jr. Batugal Paat
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         09-Feb-2010                                  Estimated   29-Jun-2010
                            Appraisal Date:                                                Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEN02                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                           Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                              Climate change
                            Area:
                            Sector:           Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (29%), Crops
                                              (20%), Irrigation and drainage (20%), Agricultural extens ion and research
                                              (20%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (11%)
                            Theme:            Climate change (60%), Land administration and management (20%), Natural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                              disaster management (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                          No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        55.42           Total Bank Financing:                                           0.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                 Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                            50.45
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                    4.97
                              Total                                                                                               55.42
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?



                                                                                Page 1 of 9
                         2. Current Global Environmental Objective(s)
                         The project development objective is to develop approaches that would enable targeted communities
                         to adapt to the potential impacts of climate variability and c                           hange.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This would be achieved by strengthening existing institutional frameworks
                         for climate change adaptation, and by the demonstration of cost-effective adapt
                         ation strategies in agriculture and natural resources management.
                         Proposed New GEO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The project development objective is to develop approaches that would enable targeted communities
                         to adapt to the potential impacts of climate variability and c                           hange.
                         This would be achieved by strengthening existing institutional frameworks
                         for climate change adaptation, and by the demonstration of cost-effective adapt
                         ation strategies in agriculture and natural resources management.
                         3. Project Description
                         The Philippines Climate Change Adaptation Project (PhilCCAP) was developed as a long-term
                         program of the Government to develop and pilot-test measures to better adapt to climate change
                         impacts and respond to climate change-related risks and hazards. The project is comprised of four
                         components namely: (Component 1) Strengthening the enabling environment for climate change
                         adaptation; (Component 2) Demonstrating climate change adaptation strategies in the agriculture and
                         natural resources sectors; (Component 3) Enhanced provision of scientific information for climate
                         risk management, and (Component 4) Project coordination. Described below are the components,
                         what has been achieved, and the proposed changes.

                         Component 1: Strengthening the Enabling Environment for Climate Change Adaptation
                         The aim of this component is to support the integration of climate change adaptation into the
                         agriculture and natural resources sectors and to strengthen the capabilities of government agencies
                         that play a role in pursuing the adaptation activities in these sectors. The key outputs of this
Public Disclosure Copy




                         component are the set of recommendations to strengthen the enabling policy environment at the
                         national and local levels; implementation of adaptation framework; development of decision making
                         framework for adaptation, capacity building and knowledge management, support to dissemination
                         of climate information and adaptation, awareness raising, and education.

                         Status: The implementing agency, the Climate Changer Commission (CCC), conducted a policy gap
                         assessment to serve as input to policy recommendations and the integrated decision-making
                         framework for national agencies and local government units. A knowledge management unit within
                         the CCC was established that documented the climate change adaptation practices. A protocol for
                         climate information sharing is being developed in collaboration with PAGASA. A communication
                         and engagement plan was developed with the implementing agencies.

                         Proposed changes: The restructuring proposes to extend the implementation of the awareness raising
                         and communication activity in the project’s pilot areas. The communications plan will be
                         implemented to generate support among government agencies and stakeholders and to further
                         promote the adoption of the adaptation tools and information. Communication and outreach events
                         will be conducted in partnership with local governments and civil society organizations while
                         recognizing the implications of the upcoming elections in 2016.

                         Component 2: Demonstrating Climate Change Adaptation Strategies in the Agriculture and Natural


                                                                     Page 2 of 9
                         Resources Sectors
                         The aim of this component is to help poor rural communities that are most at risk of climate change
                         impacts to adapt to the effects of climate change. It will demonstrate both tangible reductions in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         climate-related risks, and increased resilience to longer-term climate changes and climate-related
                         disasters. The proposed activities are targeted toward pilot-testing of adaptive mechanisms that could
                         be integrated into improved agricultural practices and natural resources management, and for
                         protecting the infrastructure that supports activities in these sectors. This component supported the
                         following adaptation measures:

                         • Content development and delivery of agricultural extension program to incorporate climate change
                         adaptation planning and decisions through Enhanced Climate Smart Farmers Field School (ECSFFS)
                         and Decision Support System (DSS);
                         • Redesign of irrigation systems in Cagayan and Western Visayas to strengthened resilience of
                         vulnerable irrigation infrastructure;
                         • Develop and pilot-test weather index-based crop insurance (WIBCI) mechanism to protect against
                         known perils such as drought and excessive rainfall, and
                         • Strengthened the resilience of natural ecosystems in two protected areas (Penablanca Protected
                         Landscape and Seascape and Siargao Island Protected Landscape and Seascape) through watershed
                         and coastal resource management.

                         Status: The National Irrigation Administration (NIA) completed the feasibility studies and
                         supplemental guidelines for incorporating climate change impacts into the designs of two pilot
                         irrigation systems. The farmers have started applying the techniques imparted by the Enhanced
                         Climate Smart Farmers Field School (ECSFFS) by the Agricultural Training Institute (ATI) and the
                         Bureau of Soils and Water Management (BSWM) of the Department of Agriculture. The ECSFFS
                         training was codified into a manual and for adoption as the resource kit of DA for climate smart
                         agriculture. The web- and SMS-based decision support system for corn and rice farm extension
                         workers and farmers developed by the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) has also been
                         completed and for integration with the Crop Manager database of DA. The Philippine Crop
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Insurance Corporation (PCIC) completed the first field test cycle of WIBCI in 2014 covering the dry
                         season in the pilot sites of Region 02 and Region 06. PCIC plans to complete the development of
                         geographical insurance units (GIU) and complete the second cycle wet season in Region 02. The
                         Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) has completed the revisions of the
                         protected area management plans for PPLS and SIPLAS incorporating the vulnerability assessments
                         of these PAs. Livelihood activities in these PAs are ongoing however may require more time to
                         complete the demonstration. DENR will undertake activities that will support and institutionalize the
                         PA management plans within LGU plans.

                         Proposed changes: The restructuring proposes to extend the implementation of activities under this
                         Component to complete the development and testing of key adaptation measures and strengthen the
                         institutionalization, adoption and awareness of the measures. No new activities are being introduced
                         in this component.

                         • NIA will test the Supplemental Guidelines and apply the climate change design considerations in
                         the redesigning of two irrigation systems of PIDP. Alongside, NIA will train its technical personnel
                         on the use of the Supplemental manual.
                         • The ATI and BSWM will train extension workers and those assigned at the Municipal
                         Agricultural Offices on the use of the Enhanced Climate Smart Farmers Field School (ECSFFS)
                         Manual including the Decision Support System.

                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                         • The PCIC will complete the development of the geographical insurance units. The development
                         and testing of the GIUs will be completed in in 2016 and supported by BSWM. The development and
                         pilot-testing of weather indices will also be undertaken for wet season in Cagayan Valley region.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         • The protected area management plans for the PPLS and the SIPLAS were completed and endorsed
                         by the protected area (PA) management board (PAMB). The extension will focus on strengthening
                         the institutional arrangements with the local government units to promote the integration of the PA
                         management plans with LGU development plans. Included during the extension period is the
                         completion of the testing of the key adaptation measures identified in the revised PA management
                         plans such as the agroforestry, mangrove rehabilitation, and coastal/marine-based livelihood projects.

                         Component 3: Enhanced Provision of Scientific Information for Climate Risk Management
                         This component aims to improve the access of end users, especially in the agriculture and natural
                         resources sectors, to more reliable scientific information that would enable more rapid and accurate
                         decision-making for climate risk management.

                         Status: The DOST through the PAGASA provided climate information (historical and projections
                         using PRECIS model) to implementing agencies for use in the design of adaptation options.

                         Proposed changes: The extension will complete the capacity enhancement activities for PAGASA
                         including the project implementing agencies on the use of climate information. This component will
                         complete the trainings on data generation, dissemination and use that were initiated to enhance the
                         institutional capacity of PAGASA and enable the institution to perform its mandate.

                         Component 4: Project Coordination
                         This component will support the project coordination mainly among the implementing agencies
                         DENR, DA, DOST, and the Climate Change Commission, PCIC and NIA. This component supports
                         the implementation of the activities by ensuring adequate and effective overall management,
                         guidance, and the day-to-day operations.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Status: The Project Management Office continues to provide coordination and management support
                         to the implementing agencies. Through the PMO, several projects have been leveraged including the
                         technical support from the GEF-MSP regional knowledge management project to scale up
                         investment partnership in the seas of East Asia, the Michigan Technological University, and the
                         International Finance Corporation (IFC).

                         Proposed changes: Activities during the extension will be continuation of project support and
                         coordination activities. The PMO plans to facilitate process documentation and the conduct of the
                         final evaluation study through an end of project survey. The PMO will also assist the CCC in the
                         roll-out of the information, education and communication (IEC) program designed to sustain the
                         interest and support of the stakeholders in implementing adaptation measures.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The adaptation measures are demonstrated in identified communities in the Municipality of
                         Penablanca and Tuguegarao City in the Province of Cagayan, the Municipality of Jalaur in the
                         Province of Iloilo, and the island province of Siargao. Most of the activities are designed to test a
                         particular measure at the same time build capabilities of communities. The Peñablanca Protected
                         Landscape and Seascape (PPLS) in Northern Luzon and the Siargao Islands Protected Landscape and
                         Seascape (SIPLAS) in Siargao Island in Northeastern Mindanao are two of the pilot sites of the


                                                                      Page 4 of 9
                           project. Livelihood activities in PPLS include agroforestry located along the allowable zone. For
                           SIPLAS, the livelihood activities identified are those that are coastal and marine-based. Activities
                           within the protected areas do not entail construction works and follow the existing PA management
Public Disclosure Copy




                           plans. While these areas are of high conservation values, the activities will be undertaken in areas
                           near existing settlements.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Marivi Amor Jucotan Ladia (GSURR)

                            6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental               Yes
                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
                            Pest Management OP 4.09     No
                            Physical Cultural           No
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      Yes
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    No
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                The project extension will allow the implementing agencies to complete the pilot testing of some
                              of the activities such as the adaptation measures, awareness and communication, and further
                              downscaling of climate information. No new activities will be introduced. The earlier EA of the
                              project identified the aspects of the project considered to have benign environmental impacts were
                              those associated with redesigning of irrigation infrastructure and the alternative livelihoods. The
                              project does not support any construction-related activities. The early lessons from the
                              implementation of the project confirms the assessment conducted during the project preparation
                              that the environmental benefits of the project far outweigh the envisaged negative environmental
                              impacts. It also validated the assessment that the environmental impacts from the implementation
                              of alternative livelihoods such as agroforestry in degraded uplands and seaweed farming as
                              minimal, localized, reversible, and can be readily mitigated. The design of these alternative
                              livelihoods were reviewed jointly by the Bank, PMO, and implementing agencies. The project
                              extension involves the continuation of activities the type of which are expected to have benign

                                                                        Page 5 of 9
                           environmental impacts. The implementation of the project confirmed the social assessment done
                           during project preparation that focused on the analysis of potential impacts on the social and
                           economic circumstances of the households, communities, and other stakeholders. The assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                           determined that overall the project is expected to improve income streams and equitable
                           distribution of opportunities among farmers, fishers, and other beneficiaries including women.
                           Among the components of the project, activities under Component 2 have social dimensions that
                           can be enhanced for improved benefit to the vulnerable groups. It was established during
                           implementation that there are no indigenous peoples (IPs) among identified household
                           beneficiaries or in the targeted communities. The areas used for demonstrating adaptation
                           measures do not belong to ancestral lands or claimed as part of any ancestral domains.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            The long-term environmental and social impacts are assessed to be beneficial with communities
                           and the targeted sectors being made more resilient to the impacts of climate change. The project
                           restructuring is expected to improve further the outcome of the project and consequently the
                           benefits derived by the communities.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            No adverse impacts are envisaged for the project. The extension proposed is to complete the
                           ongoing activities specifically the testing of adaptation measures and the institutionalization of
                           these measures.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            The DENR and DA are the agencies tasked to lead the activities mostly belonging to Component
                           2 of the project considered to have the potential to generate environmental and social impacts,
                           albeit benign and insignificant. The project implementation considered the Philippine EIS system
                           particularly the Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) and Environmental Management Plans as
Public Disclosure Copy




                           means to manage and address the impacts. The project's executing agency, the DENR, is the
                           primary institution with the mandate to review environmental impact assessment (EIA) studies for
                           any investment operations that are deemed covered by the Philippine EIA system. The EIA study
                           and review is a requirement for the issuance of environmental compliance certificates (ECCs) by
                           the DENR to any investment operations prior construction or implementation. The DENR, through
                           a Memorandum Circular updated its EIS system in 2011 to include considerations of climate
                           change and variability and disaster risk reduction. It is now completing the inclusion of technical
                           guidance in screening projects for climate change impacts through an initiative supported by the
                           World Bank and Australian DFAT. Recently, the DENR has also introduced an online application
                           for IEE in their attempt to make IEE process more convenient for project proponents. The
                           Environmental Management Bureau (EMB), the line bureau of the DENR with the responsibility
                           of implementing the EIS system has presence at the regional level and can handle environment
                           concerns of subprojects. Moreover, DENR has led/facilitated the establishment of multi-
                           stakeholder structures to deal with environmental management (as in the case of PAMBs in
                           protected areas) and environmental monitoring (as in the case of multi-partite monitoring teams
                           for environmentally critical projects). The DENR, being an implementer of Bank-financed
                           projects, is also familiar with the Bank's safeguard policies. The DENR has organized Protected
                           Area Management Boards (PAMBs) composed of various stakeholders and LGUs to set the
                           policies for the management of protected areas.



                                                                     Page 6 of 9
                         The Department of Agriculture and its attached agencies have extensive experience in executing
                         Bank assisted projects, and it is expected that with the inputs of the DENR, there would be
                         adequate capacity to carry out required actions.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The redesigned irrigation systems under PIDP have their respective Environmental and Social
                         Management Plans that provide details of managing identified potential impacts. Where required,
                         the projects are subjected to the Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) that assess the impacts
                         during construction and operation. The supplemental environmental measures as provided in the
                         Environmental Assessment addresses any additional impacts that may be brought by the inclusion
                         of new design. The supplemental measures also covers mitigating impacts from alternative
                         livelihood activities such as agroforestry and marine-based activities.

                         The two irrigation projects (Pinacanauan and Jalaur River Irrigation Systems) for climate proofing
                         are covered by the PIDP however based on earlier assessment, the redesigning and the execution
                         of civil works for both irrigation systems have no triggers to the Bank's Policy on Indigenous
                         Peoples. In the remote chance that the IP Policy will be triggered in the implementation of the
                         project, the PIDP IP Framework shall be applied. It provides guidance in the process to be
                         followed for getting the Free and Prior Informed Consent of the affected IP community and that
                         adverse impacts on them, if any, will be mitigated in compliance to Bank's OP 4.10. In so doing
                         affected IPs may directly benefit from the proposed activities.

                         Issues that arose during the implementation include those associated with delineation of sub-
                         project areas in Siargao Island and Penablanca, particularly the plantation sites supported by
                         PhilCCAP and those supported by other Government initiatives including the national Greening
                         Program. This issue was resolved through geotagging and complemented by ground truthing that
                         fostered the agreements on sub-project locations. On agroforestry establishment, the PAMB
                         identified previously disturbed upland classified as multiple use zone for the demonstration. Soil
                         and water conservation measures, sloping agricultural technology and intercropping were used in
                         the initial agroforestry plan. The implementing agencies and communities are cognizant of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         effects of pesticides and herbicides that local ordinances were enacted (municipal and barangay)
                         limiting the use of these agrochemicals.

                         There are no additional safeguards policies triggered for the extension. The extension sought for
                         PhilCCAP is intended to complete the development and demonstration of key climate change
                         adaptation measures and no new activities will be introduced. Supporting activities under
                         Components 1 and 3 that will be extended are considered “soft” activities, such as trainings,
                         communication, and policy advocacy, and are consistent with the project’s EA describing these as
                         having benign, localized and reversible environmental impacts. Activities under Component 2 that
                         will be completed during the extension include completion of agroforestry farm establishment for
                         upland communities of Penablanca Protected Landscape and Seascape and the investment
                         partnership and knowledge management planning for the seaweed and abalone farming in Siargao
                         Island Protected Landscape and Seascape. These activities are covered in the EA of the project.
                         The rest of the activities under Component 2 have been completed or have not been pursued, for
                         example rural infrastructure other than irrigation system. As established during project
                         implementation, the pilot sites did not have indigenous peoples (IPs) communities or any claims to
                         ancestral domains. The EA Framework developed for PhilCCAP established the process to screen,
                         identify, assess and manage the potential impacts of the subprojects/activities. The EA Framework
                         is comprehensive covering the activities of each component and presented a typology of
                         subprojects and adaptation measures that may be considered by the project. The EA differentiated

                                                                   Page 7 of 9
                           the “hard” projects that may require further analysis such as the retrofit engineering design of
                           irrigation systems under the PIDP. The activities that will be extended are mostly “soft” activities
                           and are covered in the current EA.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders of the project remain the same and includes the upland communities in the
                           Municipality of Penablanca (Cagayan), farmers of Tuguegarao City and Iloilo, and coastal
                           communities of Siargao Island. The key government institutions still include the project executing
                           agencies with the Climate Change Commission. Consultations and stakeholder dialogue were
                           undertaken in the course of the implementation and at various levels – barangay and people’s
                           organization, regional offices and the Project Steering Committee.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        27-Nov-2009
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     04-Feb-2010
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        ////
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        02-Feb-2010
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     02-Feb-2010
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [       ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice     Yes [       ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [       ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples




                                                                      Page 8 of 9
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Leonardo Jr. Batugal Paat
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Johannes Heister (PMGR)                          Date: 30-Nov-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                        Page 9 of 9
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
