                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC12340

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Mar-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Serbia                          Project ID:       P154862
                            Project Name:        Technical assistance for reform of financial reporting in Serbia
                            Team Leader(s):      Jarett Decker
                            Estimated Date       08-Jan-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GGOFR                           Lending           Lending Instrument
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           Public administration- Financial Sector (20%), SME Finance (10%), General
                                                 finance sector (70%)
                            Theme(s):            Corporate governance (10%), International financial standards and systems
                                                 (70%), State-owned enterprise restructuring and privatization (20%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 3.4                            Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              REPARIS - Road to Europe Program for ACC                                                      3.4
                            Environment       C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project’s development objective is to establish and implement a sound institutional framework
                           for corporate financial reporting, drawing on good international practices, and to build capacity for
                           preparing, teaching, regulating, auditing and using reliable financial reporting.
                           C. Project Description
                           A.       Concept
                           This Project will use a multi-pronged strategy to enhance formal laws and standards, knowledge,
                           institutions, and practices in CFR in Serbia (including reporting for State-owned Enterprises). An
                           effective approach should support adoption of formal laws, standards, and other rules governing
                           financial reporting and auditing that are consistent with international good practices; enhance the
                           education of future accountants and auditors and support the continual upgrading of knowledge and
                           skills by current practitioners; develop the capacity of regulators, professional bodies, and other
                           authorities to monitor, use, and improve the quality of financial reporting and auditing; and enhance
                           the understanding and use of financial reporting in the broader economy and among members of the
                         public. This Project addresses all of these needs through its component activities.

                         The Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO) expressed their interest in financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation of the Project, focusing on building sound statutory framework, strengthening
                         institutional capacity of the parties involved, improving monitoring and use of financial information
                         from SOEs, and enhancing the accountancy education and literacy, including raising public
                         understanding and awareness of financial reporting. The World Bank Project team has informed all
                         the key development partners active in the Republic of Serbia about its intention to support
                         implementation of the Strategy with donor grant funding, thus opening a possibility for mobilization
                         of additional grant financing for the second, follow-on phase of the Strategy.

                         The Project is planned to be 60% Recipient-executed and about 40% Bank-executed. In general, the
                         Bank-executed programs are those perceived to require the closest involvement and most expertise
                         from the CFRR.

                         1.       Description
                                  To address the current capacity challenges (described in section I.B above) and align the
                         Project’s design with the Government’s Strategy to enhance and develop financial reporting and
                         auditing framework, the project activities will comprise five components with the following
                         implementation arrangements:
                         -        Component 1 [Recipient executed]: Completing and Enhancing the Accounting and
                         Financial Reporting Framework. Through this Component, (a) analysis will be performed of Serbia’s
                         existing legislation, bylaws, rulebooks, and charts of accounts governing financial reporting,
                         including recent changes made to the Law on Accounting, resulting in an assessment of gaps
                         between Serbian formal laws and standards and good international practices, including the acquis,
                         and appropriate amendments will be proposed; (b) support will be provided to develop a sustainable
                         process for translating and adopting IFRS standards; (c) support will be provided to the Ministry of
                         Finance to enhance its capacity to monitor and regulate corporate financial reporting; (d) a technical
                         guide will be designed describing approaches and methodologies for conducting policymaking
Public Disclosure Copy




                         activities including for updating concordance tables and maintenance of relevant webpages on the
                         Ministry of Finance website; (e) training in use and application of IFRS will be provided for financial
                         reporting practitioners; (f) events and activities will be conducted to promote public understanding
                         and awareness of the importance and uses of financial reporting.
                         The Ministry of Finance will be responsible for implantation of this component, with enhanced
                         implementation support from the World Bank’s Centre for Financial Reporting Reform (CFRR).
                         This Component will be allocated 32% of the total funding of the Project (Euro 1,090,000).
                         -        Component 2 [Bank executed]: Building an Effective Audit Oversight and Quality
                         Assurance System: Through this Component, the Project will (a) support development of regulations
                         and guidance for Serbia’s Public Oversight Board for the auditing profession; (b) help develop the
                         capacity of POB members and staff to fulfill their functions; (c) support development of regulations,
                         methodologies, and guidance for audit quality control inspectors; (d) help develop a sustainable
                         system for translation of International Standards on Auditing (ISAs) and provide training to
                         practitioners in use of ISAs; (e) conduct activities and events to promote public and business
                         understanding of the importance and use of external audits.
                         The Component will be implemented directly by the CFRR specialists and consultants with
                         involvement of various stakeholders, international and local consultants and professional partners.
                         This Component will be allocated 15% of the total funding of the Project (Euro 510,000).
                         -        Component 3 [Recipient executed]: Improving Accounting and Auditing Curricula for
                         University and Professional Education Programs. Through this Component, the Project will support
                           (a) assessment and possible improvement of the accountancy curriculum in the university sector; (b)
                           implementation of effective professional education programs through the Chamber of Auditors and
                           other competent professional accountancy organizations, including pre-qualification education,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           training, examinations, seminar, and workshops; and (c) provision of assessments, toolkits, and other
                           support for Continuing Professional Development (CPD) programs.
                            The Ministry of Finance will be responsible for implantation of this component, with enhanced
                           implementation support from the World Bank’s Center for Financial Reporting Reform (CFRR).
                           This Component will be allocated about 28% of the total funding of the Project (Euro 950,000).
                           -        Component 4 [Bank executed]: Institutional Strengthening and Monitoring of SOEs.
                           Through this component, the Project will (a) assess the legal framework and practices for state
                           monitoring of financial statements from SOEs; (b) develop a methodology and tools for reviewing
                           the financial reports prepared by SOEs and a dashboard to input and analyze key financial
                           performance indicators, (c) develop the capacity of Ministry of Finance staff and other authorities
                           responsible for monitoring financial reporting from SOEs to use the methodology, dashboard, and
                           guidelines through training courses, study visit(s) to countries with a strong track record in
                           monitoring SOEs, and /or other appropriate capacity-building activities; (d) develop the capacity of
                           staff from the Ministry of Finance, the Privatization Agency, and other relevant authorities to analyze
                           and use financial information from SOEs in fulfilling their functions.
                           The Component will be implemented directly by the CFRR specialists and consultants with
                           involvement of various stakeholders, international and local consultants and professional partners.
                           This Component will be allocated 15% of the total funding of the Project (Euro 510,000).
                           -        Component 5: Enhanced Implementation Support, Project Management, Monitoring and
                           Evaluation [Bank executed]. This Component will include necessary incremental costs related to
                           enhanced implementation support to the Ministry of Finance, management of the Project, including
                           overall reform management and coordination, monitoring of the reform activities supported under the
                           Project, as well as the Project’s fiduciary activities.
                           This Component will be allocated 10% of the total funding for the Project (Euro 340,000).

                           The Project will be structured as part of the REPARIS trust fund, implemented jointly by the Bank
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and the Recipient. The donor grant is yet to be established and documented. SECO expressed their
                           interest in financing the Project over the estimated time of 30 months, for approximately EURO 3.4
                           million.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                  No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Pest Management OP 4.09                      No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/              No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
                           Projects on International                    No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP             No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Jarett Decker
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                                           Date: 09-Mar-2015
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Henri Fortin (PMGR)                                          Date: 19-Aug-2015
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
