INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: JSDSA16148
U
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Nov-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        China                      Project ID:  P148527
Project Name: Urumqi Urban Transport Project II (P148527)
Task Team       Binyam Reja
Leader(s):
Estimated       13-Jul-2015                Estimated    21-Dec-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GT102                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Urban Transport (70%), Information technology (30%)
Theme(s):       City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (70%), Climate change (20%),
Other Financial Sector Development (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     536.80            Total Bank Financing:  140.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                  396.80
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     140.00
Total                                                                     536.80
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The PDO is to improve mobility in selected transport corridors in Urumqi.
3. Project Description
Component 1 Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) Corridors (61% percent of total project cost). This
component will finance the development of three new BRT lines on existing road alignments,
Page 1 of 10


﻿namely the proposed BRT 4 (20.1 km), BRT 6 (18.1 km), and 6b (13.5 km). The activities include:
(i) construction of 51.7 km of BRT lines, including road rehabilitation and lane reconfiguration of
existing lanes, installation of lane segregation and pavement markings, and construction of BRT
station platforms; (ii) procurement of BRT equipment, including fare collection system, passenger
O
information system, safety screen door system, x-ray machine, BRT priority signal at intersections,
power supply for BRT stations, software and hardware for BRT dispatching center, and GPS-based
onboard equipment for BRT vehicles; and (iii) procurement of 152 articulated buses (1 8m) and 29
regular buses (12m).
Component 2 Comprehensive Transport Information Management System (16% of project cost).
This component will support the development of a city-wide Urumqi Comprehensive Transport
Information Management System (UCTIMS), including: (i) development of comprehensive transport
information management platform to collect and process transport data from various sources; (ii)
installation of fiber optic cable network between different data center, installation of traffic data
collection equipment along major roads in Urumqi, and the development of GIS-based transport data
system; and (iii) improvement of parking management system, upgrade of the existing smart card
system, installation of bus passenger counting system, and upgrade of existing GPS-based taxi
onboard equipment.
Component 3 Public Transport Infrastructure (21% of project cost). The component will finance (i)
construction of public transport hub at the South Square of the High Speed Rail Station; the hub
includes BRT terminal, regular bus terminal and public transport dispatching and information center;
(ii) construction of public transport terminals at Beijiao, Midong and North Square of High Speed
Rail Station; and (iii) construction of two public transport parking and maintenance facilities at
Sangong and Midong. These facilities are located at the end of BRT 4, 6 and 6b lines. They will
serve BRT buses and regular buses to facilitate passenger transfers.
Component 4 Capacity Building (2% of project cost). This component comprises the development of
a series of strategic studies, capacity building and training activities, project management and
consulting services aimed at enhancing local capacities for planning, design, and operating urban
transport services. Some of the studies, carried out during the project preparation, were financed
using local funds, and have been used to inform the design of the project. The remaining studies and
activities under this component will be financed under IBRD loan, and will be used to inform future
a        policy reforms and investment program for urban transport in Urumqi.
Link road for BRT 4. Urumqi is currently developing an elevated road over the north segment of the
BRT 4 corridor to provide additional capacity for travelling along the corridor. The Elevated Road
(about 5.7 km along the Aletai Road) will be used for through traffic, while the vehicle travel lanes
along the proposed BRT 4 corridor (which is 20.1 km in length) will mostly serve local traffic. This
will improve the traffic flow and create additional capacity along the corridor. In addition to the
elevated road, the rehabilitation of the section of the BRT section under the road will be rehabilitated
as part of the Aletai road project. However, the proposed project will do the BRT stations, lane
segregation, and ITS aspects. Although the proposed project finances only BRT 4 line, UMG??s
separate Aletai road project is linked to the Bank-financed project in terms of technical and
safeguards requirements. As such, the project will ensure that the designs and implementation of the
elevated road is compatible with the design of the BRT line, and the agreed safeguard policies for the
proposed project are followed in the elevated road as well. During the pre-appraisal, the Bank
reviewed the Aletai road design and implementation and concluded that the technical and safeguard
aspects of the elevated road are compatible with the objectives, design and procedures of the project.
Page 2 of 10


﻿The construction is expected to be completed by November 2015.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project is located in urban and suburb area of Urumqi City, within which there are minority
villages/communities of Uyghur and other several ethnic minorities. Urumqi is the capital city of
Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region northwestern most of China with an arid to semi-arid climate
and average annual precipitation of less than 200mm.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Songling Yao (GSURR)
Xin Ren (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         Component 1 (establishing BRT lines and stations) and
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               Component 3 (building and rehabilitating bus depots and
terminals) will involve civil works. The environmental
impacts will be mostly construction-related, such as noise
and dust, construction waste disposal and temporary
storage on-site, vegetation loss, sewage discharge, traffic
impact, social disturbance and safety. Major impacts
during operation include air pollution, noise, road safety
and wastewater from bus depots and terminals built under
the project.
Given the potential physical impacts described above, and
the complexities associated with some 12 ethnic groups
living in the city, the project is assigned a Category A.
In line with the Bank??s Safeguard Policies and relevant
domestic regulations, an Environmental Assessment (EA)
was prepared by a well?qualified and experienced EA
institute, the Xinjiang EA Center, which has recent
experience with Bank projects in the region. The EA was
conducted in parallel with the feasibility study to integrate
environmental and social consideration into technical
designs. An Environment Management Plan (EMP) has
been prepared and adopted by the client.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          The project will take place in built-up area in Urumqi
4.04                                with no natural habitats as defined by this OP in the
vicinity of any project sites, as verified by the EA process.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          Not applicable
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          Not applicable
Physical Cultural       No          Surveys during the EA process verified that no Physical
Resources OP/BP 4.11                Cultural Resources as defined by this OP were found in
Page 3 of 10


﻿any project sites and the vicinity. Nevertheless, measures
to mitigate impacts on religious activities in mosques
along the project roads and chance find procedure during
construction are included in the EMP.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           The Ethnic Minority screening by the task team and the
BP 4.10                              SA found that ethnic minorities, mainly Uyghur, Kazak,
Hui, etc. are in urban Urumqi City, but they are actually
mainstreamed. Therefore, the OP 4.10 on Indigenous
People will not be triggered.
However, in view of the complex ethnic composition of
the city, the project conducted thorough minority-
differentiated social assessment to ensure that the
improved public transport system serves all communities
and that the construction disruptions and ensuing access
changes are not perceived as being disproportional to
certain communities.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         The policy is triggered because of the fact that
OP/BP 4.12                           Components 1 and 3 will require land acquisition and/or
resettlement. Specific activities include:
The project will acquire 239 mu collective land in two
villages, separately taking 1.64% and 3.39 % of the total
village land, with direct impact on 216 persons in 50
households.
Furthermore, some land acquisition and resettlement
related to Beijiao Terminal, two hubs at north and south
stations of High Speed Rail were implemented and have
been reviewed in the RP. The total impact include 69 mu
state-owned land with relocation of 4 households, 40
shops and partial impact of one agency. The due diligence
review, detailed in annex of the RP, concluded that the
impacts were fully investigated, compensated and
restored, and that there is no any complaint found in the
review. The mission interviewed two persons relocated
and versified the findings of the review. The external
monitoring in project implementation stage will also
cover this part as needed.
Resettlement of the linkage Aertai Road includes
relocation of 69 households with 242 persons, and partial
demolition of structures in 13 agencies, which were fully
integrated into the RP. Resettlement costs and civil works
are covered under the Aletai Road project, financed
separately by UMG, which has already allocated adequate
budget for it
Page 4 of 10


﻿To address the above resettlement impacts, a resettlement
plan (RP) with due diligence review has been prepared.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environment
As an urban transport project without building new roads or widening road but rehabilitating
existing roads and building/rehabilitating transit hubs, bus depots and terminals, the adverse
environmental impacts during construction are moderate and mostly temporary in nature. These
impacts mainly include noise and dust, construction waste disposal and temporary storage on-site,
vegetation loss, sewage discharge, traffic impact, social disturbance and safety. What is unique
and important for Urumqi are social impacts on religious activities and vendors, as construction
can cut off access to religious and educational venues, and business shops. Noise and dust can
affect educational and religious activities and people's health. These impacts are temporary and
can be mitigated if the measures in the EMP be followed (details see below under 4).
Impacts during operation include air pollution, noise, road safety and wastewater from bus depots
O
U           and terminals built under the project. The environmental impacts during operation mainly include
air pollution, traffic noise, road safety and sewage from bus hubs and depots. But compared to ???
without project???, the project would improve bus speed and lower congestion thus leading to
reduced level of air pollution and noise these would be offset by the environmental improvement
of reduced air pollution.
Social Impacts: the project will improve the public transportation system in Urumqi, especially in
some suburban areas, and provide direct benefit to urban and peri-urban citizens in their daily life.
In contrast, the social assessment also realized some likely adverse impacts on social disturbance
in implementation stage and on land acquisition and resettlement. The main adverse impacts
include:
The project will acquire 239 mu collective land in two villages, separately taking 1.64 and 3.39 %
of the total village land, with direct impact on 216 persons in 50 households.
Further, some land acquisition and resettlement related to Beijiao Terminal, two hubs at north and
south stations of High Speed Rail was implemented and was reviewed in the RP. The total impacts
include 69 mu state-owned land with relocation of 4 households, 40 shops and partial impact of
one agency. The due diligence review, detailed in annex of the RP, concluded that impacts were
Page 5 of 10


﻿fully investigated, compensated and restored, and that there is no any complaint found in the
review. The mission interviewed two persons relocated and versified the findings of the review.
The external monitoring in project implementation stage will also cover this part as needed.
O
Resettlement of the linkage Aertai Road includes relocation of 69 households with 242 persons,
and partial demolition of structures in 13 agencies, which were fully integrated into the RP, even
the budget is not covered in the project investment.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
More long term impacts occur during operation, i.e. air pollution and noise from traffic, waste and
wastewater from bus hubs and depots, and passenger and vehicle safety, particularly in cold
season. Measures to address these impacts are specified in the Environmental Management Plan
(EMP) developed for the project. Another long-term issue related to green belt affected, as more
than 5000 road-side trees will be relocated. It is expected that the green area in the city would be
reduced to some extent if not properly managed.
Long-term impacts that could be induced by the project are mostly positive, as the project will not
build new roads but new bus facilities. With improved public transport, people will use less cars
thus reduce air pollution and GHG emissions. New bus stations will bring in business around them
which generate employment and economic opportunities.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Alternative analysis of different design options was undertaken as part of the EA process,
including a without project scenario, to avoid or minimize negative impacts from the outset.
Choice of major corridors for improvement, site selection for bus facilities, different land
configuration and impacts on green belt and vegetation etc are compared. Alternatives with less
social and environmental impacts, e.g. those that could reduce the tree/bush removal, better shelter
passengers from the cold and wind were recommended. These recommendations have been
incorporated in the feasibility studies and will feed into the design process.
At least two options of project design were considered to avoid or minimize adverse social impacts
in the project feasibility study process. For instance, all project activities prioritize use of current
transport lines, hubs and terminals to minimize land acquisition and resettlement.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environment
Capacity building of the clients has been an integral part of the project preparation process to
address environmental safeguard issues. The PMO has implemented the Bank transport projects
and safeguard policies in the past although many of its new staff lack experience. To tackle it, the
PMO has assigned one staff in charge of environmental safeguard who has worked effectively. It
also engaged a well?qualified and experienced EA institute, Xinjiang EA Center, which has very
recent experience with the Bank projects in the region, one of them being Yining urban transport
project in 2012.
The EMP was developed based on the EA. It specifies supervising mechanism and institutional
arrangement to foster its implementation. During construction, supervision engineers will be
Page 6 of 10


﻿primarily responsible for daily supervision of EMP measures. The PMO, assisted by
environmental experts, will carry out random inspection. The EMP will be referred to in bidding
documents and contracts with contractors and supervisors to ensure its implementation. During
operation, responsibility to implement the EMP will largely be shifted to relevant operators and
O
government agencies. To ensure the EMP implementation, a budgeted training plan is included in
the EMP. The EMP is the result of close collaboration between the PMO, FS team and the EA
consultants. This ensures the EMP's ownership by the project entities which in turn helps
guarantee its effective implementation.
Social disturbance and impacts on green area are identified as key issues unique for this project.
Social impacts will be mitigated through careful scheduling of construction to avoid the sensitive
time for mosques and praying time, schools, kindergartens and hospitals; provision of access
roads, prohibition of noisy equipment operation and water spray near such sensitive sections, and
cooperation with local departments on traffic control and infrastructure service. Timing for the
religious activities has been identified through the EA consultation, and the construction will be
suspended during these times. In addition, respect on the religious custom is identified as a key
issue for the construction management, the workers will be provided with trainings on the good
behavior near the religious venues and supervision of their behavior will be the duty of the
supervisors.
After civil work completes, replantation of the trees and vegetation will compensate for the loss of
the green area. The greening plan will be developed in the detailed design which include
establishment of larger green belt and plots of flower beds that would improve the landscape of the
city. The construction management will be enhanced to control the scope of the works and the
workers will be trained on the protection of the green area.
Social Aspects
A social assessment (SA) was conducted by an experienced team from Xinjiang Social Science
Institute. Based on meaningful consultation with various stakeholders: transport service users,
affected citizens by land use and construction, officials and academics; as well as extensive
quantitative and qualitative analysis, covering a survey of 1542 random samples with particular
attention to gender, minority, poor and disable, the SA concluded that the project will improve the
public transportation system in Urumqi, especially in some suburban areas, and provide direct
a           benefit to urban and peri-urban citizens in their daily life. Further, the SA recommended 55
suggestions/measures to pursue a friendly project design to enlarge the social benefit, which were
reflected into the project feasibility study and will be incorporated into detailed project design.
In contrast, the SA also realized some likely adverse impacts on social disturbance in
implementation stage and on land acquisition and resettlement. The resettlement planning, with
assistance from Hohai University, clearly scoped, investigated, and analyzed the resettlement
impacts, and further explored mitigation measures based on meaningful consultation with the
affected, by the project and by activities linked to the project, and finally developed the only
resettlement instrument Resettlement Plan (RP).
Main measures for household relocation consist of two options of cash compensation based on
market value and replacement house. Compensation for households, including replacement house
value, subsidies of movement and transition, and the unit price disbursed to the affected will not
lower than the market price to ensure housing restoration. Compensation for shop and agency is at
replacement cost determined by professional evaluation, including operational loss during the
Page 7 of 10


﻿transition stage. Land compensation is in line with national regulation, plus training and social
security program are planned. The RP also identified valuable households and provided special
measure for ensuring livelihood.
O
The RP also provided details on resettlement implementation procedures and requirements to be
followed during project implementation, including compensation rates, mitigation measures to
restore livelihoods, institutional and monitoring arrangements, and grievance redress mechanism,
etc. The tabulated resettlement budget was determined in the RP and was committed to fully
fmanced by the PMO.
A grievance redress mechanism was designed in the RP, in which grievances can be filed both
orally and in writing. The process starting from village and neighborhood committee level, could
be elevated to district, city level, if they are not satisfied with the resolution at the lower level.
Complainants also could file their cases in court, if not satisfied with the resolution by the project
authority. All grievances and their resolutions will be recorded. This mechanism has been
disclosed to the local population and will be further disseminated through the Resettlement
Information Booklet attached to the RP.
Internal and external resettlement monitoring arrangement was fully designed in the RP, which
covers the monitoring indicators, frequency, agency qualification and their roles. The monitoring
system will cover resettlement in the linked Aertai Road and the implemented Beijiao Terminal.
A resettlement management system with proper staff and resources in the PMO and in project
district will be established prior to resettlement commencement according to the RP, to internally
monitor the resettlement progress and report semiannually to the Bank. A dedicated staff has been
appointed in the PMO and District PMO to be responsible for the resettlement related assignment.
In addition, an experienced external resettlement monitor will be contractually engaged according
to the RP to ensure regularly monitoring and reporting. Further, the training program in the RP
will be conducted as early as possible to ensure capacity building.
O
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Environment
Two rounds of public consultation has been undertaken following corresponding public disclosure.
In March 2014, notification about the project and plan for EA was disclosed March 2014 in local
newspaper, official website of Provincial Environmental Bureau as well as bulletin boards along
the proposed corridors. In June 2014, the draft EA/EMP was disclosed on the above mentioned
website, and advertised in newspaper with information about access to the hardcopy. In January
2015, the revised EA was disclosure locally again after some major adjustment of the project. The
primary objective was to collect the public opinion about the project, the EA findings and the
sufficiency of mitigation measures. Altogether 701 people with a wide range of background with
17% from ethnic minority groups were surveyed with a bilingual questionnaire in Chinese and
Uygur. Most people support the project. Their major concerns include traffic and social
disturbance and noise during construction. Measures to address these concerns are incorporated in
the EA/EMP and conveyed to the PMO. The English versions were sent to the World Bank??s
InfoShop on June 26, 2015.
Social
Page 8 of 10


﻿In the social preparation process, meaningful consultation was conducted with various
stakeholders: transport service users, affected citizens by land use and construction, officials and
academics; as well as extensive quantitative and qualitative analyses, covering a survey of 1542
random samples with particular attention to gender, minority, poor and disable. The identified 55
O
suggestions/measures of the SA, to pursue a friendly project design to enlarge the social benefit,
were reflected into the project feasibility study and will be incorporated into detailed project
design. Further consultation and participation in project implementation stage will be further
executed in line with the RP to ensure resettlement planning to be adjusted to reflect the project
design and the demand of the affected people, which will be integrated into the supervision and
monitoring process.
Relevant information on the project social aspects was distributed among the local communities
during the SA and RP preparation. The prepared SA and RP was locally disclosed in May 7, 2015
on websites of Urumqi Municipal Construction Committee and local resettlement offices, as well
as major communities in hard copies. The draft English versions of the documents were sent to the
World Bank??s Infoshop on May 15, 2015.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              16-Jun-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           26-Jun-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  27-Nov-2015
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                    06-Jan-2015
Comments: The EA Summary was resubmitted to SECPO on November 27, 2015.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              04-May-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           15-May-2015
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                    07-May-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Page 9 of 10


﻿Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X ] No[  ]  NA[  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?            Yes [X] No [     ]  TBD [   ]
216 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [ X] No [ ] TBD [ ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
652 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
a          related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Binyam Reja
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Surhid P. Gautam (SA)                Date: 30-Nov-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Arturo Ardila Gomez (PMGR)           Date: 30-Nov-2015
Manager:
Page 10 of 10


