INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR15653
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Oct-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Argentina                  Project ID:  P120211
Project Name: AR Norte Grande Water Infrastructure (P120211)
Task Team       Christophe Prevost,Maria Catalina Ramirez
Leader(s):
Estimated       1 1-Nov-2010               Estimated    20-Dec-2010
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWAO4                       Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Water supply (70%), Flood protection (18%), Public administration- Water,
sanitation and flood protection (12%)
Theme:          Urban services and housing for the poor (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                  No
Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     240.00            Total Bank Financing:  200.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                        40.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development         200.00
Total                                                         240.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) of this project is to increase sustainable access to water
supply and urban drainage in the Norte Grande Region (NGR) of
Page 1 of 11


﻿Argentina by (i) providing the necessary infrastructure and (ii) supporting ins
titutional development.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) of this project is to increase sustainable access to water
supply and urban drainage in the Norte Grande Region (NGR) of
Argentina by (i) providing the necessary infrastructure and (ii) supporting ins
titutional development.
3. Project Description
The Government of Argentina (GoA) is financing the Norte Grande Program through funds from the
Inter-American Development Bank, Andean Finance Corporation, and World Bank, based on
priorities indicated by the 9 provinces in the region. The Project was prepared as a programmatic in
nature, where specific investments were not known in advance and were defined during
implementation.
Component 1: Water Supply and Urban Drainage Infrastructure (US$147 million, with US$118
million of Bank funding): This component finance the construction, improvement and revamping of:
(i) water supply systems, including the rehabilitation of existing water infrastructure, expansion of
production and distribution systems (water treatment plants, pumping station and main collectors),
non-revenue water reduction programs, macro and micro-metering and other investments aimed to
increase operational efficiency; and (ii) urban drainage works aimed to reduce flooding vulnerability
in targeted cities in the NGR. All sub-projects financed under this component must meet eligibility
and readiness criteria. Investments in sewage collection and disposal systems, including wastewater
treatment facilities, which are a high priority for the GoA and provinces, will be financed under the
future operation focused on sanitation.
Component 2: Institutional Development and Technical Assistance (US$ 53 million financed by the
Bank): This will finance a range of activities expected to improve the regional WSS institutional
framework for service provision and generate efficiency improvements. It will fund: (i) institutional
and operational strengthening programs for participating WSS service providers; a tailored-made
program for each participating service provider to improve specific areas related to investment
planning, management capabilities and technical, operational, commercial and financial efficiency;
(ii) technical assistance to service providers and regional entities with responsibilities over WSS and
urban drainage services; Activities to be funded include, in general, studies and tools for analysis and
decision making over different aspects of WSS services, including, inter alia: implementation of the
EMPs and social communication programs, strategic investment planning, project design, technical
studies on availability and quality of water resources, development of information systems,
generation of customer databases and cadastres, analysis of cost recovery options and optimization
of rates and subsidy structures; (iii) activities to promote WSS sector knowledge and capacity
building within relevant sector institutions: This component can also support the strengthening of
regulatory and entities and monitoring capabilities within the Provinces to promote efficient and
sustainable WSS services and improve management of water resources depending on initiatives at
the local level which support the achievement of Project objectives, and (iv) technical studies
required for the preparation of sub-projects envisaged to be financed under a future Bank financed
operation focusing on sanitation investments in the NGR, in support for the GoA's priority
Development Program for the region.
Component 3: Program Management and Supervision (US$ 22 million financed by the Bank). This
Page 2 of 11


﻿will finance: (i) specialized independent technical supervision; (ii) strengthening of environmental
management through technical assistance to conduct screening and assessment of sub-projects,
monitor and supervise construction, and train permanent staff at the central level and local levels; and
(iii) project audits and monitoring and evaluation activities.
0
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project spans a wide geographic area in Argentina that includes the nine provinces that comprise
the Norte Grande Region. The region involves several eco-regions which contain important habitats:
(i) the Great American Chaco; (ii) the Upper Parand Atlantic Forest; (iii) the Yungas and (iv) other
eco-regions such as the Puna and Altos Andes. These have been documented in a series of baseline
studies through regional environmental assessment. The region also contains a population that is
highly marginalized and has high levels of poverty. According to the latest Bank Provincial
Development Index, which compiled measures of poverty and deficits in social and basic
infrastructure services for all twenty-four provinces in Argentina, eight of the nine provinces of
Norte Grande are rated as the poorest in the nation. In addition, illiteracy (at 5.4 percent) is more than
double the national average, the infant mortality rate at 16.2 per 1000 live births compared to the
national average at 13.3 per 1000 and the proportion of homes with Basic Unsatisfied Needs
(Necesidades Bdsicas Insatisfechas, NBI ) is 18.6 percent compared to the national average of 14.3
percent. It also contains a significant population of indigenous peoples.
The water supply and drainage works currently being financed are primarily located in urban or peri-
urban areas, and those located in more remote locations are not within protected areas, nor do they
have any significant impacts on biodiviersity. These works include drainage works in Yerbabuena
Municipality in the Tucuman province, and two aqueducts in the province of Chaco, one for Wichi,
Nueva Pompeya and el Sauzal towns, and the second for Pampa de los Indio, Presidencia Roca, and
other 5 municipalities. The locations were optimized through eligibility criteria to avoid significant
environmental and social impacts as well as designs considered to minimize resettlement, and
impacts on the environment and indigenous people.
U         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Carlos Alberto Molina Prieto (GSURR)
Noreen Beg (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       Yes
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes
OP/BP 4.12
Page 3 of 11


﻿Safety of Dams OP/BP    Yes
4.37
Projects on International  No
U         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
O
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The types of water supply and urban drainage works to be funded with the Project are expected to
have an overall positive impact and are not envisaged to lead to significant environmental and
social impacts if risks are appropriately mitigated. Thus, the Project has been given a Category B
following the Environmental Assessment safeguard policy (OP4.01). Because of the nature of the
potential impacts of these types of works the Project also triggers the following World Bank
safeguard policies: Natural Habitats (OP4.04), Physical Cultural Resources (OP4. 11); Indigenous
Peoples (OP4.10); Resettlement (OP 4.12) and Safety of Dams (OP4.37). The application of these
policies will be screened and managed under the project through an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF). See section II A. 4 for details. The restructuring of the project
does not trigger any additional Safeguards.
The Project's social analysis (SA) which covers potential investments in water and sanitation
investments, has identified the main opportunities for social positive impacts during the
construction and operation phases of investments to be the following: (i) direct and indirect
employment creation and multiplier effects in the chain provision of goods, supplies, equipment,
services and income generation, which will contribute to growth of local economies and
O
U           discourage migration; (ii) better quality of life, health and hygiene conditions stemming from
increased access to WS; and (iii) reduced vulnerability to flooding through more and better urban
o           drainage systems. The proposed SIL is expected to benefit around 10% of the population of the
NGR. The SA also identifies significant urban population growth resulting from migration from
a          rural areas due to land tenure and natural resources pressure, which has increased informal human
settlements, inclu ding indigenous peoples also integrated to the urban communities.
Envisaged negative social impacts of future sub-projects in the NGR to be funded under the
Project are few, temporary and mostly affect localized population during the construction phase
(public safety, movement or excavations of land and possible collapse of housing and public
facilities foundations, disruptions of water, gas, energy, commerce and industries, noise and other
nuisances). These impacts will be addressed by the sub-project's environmental and social
management programs. Potential impacts of the sub-projects on indigenous people and other
vulnerable groups are expected to be highly positive on balance: the Project will promote
rehabilitation and expansion of water systems primarily in urban and peri-urban areas integrated in
the existing land-use legal framework, where access to WSS services and urban drainage systems
has been a long-standing aspiration of the local communities, including indigenous peoples.
Environmental impacts as sociated with these subprojects can be managed with known mitigation
and management methods.
Page 4 of 11


﻿Environmental Safeguards (OP4.01, OP4.04 and OP 4.11): Specific sub-projects that will be
proposed for funding will undergo environmental screening following the ESMF guidelines to
determine eligibility for financing. Eligible subprojects will include only those that can be
O
confirmed to have an environmental categorization of Category B (or C); and that do not involve
complex issues with regard to other environmental safeguards policies including significant
impacts on cultural property or natural habitats and impacts on critical natural habitats. The
projects are thus expected to have limited environmental impacts associated with the design and
location of the works on water resources, the management of construction works, and mitigable
natural habitats and cultural property issues. These will be managed through an environmental
assessment process.
Resettlement (OP 4.12): The eligible works will likely involve some resettlement and temporary
and permanent land acquisition as a result of the construction activities. The subprojects will
undergo screening to ensure they do not involve unprecedented or significant resettlement and for
those projects that are eligible, resettlement issues will be managed through a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF).
Indigenous Peoples (OP4. 10): Indigenous People (IP) are known to live within the project area
and are likely to benefit or be impacted by the subprojects. The subprojects will undergo screening
to ensure they do not involve unprecedented or significant impacts on indigenous peopleslP and,
for those subprojects that are eligible, a planning process that is culturally appropriate and takes
into account local desires and aspirations has been developed along with an Indigenous Peoples
Planning Framework (IPPF). For all subprojects where indigenous peoples (IP) are present in the
project area of influence, a social assessment will be carried out to evaluate the benefits and risks.
This IP social assessment process will be carried out in a culturally appropriate manner as
articulated in the project's IPPF.
Safety of Dams (OP4.37): As water supply and drainage systems in the project area commonly
rely on systems involving dams, those subprojects that are determined to be triggered by the Dam
Safety policy will follow the procedures outlined in the policy.
International Waterways (OP7.50): This policy is not triggered under the Project. The ESMF
0           includes provisions requiring that no subprojects or technical assistance that involve international
waterways will be allowed to be financed under the Project.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Cumulative impacts should be highly positive if the systems are built and operated with the
envisaged high quality supervision and environmental management. Cumulative impacts of works
to be selected during implementation will be assessed as part of the corresponding EIA, under the
ESMF guidelines, and any specific provisions to manage these would be included in the relevant
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and Environmental Technical Specifications (ETS) for
contractors (more detail on the instruments is provided on section 4).
The likelihood of the Project contributing to the Government's goal of reducing poverty and
inequality through infrastructure investment will depend on the combined effectiveness of all the
various programs in the Norte Grande region. This includes the construction, operation and
maintenance of other infrastructure and ongoing and planned EMPs. In this sense, the Borrower's
Page 5 of 11


﻿National Strategic Plan for Territorial Development provides valuable environmental and social
considerations that shall be integrated in future development plans at country level with specific
recommendations for each region.
O
Q)          A series of inclusiveness measures to enhance differentiated impacts among more vulnerable
groups will be developed through sub-project level communication and social management
programs (to be financed under Component 2). These will be car ried out by the relevant parties as
identified in the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), which is part of the
Project's OM. Activities will include, depending on local needs and practices: (i) training, capacity
building and knowledge sharing activities aimed at achieving better inter-institutional- based
planning of enhancement and expansion of WSS within agencies in charge of water, land use,
natural resources exploitation, indigenous peoples, health, edu cation, and income generation; (ii)
social impacts analysis and assessments, including affordaility of different income groups in the
access of the services; ( iii) educational and awareness programs for specific groups such as
occupied com munities and indigenous peoples nearby the sub-project's areas.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The project was originally conceived to include water supply, flood prevention and sanitation
(including wastewater treatment sewerage and outfalls) infrastructure investments and was
restructured in response to the need to implement priority investments quickly while providing
technical assistance and capacity building to help UCPyPFE develop projects with more
complicated and sensitive safeguards issues that need more time and careful consideration. In that
regard, the Project will focus on water supply and flood prevention works that are priorities and
involve relatively simple safeguards issues while under a second project, investments would focus
on sanitation projects and water supply and drainage projects with more complex safeguards issues
that require careful consideration and studies. All subprojects will be developed on a demand
driven basis for which a preliminary list of pipeline projects have been identified by the provinces.
The identification of the specific projects (including their location and detailed works) that will be
eligible and chosen for financing under the Project will be undertaken as part of Project
implementation and specific alternatives analysis for each subproject will be undertaken as part of
the EIA process and in the development of the indigenous peoples development plan and/or
resettlement plan as applicable.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Given the programmatic and demand-driven nature of the Project, during Project preparation the
GOA has developed an ESMF which is part of the Project's OM. The ESMF will be used and
applied by all agencies charged with the execution of the investment sub-projects. It provides an
analysis of the Project setting and base line conditions and a set of technical guidelines describing
procedures and institutional responsibilities for assessing and managing the potential
environmental and social risks and impacts that could be faced throughout the sub-project cycle.
The ESMF was disclosed as a draft in country on September 28, 2010 and in Bank's Infoshop on
October 21, 2010. This framework supports three essential goals: (a) increasing social and
environmental sustainability of sub-projects financed under loan; (b) complying with national
environmental legislation, and (c) complying with Bank's Environmental and Social Safeguards
Policies.
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Process. Once specific investment proposals are firmed-
up and undergo the initial screening to confirm eligibility and scope out the key issues, eligible
Page 6 of 11


﻿subprojects will be required to follow the procedures outlined in the ESMF to ensure compliance
with safeguards policies applicable to the subproject. The ESMF includes a detailed environmental
assessment methodology for the assessment of sub-projects including: (a) procedures for
environmental and social screening of activities; (b) procedures for preparation of EA s and EMPs
O
Q)          including draft TORs and guidelines for mitigation measures; (c) procedures and guidelines on
public consultation and disclosure procedures; (d) procedures for clearance of EAs; and (e)
procedures for supervision of EMP implementation. EIAs for the identified works have been
cleared by the Bank, and disclosed in country and in the InfoShop, for both the aqueducts at Wichi
and Pampa del Indio, and the drainage works at Tucuman.
The EMP will include ETS for contractors prepared during Project preparation to avoid and
reduce impacts on surrounding environments, properties and address social impacts. These
specifications include measures to address physical cultural resources findings (in line with
OP4.09 on Physical Cultural Resources), avoid impacts in natural habitats (following the Natural
Habitats OP4.37 safeguard policy) and make an eventual and proper application of chemical
substances. The ESMF also includes a set of measures to activate and apply the Safety of Dams
policy (OP4.37) in future sub-projects if necessary. Contractors will develop a detailed manual to
achieve, inter alia, a sound environmental management during the operational phase of the
systems. Environmental and socio-environmental mitigation measures currently in place under the
IADB financed NGR Water Infrastructure Project include best practices for mitigating impacts
during construction, restoration of construction sites, landscape considerations, and health and
safety measures compatible with Bank standards and national law. All sub-projects will receive
the no-objection from the Bank prior to initiation of bidding processes and ETS to contractors.
With regard to Bank's social safeguards, an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) and a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) following GoA's legislation and Bank's OP 4.10 and
OP4.12, have been prepared by the GOA as part of the ESMF. As a sub-project eligibility criteria
pre-agreed in the OM, specific subproject s will undergo a social and environmental screening
and/or full assessment for the pertinent works following the ESMF. If resettlement and/or the
presence of indigenous population is identified in the area in which the works will take place, the
Borrower will, prior to the carrying out of any said works, prepare and furnish to the Bank a
resettlement plan and/or an indigenous plan including relevant consultation and disclosure in
accordance with the provisions of the IPPF and RPF, as the case may be.
The IPPF takes into account key aspects of the national legislation and the OP 4.10: and includes
inter alia: (i) social assessment and previous, free and informed consultations of affected IP; (ii)
action plan duly budgeted with measures to ensure that IP obtain adequate social and economic
benefits generated by the sub-project as appropriated or to prevent, reduce, mitigate or compensate
negative effects; and (iii) monitoring and grievance mechanism.
The RPF takes into account key aspects of the national legislation and the OP 4.12 and includes
some basic principles such as (i) freedom of choice of the compensatory measure; and (ii)
compensation at cost reposition and (iii) finalization of transactions on resettlement before starting
of civil works.
The UCPyPFE (through a dedica ted unit) within the Ministry of Federal Planning, Public
Investment and Services (MFP) at the federal government level, will be responsible for
supervision of environmental and social management issues during the construction phase of sub-
projects. The UCPyPFE will assign sufficient qualified staff dedicated to the management and
Page 7 of 11


﻿supervision of the EMPs during sub-project implementation and ensure periodic audits, and
supervision of environmental and social performance. The UCPyPFE will also provide support in
coordinating information disclosure and consultations.
O
Q)           The following environmental and social safeguards-related eligibility criteria for sub-projects to
be funded under the Project are included in the Operating Manual: (i) The project must follow the
guidelines of the Project's Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) in applying
the safeguards related eligibility criteria and to ensure compliance with applicable social and
environmental safeguards policies including preparing the necessary safeguards instruments and
undertaking consultation and disclosure; (ii) Subprojects must be considered Category B (or C)
investments under OP 4.01 and do not involve complex issues with regard to other environmental
safeguards policies including those with significant, non mitigable impacts on cultural property or
natural habitats including habitats or areas relied upon by indigenous communities for their
survival; or involve loss or partial degradation of critical natural habitats; (iii) Based on th e
definitions and procedures outlined in World Bank Operational Policy 7.50, for subprojects or
technical assistance to be eligible they cannot have implications on international waterways and on
the use and possible contamination of these waterways; and (iv) Projects would not contravene
national laws and policies including guidelines related to land use and urbanization plans and
Argentina's obligations under international treaties or agreements.
As part of the Participation, Transfer and Maintenance Agreement (PTA) to be signed between
the federal Government and the provincial governments, the UCPyPFE will transfer to the
provincial level the following roles and responsibilities: c o-participation with the UCPyPFE in
sub-projects screening, consultations processes, environmental and social assessments, design and
implementation of IPPs and RPs, monitoring and supervision requirements. The service providers
will have the primary responsibility for establishing baselines and monitoring specific activities
under construction and plant operations. This co-participated transfer of roles and responsibilities
will also include coordination arrangements to ensure that local service providers internalize
capacity towards the operation of th e proposed works. This capacity will be created during a
phase of joint collaboration with the UCPyPFE during the construction and the operation phase.
All construction contractors will be required to assign an environmental engineer or other suitably
qualified staff, including a social specialist, to oversee compliance with the EMP on a day-today
a           basis. The specific requirements for environmental and social mitigation measures will be included
in bidding documents and included as part of the standard construction contract package as ETS.
During the operational phase, the relevant service providers in charge of operating the relevant
works will have specific institutional responsibilities to ensure minimization and avoidance of all
operationally related impacts. Through their environmental staff, the utilities will ensure that
competent core staff will be available at all times to supervise the implementation of
environmental and social management measures directly under their control and to ensure
compliance             of the agreed EMPs and environmental license obligations.
An assessment of the current institutional capacity was conducted during Project preparation.
Aspects to be strengthened include: (i) the generation of baseline and environmental monitoring
studies, (ii) environmental management processes, (iii) the design and implementation of
mitigation measures; (iv) the capabilities to incorporate social dimensions in EIA processes,
including consultation and social participation and indigenous peoples planning in all stages of
sub-project's cycle; (v) the dissemination, consultation and claims and redress mechanisms ; (vi)
Page 8 of 11


﻿involuntary resettlement practices; (vi) the integration of communication plans into the
institutional system both at the national and provincial level; (vi) capacity for monitoring activity
outcomes. A specific assessment of the environmental and social instruments will be undertaken
within the mid-term evaluation and at Project completion.
O
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
O
Key stakeholders include people with new access to water supply services and improved water
quality and service, and people living in urban areas in which urban drainage will be improved.
Based on GoA's preliminary pipeline of potential future sub-projects (including projects identified
during the preparation of the ongoing IADB financed Water Infrastructure Project), the estimated
number of Project beneficiaries under the proposed Project is around 700,000 people in the NGR.
Other key stakeholders include provincial entities with responsibilities for water resources
management, WSS service providers, WSS services regulators and environmental agencies.
Appropriate guidelines for consultation processes following Bank's OP4.01 (and OP4. 10 with
regards to consultation with indigenous communities) and national legislation have been included
in the ESMF. These guidelines are applicable to all sub-projects to be funded under the Project.
A Management of Claims and Disputes System is foreseen in the ESMF and will be the joint
responsibility of the UCPyPFE and the participant Provinces, and will be channeled through four
levels, one internal (at the sub-project level in the field through contractors, the Province and the
UCPyPFE), and the other three external including mediations, ombudsman, and judicial. Specific
mechanisms will be located in the work-sites, in the Provinces, and in the UCPyPFE's facilities in
Buenos Aires. Channels to receive claims and disputes will comprise a toll-free call phone line,
web site, social monitoring, among others, according to the characteristics and needs of users,
including indigenous peoples as needed. In all cases, a systematic record will be kept of the date of
reception and resolution of claims. All expenses incurred in for the resolution of claims or disputes
will be afforded by the PIU and the respective Province.
O
The ESMF (including the RPF and IPPF) was disclosed for public consultation in the website of
the UCPyPFE on 09/28/09 and at the Bank's Infoshop on October 19, 2010.
O
B. Disclosure Requirements
*         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              28-Sep-2010
Date of submission to InfoShop                           19-Oct-2010
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              10-Sep-2010
Date of submission to InfoShop                           19-Oct-2010
Page 9 of 11I


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
O
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                28-Sep-2010
Date of submission to InfoShop                             19-Oct-2010
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ] No[X]     NA [    ]
report?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]   NA [    ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]    NA [    ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes     No        NA    X
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes   No        NA    X
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [    ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Page 10 of 11I


﻿If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?           Yes [     No[X]     TBD[
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [ No[X]  TBD
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                    Yes [  ] No [    ]   NA [ X ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent  Yes [  ] No [  ]   NA [ X ]
Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes[X]  No[  ]  NA
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes[X]  No[   NA
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]  No[       NA[
o          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[      NA[
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Christophe Prevost,Maria Catalina Ramirez
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Jonathan S. Kamkwalala (PMGR)        Date: 28-Dec-2015
Manager:
Page 11 of 11


