INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
0                                               Report No.: ISDSC 123 10
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:          Indonesia                  Project ID:   P154846
Project Name:     Improving Energy Project Delivery
Team Leader(s): Dhruva Sahai
Estimated Date    24-Apr-2015
of Approval:
Managing Unit:    GEEDR                      Lending       Lending Instrument
Instrument:
Sector(s):        Public administration- Energy and mining (50%), General energy sector (50%)
Theme(s):         Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (30%), Other
public sector governance (10%), Managing for development results (60%)
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:   1.5                  Total Bank Financing: 0
Financing Gap:        0
Financing Source                                                           Amount
Indonesia - AUSAID TF for Insfrastructure Support                               1.5
-       Environment       B - Partial Assessment
Category:
0
B. Project Development Objective(s)
The objective of the Project is to support the Recipient's efforts to promote transparency and good
governance in energy project delivery.
C. Project Description
The Project shall fund the operations of the Performance Management Unit, and the future Project
Management Office during their initial operating year. The funds shall cover the remuneration of
key individuals engaged by the PMU and future PMO to improve energy project delivery. As the
PMU and PMO are new units, the precise components to be financed under this TA will develop as
the PMU brings on staff and deals with the most pressing issues necessary to deliver on the
Government's energy agenda. However, indicative components as defined under the MEMR
Transformation Program towards which the individuals hired by the PMU could contribute would be
as follows:
Component 1: Promoting transparency and good governance in the permitting and licensing
processes


﻿Component 2: Promoting improvements to the procurement processes of goods & services funded by
the state budget
Component 3: Promoting the use of innovative infrastructure financing mechanisms
Component 4: Improving MEMR's data management system
O
U       Component 5: Developing an IT based performance monitoring system for MEMR's strategic action
plan for 2015-2019
Component 6: Staff capacity building and innovation scouting activities
Component 7: Promoting transparency and good governance in in MEMR's priority programs,
regulations, and public services
Component 8: Managing initiatives for improving and optimizing MEMR's non-tax revenues
Component 9: Promoting transparency and good governance within MEMR to achieve a new
leadership commitment to "improve MEMR's public trust".
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project is national in scope, given that energy resources are located throughout the country. The
project will provide technical assistance and will not finance any physical investments; however the
PMU will facilitate investments in generation, transmission and distribution. Environmental and
social concerns around energy development in Indonesia have been primarily related to the
conversion of forest lands and key ecological habitats, and the displacement and/or loss of livelihood
of local communities, including but not limited to indigenous peoples.
Several of the proposed project components will have implications for land use planning, land
allocation, and land acquisition. These are: Components (1): Promoting transparency and good
governance in the permitting and licensing processes; (3) Promoting the use of innovative
infrastructure financing mechanisms including Public Private Partnerships; (7) Promoting
transparency and good governance in MEMR's priority programs, regulations, and public services;
and (9) Promoting transparency and good governance in MEMR's operations to improve MEMR's
public trust, may also incorporate tools to ensure compliance with environmental and social
management good practice.
Resources under this proposed project will be used to cover the salaries of financial, legal, and
technical staff in the Project Management Unit (PMU) to be based in the Ministry of Energy and
Mineral Resources (MEMR). This PMU would serve as a facilitator and liaison between private
sector investors in energy development and other Government agencies, including the proposed
Project Management Office to be based in the Vice President's Office, and the Land Bureau, as well
as PLN and Pertamina and stakeholders in local communities.
The Project will not finance the preparation of feasibility studies, technical engineering studies, and
the preparation of bid documents. Given that concessions for energy development (including land
allocation and environmental permits) will already have been granted prior to the PMU becoming
involved, the PMU's role is limited to that of facilitation, liaison, and conflict resolution - working
with project developers, government agencies and ministries, and local stakeholders and
communities to remove bottlenecks to project development, and identify and resolve related
grievances and concerns. Such concerns are anticipated to be largely related to land use/allocation
and compensation issues.
It is recommended that the staffing of the PMU include an environmental specialist with familiarity
in the application of international standards for environmental design, management, and monitoring


﻿of energy projects, and experience in land use planning exercises related to the development of
infrastructure in Indonesia. It is also recommended that an expert in community relations be
included, with experience in the resolution of land use and land acquisition disputes associated with
civil works and the awarding of concessions for energy/infrastructure development. Experience with
O
U       working with indigenous communities would be an asset.
It is recommended that environmental and social objectives be incorporated into any proposed
studies or policy or program formulation under the Project (for example, the proposed pilot
permitting and licensing process). It is also recommended that the PMU prepare a stakeholder
consultation and strategic communications plan.
All TA activities, recommendations, and advice, will be consistent with the objectives of World
Bank environmental and social safeguard policies. Given that this proposed project includes
Technical Assistance but does not provide resources for the implementation of its recommendations
(There is no funding for actual investments in energy generation, transmission, and distribution; and
the decision-making mechanism for awarding energy concessions is not funded under this project)
the Project Paper and the corresponding legal documentation will make such circumstances clear.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
MEMR has prior experience in working with Bank projects including safeguards management. State
owned enterprises such as PLN and Pertamina Geothermal Energy (PGE) are also familiar with the
Bank's safeguards policies and their implementation. The placement of one or two safeguards
specialists at the PMU with adequate exposure and experience to the Bank's safeguards policies (to
be stipulated in their TORs) can bring about benefits to ensure that the innovations and improvement
efficiency efforts can be done in appropriate ways in line with Bank's safeguards policies.
The PMU's safeguards specialist shall proactively work with the Bank's safeguards specialists and
arrange specific training programs or workshops related to the application of safeguards in this TA
by the PMU.
In addition, to ensure proper safeguards works to be conducted in this TA, assistance from an
experienced safeguards consultant would be used to prepare a summary of the potential
environmental and social safeguards issues that could be encountered. This information would be
used to define the responsibilities of the proposed safeguards position at the PMU, and to prepare a
rule to ensure that any adaptation to the permitting and licensing framework or to the development of
new regulations is assessed to ensure compliance with Bank polices, and to prepare a stakeholder
engagement strategy and consultation process.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Flavio Chaves (GWADR)
Krisnan Pitradjaja Isomartana (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies             Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes            This is an upstream TA that will promote
BP 4.01                                      transparency and good governance in the
delivery of the policy and regulatory framework
governing energy projects in Indonesia. The
policy is triggered as the PMU's activities under


﻿the TA may include support with removing
bottlenecks in the licensing and approvals
processes including those related to
environmental and social safeguards clearances.
The environmental and social staff members to
be hired using resources provided by this project
will ensure that any advice and guidance
provided to the PMU and to the recipients of its
support are in accordance with OP 4.01 and the
Bank Group General and Industry Specific EHS
Guidelines. Any permits or processes developed
under this activity will also be compliant with
the objectives and requirements of this policy.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No            This is an upstream TA that will promote
transparency and good governance in the
delivery of the policy and regulatory framework
governing energy projects in Indonesia. The TA
will not identify any energy projects and will
not finance any feasibility studies, technical
engineering studies, and bidding documents.
The TA is meant to promote transparency and
good governance in the implementation of
regulations, and licensing and permitting
processes in the energy sector and in
streamlining processes. Thus, it has no impact
on natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36             No            This is an upstream TA that will promote
transparency and good governance in the
delivery of the policy and regulatory framework
governing energy projects in Indonesia. The TA
will not identify any energy projects and will
not finance any feasibility studies, technical
engineering studies, and bidding documents.
The TA is meant to promote transparency and
good governance in the implementation of
regulations, and licensing and permitting
processes in the energy sector and in
streamlining processes. Impact on forests is not
envisaged.
Pest Management OP 4.09        No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  No          This is an upstream TA that will promote
BP 4.11                                     transparency and good governance in the
delivery of the policy and regulatory framework
governing energy projects in Indonesia. The TA
will not identify any energy projects and will
not finance any feasibility studies, technical


﻿engineering studies, and bidding documents.
The TA is meant to promote transparency and
good governance in the implementation of
regulations, and licensing and permitting
processes in the energy sector and in
streamlining processes. The activity is therefore
is not expected to have an impact on PCRs.
o       Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10  No          This is an upstream TA that will promote
transparency and good governance in the
delivery of the policy and regulatory framework
governing energy projects in Indonesia. The TA
will not identify any energy projects and will
not finance any feasibility studies, technical
engineering studies, and bidding documents.
The TA is meant to promote transparency and
good governance in the implementation of
regulations, and licensing and permitting
processes in the energy sector and in
streamlining processes. The project is not
expected to affect IPs.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  No         This is an upstream TA that will promote
4.12                                       transparency and good governance in the
delivery of the policy and regulatory framework
governing energy projects in Indonesia. The TA
will not identify any energy projects and will
not finance any feasibility studies, technical
engineering studies, and bidding documents.
The TA is meant to promote transparency and
good governance in the implementation of
regulations, and licensing and permitting
processes in the energy sector and in
streamlining processes. The project is not
expected to involve any land acquisition and/or
involuntary resettlement.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No
Projects on International     No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
IV. APPROVALS
Team Leader(s):      Name: Dhruva Sahai
Approved By:


﻿Safeguards Advisor:       Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                               Date: 19-Mar-2015
Practice Manager/          Name: Julia M. Fraser (PMGR)                          Date: 22-Mar-2015
Manager:
C9
0
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.
U


