                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA20293
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Jan-2017
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Jan-2017
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Tunisia                            Project ID:   P151030
                            Project Name:      Integrated Landscapes Management in Tunisia's Lagging Regions Project
                                               (P151030)
                            Task Team          Taoufiq Bennouna,Daniel P. Gerber,Jade Salhab
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       16-Jan-2017                 Estimated     14-Mar-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GEN05                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       100.00           Total Bank Financing:    100.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     100.00
                              Total                                                                                     100.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to improve landscape management and access to economic
                           opportunities for targeted rural communities in NW and CW regions of Tunisia.
                            3. Project Description
                           A.     Project Components
                           The project seeks to promote the integrated landscape management (ILM) approach to spur
                           economic activity (livelihoods, employment), improve agricultural productivity, foster biodiversity


                                                                       Page 1 of 12
                         and contribute to climate change mitigation and adaptation, as well as improve water availability and
                         quality. By focusing on productive landscapes in the rural areas of the lagging NW and CW regions,
                         project interventions will largely target the poorest of the poor.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In line with the Tunisian Constitution, which calls for decentralization and a participatory
                         management of natural resources at local level, the project will help strengthen the capacity to
                         implement integrated landscape development, and the co-management of natural resources, at the
                         regional and local levels. A productive alliance approach will also be used in order to improve the
                         ability of emerging farmers and agroforestry MSMEs to sustainably link into larger, more
                         commercially viable markets, and thereby increase income, productivity and employment for all
                         those economic actors involved. The project will also support MARHP to coordinate its local level
                         interventions with other ministries in response to needs identified through integrated landscape
                         management planning, and to adjust its policies and role in support of the development of lagging
                         regions (see Annex 2).

                         The proposed Project will have three main components: (i) Strengthening capacities for sustainable
                         management of agricultural resources; (ii) Fostering sustainable regional investments and economic
                         growth; and (iii) Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation.

                         Component One. Strengthening capacities for sustainable management of agricultural resources (US
                         $ 20 million)
                         Activities of this component will provide adequate support to initiatives aimed at: (i) improving
                         agricultural, forests and rangelands data and information quality and accuracy at national level; (ii)
                         integrated landscape management planning; (iii) strengthening technical and managerial capacities of
                         different national, regional and local stakeholders involved in the development of agricultural
                         products; and (iv) strengthening relevant institutional and legal frameworks.
                         CP1.1. Information management and knowledge creation (US$ 8 million): This sub-component will:
                         (i) Support the development of General Forest and Rangeland Information System; and (ii) Update or
                         development of forest and rangeland co-management plans which are the main tools to manage
Public Disclosure Copy




                         these ecosystems. This will include the General Forest and Rangeland Information system including
                         national forest and rangeland inventories, national restoration (afforestation) plan, deforestation
                         maps, soil maps, and biodiversity inventories and will include a Measurement, Reporting and
                         Verification (MRV) system.
                         CP1.2. Territorial Development Planning (US$ 8 million): In the NW and CW regions, this sub-
                         component will provide capacity building to local and national stakeholders to: (i) Finalize the
                         ILMPs in the 10 selected priority landscape units (LUs); (ii) identify and develop ILMPs for new
                         LUs in NW and CW regions; and (iii) improve market access of small local agricultural producers
                         through ➢❨ Productive Alliances➢❨ . The proposed integrated landscape management approach will
                         incorporate a participatory methodology that will increase access of poor and vulnerable groups to
                         the decision making process around key activities needed to increase economic opportunities in each
                         landscape. This process is expected to make the project selection process more pro-poor within the
                         context of the feasible set of community assets and economic potential.
                         45.      The Integrated Landscape Management Plans (ILMPs) enhancement will also involve
                         identification of additional activities which will help improve: (i) access of local agricultural
                         products to the markets; (ii) promote economic diversification; (iii) help formalize market-oriented
                         producer groups, and facilitate contractual partnerships between them and existing national or
                         international buyers through the ➢❨ Productive Alliance➢❨ approach . This includes support to the
                         development of: (i) Aromatic and Medicinal Plants (AMP), mainly rosemary and myrtle; (ii) Forest


                                                                     Page 2 of 12
                         products for consumption such as Aleppo pine seeds (Pinus halepensis, locally called zgougou),
                         Pinion pine seeds (Pinus pinea), or different varieties of mushrooms; (iii) local agricultural products
                         such as olives, sheep meat, beef-cattle, cow➢❨ s milk, and apple and peach.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Capacity building activities will be provided through the provision of consultants ➢❨ services, goods
                         and training and will comprise: (i) training and technical assistance for the benefit of local and
                         national stakeholders on topics related to participatory approaches, biodiversity protection,
                         environmental governance, Sustainable forests and rangelands Management techniques, and
                         initiatives aimed at diversifying local livelihoods and preparing community-driven micro-projects.
                         CP1.3. Strengthening institutional and legal frameworks (US$ 4 million): During the preparation
                         phase, evaluation of the legal and institutional frameworks governing agriculture and natural
                         resources was done and it identified key strengths and weaknesses of the MARHP. The evaluation
                         suggested four options to reform the institutions governing natural resources and the MARHP and a
                         working group was established to select the best option to be implemented by this project. The
                         activities under this sub-component seek to support the government➢❨ s vision of institutional
                         reforms to strengthen the legal and institutional frameworks governing forests and rangelands
                         resources.
                         ➢❨¢ Strengthening the legal framework. Project activities will include technical assistance to: (i)
                         reform the Forestry Code, which will, inter alia, lead to the provision of access to forests and
                         rangelands for communities, and facilitate co-management of these resources through clear plans
                         developed between users and the government administration. Complementary activities include
                         support to review legislation which will need to be harmonized, such as the water, soils, and land
                         tenure codes; and (ii) institutionalize and scale-up the integrated landscape planning model based on
                         the lessons from the integrated landscapes supported under the project.
                         ➢❨¢ Strengthening the MARHP institutional framework. Specific activities to be recommended
                         by the working group mentioned above, will aim at improving in a targeted fashion, the
                         organizational framework of the MARHP general directorates and CRDAs, mainly services
                         governing agriculture and natural resources, to ensure better coordination, complementarity,
                         consistency and quality. Learning from pilot activities that will be implemented under component 1.2
Public Disclosure Copy




                         that reward farmers for improved agricultural practices with area based payments, policy papers and
                         draft regulation, including a payment mechanism design, could be introduced to eventually roll-out
                         the policies identified and adopted in the process of the strengthening of the legal framework
                         throughout the project area and nationally.

                         Component Two. Fostering sustainable regional investments and economic growth (US$ 74 million)
                         48.       This component will support: (i) Implementation of a variety of climate-smart agricultural
                         practices; (ii) Complementary local infrastructure investments; and (ii) Fostering economic growth.
                         The project will provide co-financing grants that will finance strategic and technically feasible
                         investments and projects which emerge from the participatory planning process from the ILMPs
                         (identified under CP 1.2). The Project Operational Manual (POM) will spell out funding
                         mechanisms, including co-financing parameters, eligible investments, eligible project promoters, and
                         evaluation and performance criteria.
                         CP2.1. Implementation of a variety of climate-smart agricultural practices (US$ 50 million). The
                         proposed eligible investments, would mainly include: (i) olive tree plantations; (ii) integrated soil
                         fertility management techniques; (iii) conservation tillage; (iv) soil, water and nutrient management
                         along with agroforestry; (v) livestock husbandry and livestock diversification; (vi) afforestation/
                         reforestation activities; (vii) rangeland seeding and natural regeneration; (viii); rehabilitation of
                         aromatic and medicinal plants; (ix) thinning and pruning of forests combined with introduction of
                         forest fire protection activities and biodiversity measures; (x) forest and rangeland certification


                                                                      Page 3 of 12
                         activities; and (xi) diversification activities including ecotourism and recreational activities.
                         CP2.2. Complementary local infrastructure investments (US$ 7 million). The Project will support
                         local development and sustainable development of landscapes by providing financing to upgrade
Public Disclosure Copy




                         investments that improve the access of rural communities➢❨ economic opportunities and enhance
                         quality of life. This will include investments to mobilize and enhance water resources, opening up
                         isolated territories through infrastructure such as feeder roads, water crossings, small water
                         reservoirs, small bridges and culverts. When the analytically underpinned participatory process for
                         the development of ILMPs and productive alliances indicates it, this component will also consider
                         support to initiatives of applied research on agricultural practices that enhance productivity and
                         adaptation to climate change, and market demands of a targeted products. To the extent possible, the
                         local participatory process will facilitate the alignment and co-financing of complementary
                         infrastructure with the municipal and private sector development plans.
                         CP2.3. Fostering economic growth (US$ 17 million). This subcomponent aims to enhance access to
                         economic opportunities and markets for intended beneficiaries mainly by co-financing investments in
                         ➢❨ Productive Alliances➢❨ which supports the formalization of Producer Organizations bringing
                         together small individual producers / farmers, and helping them connect to bigger and better markets
                         Eligible investments will include, investments in common services needed for beneficiaries,
                         particularly small farmers and MSMEs, to reach higher value added markets.
                         52.      More specifically, activities eligible for co-financing under this subcomponent will include:
                         (i) investments needed for the expansion of production capacity and/or improvement of quality as
                         needed to increase access to larger volume and higher value-added markets; and (ii) investments
                         needed to support POs that need to rationalize the production process, ensure quality control,
                         processing, transporting and marketing products and effectively address the valuation and marketing
                         of products.

                         Component Three. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$ 6 million)
                         54.      This component will support the establishment and functioning of the Project Implementing
                         Unit within the MARHP. Through the provision of goods, consultants➢❨ services and training, it
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will cover: (i) the equipment cost for the unit; (ii) Project audits; and (iii) the incremental operating
                         costs for the Project. This component will support project management and monitoring and
                         evaluation activities. This includes financing goods, consultant services, including short term
                         consultants, training and operating costs for the project implementing unit at both, central and
                         regional levels.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project area consists of the whole NW and CW regions including the NW part of Bizerte
                         Governorate (delegation of Sejenane). While Olive plantations will concern the whole regions, other
                         project activities will be based on the ILMPs implementation at landscape level. During the
                         preparation period, the following landscapes units have been selected based on several criteria which
                         will be continually used to select other landscape units. Figure 1 presents the main characteristics of
                         the priority selected landscape units, and appendix 1 present a synthesis of priority investments in
                         each LUs based on the elaborated draft ILMPs.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Africa Eshogba Olojoba (GEN05)
                         Mohamed Adnene Bezzaouia (GEN05)
                         Vincent Roquet (GSUGL)


                                                                       Page 4 of 12
                         6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental            Yes        The project is likely to result in overall positive impact
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01               through increased carbon sequestration and enhanced
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             ecosystem services flows. Some specific activities may
                                                             have adverse environmental impacts if not implemented
                                                             with due caution (small-scale physical investments within
                                                             targeted areas including habitat, roads, gravel roads ...).
                                                             For now, the specific sites have not been identified and
                                                             discussions on project activities are still evolving with the
                                                             authorities.
                                                             Environmental and social Management Framework
                                                             (ESMF) has been prepared by the government. The ESMF
                                                             details procedures as well as appropriate institutional
                                                             arrangements for preparing, screening, reviewing,
                                                             implementing and monitoring site-specific ESMPs at the
                                                             implementation phase, so as to mitigate potential adverse
                                                             impacts as well as cumulative impacts. The ESMF has
                                                             been extensively consulted and discussed with various
                                                             stakeholders (involving representatives of the main
                                                             national , regional and local institutions, NGOs and
                                                             private sector representatives) during two national
                                                             workshops (Sidi Thabet on 23 November 2016, and Tunis
                                                             January 3, 2017). The final version of the ESMF will be
                                                             disclosed in-country through the Ministry of Agriculture
                                                             website and also through the Bank external website before
                                                             the project appraisal (16 January 2017).
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes        The project activities are likely to yield positive
                         4.04                                outcomes, and enhance the environmental quality as the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             objective is to improve ecosystem services and natural
                                                             resource management. Activities would not be carried out
                                                             within protected areas or landscapes, so impacts on
                                                             critical habitats are not foreseen. The project will actually
                                                             enhance the environmental quality and and support the
                                                             protection of natural habitats. The ESMF provide
                                                             necessary guidance to prepare site-specific ESMP in case
                                                             natural habitats are concerned by project activities.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes        OP 4.36 is triggered for ensuring that activities in forests
                                                             and rangelands are aligned with their management/
                                                             working plans and do not result in any significant adverse
                                                             impacts on forest and rangeland quality. Bulk of the
                                                             project investments are aimed at enhancing forest quality
                                                             and introducing sustainable forest management practices
                                                             to improve ecosystem services.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No          Pesticides or spraying equipment are unlikely to be
                                                             procured under the project. In addition, there is no
                                                             possibility that project activities would affect the existing
                                                             pest management practices in the country.


                                                              Page 5 of 12
                            Physical Cultural           No         Physical and cultural resources, if located in the project
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                   areas, will not be impacted. There are no heavy
                                                                   excavations planned. In addition, no large-scale
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   infrastructure interventions are planned under the project.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/   No            This policy is not triggered.
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes           The project does not involve land expropriation, land
                            OP/BP 4.12                             acquisition, or relocation or loss of shelter, for project
                                                                   interventions. The project would also not accept voluntary
                                                                   land donation at an individual level.
                                                                   The project will finance some rehabilitation of prevention
                                                                   and protection infrastructure. The rehabilitation will not
                                                                   include construction of new facilities and therefore use
                                                                   only existing land. While there is no displacement or loss
                                                                   of tangible assets, local populations may lose earnings
                                                                   during a certain period of time (mise en repos).Whether
                                                                   voluntary or involuntary, local populations will need to be
                                                                   compensated for the loss of livelihoods. For precautionary
                                                                   purpose, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have
                                                                   been prepared and provide necessary guidance for land
                                                                   related or compensation issues during project
                                                                   implementation as and when if they occur. In addition, a
                                                                   Process Framework (PF), has also been prepared, it
                                                                   include applicable compensation mechanisms,
                                                                   consultation processes, and mitigation planning, and
                                                                   M&E. The RPF and PF have been prepared by the
                                                                   government and presented to various stakeholders
                                                                   (involving representatives of the main national
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   institutions) during two national workshops (Sidi Thabet
                                                                   on 23 November 2016, and Tunis January 3, 2017). The
                                                                   RPF and PF suggest key mitigation measures and
                                                                   guidance for implementation of necessary measures
                                                                   during the implementation phase of the project. The final
                                                                   version of the RPF and PF will be disclosed in-country
                                                                   through the Ministry of Agriculture website and also
                                                                   through the Bank external website before the project
                                                                   appraisal (16 January 2017).
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No         The project does not support the commissioning or
                            4.37                                   construction and/or operations related to dams.
                            Projects on International   No         No international waterways are involved.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No         The project is not located in any disputed areas.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify


                                                                     Page 6 of 12
                         and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                         Social Safeguards
                         In accordance with Tunisian legislation and in compliance with the World Bank➢❨ s OP/BP OP
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4.12 on involuntary resettlement, a draft Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared
                         by the MARHP. The RPF has been prepared by the government and presented to various
                         stakeholders (involving representatives of the main national institutions) during two national
                         workshops (Sidi Thabet on 23 November 2016, and Tunis January 3, 2017). The RPF suggest key
                         mitigation measures and guidance for implementation of necessary measures during the
                         implementation phase of the project. The final version of the RPF will be disclosed in-country
                         through the Ministry of Agriculture website and also through the Bank external website before the
                         project appraisal (16 January 2017). The major conclusions of the RPF are the following:
                         ➢❨¢ Social impacts of the activities of the proposed Project are expected to be positive.
                         Agriculturall resource users and producers (including women and youth) will directly benefit from
                         a variety of investments aimed at rehabilitating their natural resources, creating new economic
                         opportunities and growth, and building their technical and managerial capacities.
                         ➢❨¢ Negative environmental and social impacts of the institutional and legal reforms of
                         Component 1 will be minimal, provided that legislative and regulatory texts take into account
                         environmental and social safeguards requirements.
                         ➢❨¢ While Component 2 may finance small-scale physical investments (including local
                         community facilities, small water-catchments, and gravel roads), impacts on project affected
                         persons (PAPs) related to physical relocation, land acquisition or economic displacement (loss of
                         income, livelihoods, or businesses) are expected to be minimal or non-existent, are anticipated. As
                         defined by the RPF, a screening process will help to identify investment sub-projects which might
                         result in involuntary resettlement and in such cases an Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan
                         (ARAP) will be prepared.

                         A draft Process Framework (PF) has also been prepared by the MARHP, because Component 2 is
                         likely to include activities involving (for limited periods of time, comprised between 3 months and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3 years) the involuntary restriction of access to and use of specific natural resources designated for
                         conservation activities by local communities - these restrictions will concern forests and
                         rangelands whose degradation has not yet reached the threshold of irreversibility and which will
                         be rehabilitated with different techniques. Adequate compensation measures will be identified in a
                         Process Action Plan to be formulated in a participatory manner with concerned stakeholders. The
                         draft PF has been prepared by the government and presented to various stakeholders (involving
                         representatives of the main national institutions, NGOs, private sector ➢❨¦) during two national
                         workshops (Sidi Thabet on 23 November 2016, and Tunis January 3, 2017). The final version of
                         the PF will be disclosed in-country through the Ministry of Agriculture website and also through
                         the Bank external website before the project appraisal (16 January 2017).

                         Environmental Safeguards
                         In reference to the World Bank➢❨ s OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment, given the fact that
                         the effects of the proposed Project and its investments will be limited, not irreversible, and easily
                         controllable and manageable, the Project is classified as environmental category B.
                         The MARHP has prepared a draft Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF),
                         agro which has been presented to various stakeholders (involving representatives of the main
                         national institutions) during two national workshops (Sidi Thabet on 23 November 2016, and
                         Tunis January 3, 2017). The ESMF proposes key mitigation measures and guidance for their
                         implementation during the implementation phase of the project. The final version of the ESMF


                                                                    Page 7 of 12
                          will be disclosed in-country through the Ministry of Agriculture website and also through the
                          Bank external website before the project appraisal (16 January 2017).
                          Activities to be financed by the project will follow the steps of environmental screening process
Public Disclosure Copy




                          through an Environmental and Social Diagnostic Fact Sheet (FDES), which will determine the
                          magnitude of negative impacts of the sub-project on the human and bio-physical environment
                          (including potential water, air and noise pollution during construction works, generation of liquid
                          and solid waste, tree cutting, etc.). Based on the information included in the FDES, it will possible
                          to determine if a complete Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) or a simple
                          Environmental and Social Information Fact Sheet (FIES) will be required, in order to identify
                          expected risks and related measures aimed at reducing/avoiding them. ESMPs and FIESs will be
                          elaborated in consultation with key local stakeholders and will be published and posted on the
                          MARHP➢❨ s Website and the Bank➢❨ s external Website. Mitigation measures identified in
                          these safeguard tools will be included in the Terms and Specifications documents (Cahiers des
                          charges) for operators and entrepreneurs.
                          Within each administrative district (Imada) covered by the Project, the UGO will be in charge of
                          the establishment and managing operation of a Complaints Commission, made up of the
                          representatives of local communitities, NGOs and private sector representatives, women and youth
                          groups, as well as CRDAs and other deconcentrated technical services. The UGO will prepare a
                          template to help people / households potentially affected by sub-projects to properly present their
                          complaints, if needed, and to establish and deliver the amounts of compensation (by type), as
                          defined in a participatory manner on the basis of the RPF and the PF. Related costs will be
                          integrated into the sub-project➢❨ s budget
                          Gender
                          Specific indicators will track the impact of the activities of the proposed project on women
                          (individual women and women➢❨ s groups). See in Results Framework and Indicators in Annex
                          1, PDO Indicator 1 and IR Indicator 2.5.

                           Citizen➢❨ s Engagement
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The project explicitly seeks to support engagement of stakeholders and beneficiaries through
                           consultative processes, engagement in local level planning and feedback mechanisms to elaborate
                           and adjust the integrated landscape management approach and access to economic opportunities
                           thus contributing to achieving sustainability and project outcomes. Feedback mechanisms will be
                           developed in the project design to ensure transparency, accountability and learning as well as a
                           continuous dialogue with local level beneficiaries and other stakeholders. Particular attention will
                           be given during implementation to the capacity of the local structures to close the feedback loop
                           and report on action taken in this regards. The specific elements of the framework for citizen
                           engagement include: (a) support to engagement of local rural and peri-urban communities in the
                           planning and management of landscapes including monitoring (b) support community engagement
                           in determining local investment in agriculture ad value chain investments; (c) support to a
                           feedback mechanism from stakeholders and beneficiaries to be designed to process concerns and
                           questions from beneficiaries and other stakeholders at different levels (regional to local), with a
                           view to resolving these concern s and questions within certain time frames. The protocol and
                           mechanisms for elements of this citizen engagement framework will be detailed in the Project
                           Operational Manual. Quality of its implementation and progress will be monitored both at regional
                           and national levels through supervision and dialogue.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           ➢❨¢ Some investments may have low negative impacts insofar as they involve the construction


                                                                     Page 8 of 12
                           or rehabilitation of infrastructures and the development of spaces within the agricultural zones
                           (construction and / or development of rural roads, rehabilitation of buildings, etc.). But the
                           identification of possible mitigation measures will be relatively easy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ➢❨¢ The environmental and social impact of the institutional and legal reforms of Component
                           1 will be insignificant, provided that the legislative and regulatory texts to be elaborated with the
                           support of the Project take into account environmental and social safeguard requirements. To this
                           end, it is advisable to conduct an appropriate strategic evaluation at the appropriate time.
                           Moreover, the positive effects of the Project should be sustained over the long term:
                           ➢❨¢ Awareness-raising and capacity-building activities of selected local communities will have
                           significant positive environmental and social effects, as the principles of good governance will be
                           strengthened and implemented.
                           ➢❨¢ Activities related to the preparation of Integrated Landscape Management Plans (ILMPs)
                           will also have significant positive impacts insofar as the development of the sectors will be carried
                           out in a way that takes into account the dynamics of the ecosystems and the active involvement of
                           the Communities in the implementation of environmental services.
                           ➢❨¢ Measures related to the development of agricultural sectors will have a positive impact on
                           the creation of new economic opportunities and growth.

                           Certain positive environmental effects, the policy of the agricultural sector being considered as a
                           major axis of a policy of sustainable development:
                           ➢❨¢ The introduction of a system of co-management of agricultural landscapes will allow
                           integrated landscape management and empowerment of local populations.
                           ➢❨¢ Restoration and conservation works will have the effect of preventing erosion.
                           ➢❨¢ Anti-erosion systems will stop silting phenomena.
                           ➢❨¢ The natural regeneration of agroforestry and restoration / restoration systems make it
                           possible to reconstitute and preserve the soil, with very significant positive impacts.
                           ➢❨¢ The forestry / restoration initiatives of precise sylvo-pastoral areas will allow the
                           restoration of vegetation cover and will reduce the degradation of resources.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ➢❨¢ Reforestation (nurseries, planting, conservation, natural regeneration), by creating
                           conditions for habitat restoration, will promote the regeneration and development of wildlife.
                           ➢❨¢ Agricultural landscapes will benefit from increased value compared to global benefits
                           (biodiversity, carbon sequestration)
                           ➢❨¢ The ways and means of life of local communities dependent on agricultural ecosystems
                           will be improved
                           ➢❨¢ Jobs will be created (including for young women and men)
                           ➢❨¢ There will be an increase in the value of locally produced domestic and local benefits (e.
                           g., agricultural productivity, range fodder productivity, recreational opportunities) and off-site (eg
                           reduced sedimentation of reservoirs) Soil conservation and restoration of forests and rangelands.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Not applicable
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The borrower is aware of Bank safeguards policies and processing. In addition, an environmental
                           and social specialist will be recruited bu the UGO He/she will responsible for applying the
                           screening checklist and following up and reporting on the mitigation measures of the site-specific
                           ESIAs➢❨ .


                                                                      Page 9 of 12
                           In accordance with Tunisian legislation and in compliance with the the World Bank➢❨ s OP/BP
                           OP 4.12 on involuntary resettlement, a draft Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been
                           prepared by the MARHP. The major conclusions of the RPF are the following:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ➢❨¢ Social impacts of the activities of the proposed Project are expected to be positive. Agro-
                           sylvo-pastoral resource users and producers (including women and youth) will directly benefit
                           from a variety of investments aimed at rehabilitating their natural resources, creating new
                           economic opportunities and growth, and building their technical and managerial capacities.
                           ➢❨¢ Negative environmental and social impacts of the institutional and legal reforms of
                           Component 1 will be minimal, provided that legislative and regulatory texts take into account
                           environmental and social safeguards requirements.
                           ➢❨¢ While Component 2 may finance small-scale physical investments (including local
                           community facilities, small water-catchments, and gravel roads), impacts on project affected
                           persons (PAPs) related to physical relocation, land acquisition or economic displacement (loss of
                           income, livelihoods, or businesses) are expected to be minimal or non-existent, are anticipated. As
                           defined by the RPF, a screening process will help to identify investment sub-projects which might
                           result in involuntary resettlement and in such cases an Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan
                           (ARAP) will be prepared.
                           A draft Process Framework (PF) has also been prepared by the MARHP, because Component 2 is
                           likely to include activities involving (for limited periods of time, comprised between 3 months and
                           3 years) the involuntary restriction of access to and use of specific natural resources designated for
                           conservation activities by local communities - these restrictions will concern forests and
                           rangelands whose degradation has not yet reached the threshold of irreversibility and which will
                           be rehabilitated with different techniques. Adequate compensation measures will be identified in a
                           Process Action Plan to be formulated in a participatory manner with concerned stakeholders.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key project stakeholders are the Ministry of Agriculture and its representing administrations at
                           governorate level (CRDA); The Ministry of Environment and Local Affairs, the Civil society
Public Disclosure Copy




                           organizations and the private sector representatives.
                           Environmental and social safeguard documents (ESMF, RPF and PF) were presented during two
                           national workshops (Sidi Thabet on 23 November 2016, and Tunis January 3, 2017). The ESMF
                           allowed the identification of potential social and environmental impacts and suggest key
                           mitigation measures and guidance for their implementation. The final version of the ESMF will be
                           disclosed in-country through the Ministry of Agriculture website and also through the Bank
                           external website before the project appraisal (16 January 2017).
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          09-Jan-2017
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       16-Jan-2017
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Tunisia                                                              12-Jan-2017
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process


                                                                     Page 10 of 12
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      09-Jan-2017
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   16-Jan-2017
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Tunisia                                                          12-Jan-2017
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information




                                                                     Page 11 of 12
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Taoufiq Bennouna,Daniel P. Gerber,Jade Salhab
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nina Chee (SA)                         Date: 16-Jan-2017
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Benoit Paul Blarel (PMGR)             Date: 17-Jan-2017
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
