INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12170
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-May-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Croatia                    Project ID:  P152130
Project Name: Croatia Innovation & Entrepreneurship VC (P152130)
Task Team       Mariana lootty De Paiva Dias
Leader(s):
Estimated       26-May-2015                Estimated    18-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTCDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General industry and trade sector (60%), Other non-bank financial intermediaries
(40%)
Theme(s):       Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (60%), Other Financial Sector
Development (40%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     20.00             Total Bank Financing:   20.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                    0.00
P           International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      20.00
Total                                                                      20.00
Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project development objective is to strengthen risk capital financing for innovative SMEs and
startups.
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 9


﻿The Project has a tenure of six years and will have three components: a) a pilot venture capital fund
b) a seed co-investment fund; and c) technical assistance (TA). The Project will be financed 100%
through a World Bank loan to the Republic of Croatia. Each component is described as follows:
O
Component 1: Pilot Venture Capital Fund (C 15.5 million)
The Pilot VC Fund will be registered in Croatia as a closed end fund established as a limited liability
company in accordance with the Alternative Investment Fund Act, and as a EuVECA, in accordance
with the European Venture Capital Fund Regulation. The Fund will be supervised by HANFA. It will
*        be a 10-year euro-denominated fund, with an option for a two year extension. The Fund will consist
of both public and private financing, in a ratio consistent with EU state aid regulation. It will be
established with the purpose of providing financing, in the form of equity or quasi equity
instruments, to innovative SMEs (including startups) with the locus of activity in Croatia. The Fund
will be managed by a private fund manager selected through an international tender process. The
Fund Manager must be established as a limited liability company or a joint stock company, in
accordance with the Alternative Investment Fund Act. The Fund Manager must have an EU AIFM
passport, meaning that it is either registered in Croatia or licensed by HANFA or that it is registered
in another Member State and licensed by the relevant Regulatory Authority. To ensure the
commercial viability of the fund, and its uptake by private investors, the Government of Croatia will
provide financial contribution towards the Fund's structure (up to £3.5 million of the loan will be
used to cover management fees - in effect, lowering the cost to private investors from management
fees -- to ensure the viability of the fund structure). This means the net amount available for
investment under the VC Fund is C12 million.
Component 2: Seed Co-Investment Fund (C 2.5 million)
This component will provide C2.5 million towards establishing a Seed Co-Investment Fund ("Co-
Investment Fund"). The Co-Investment Fund will be an open-ended fund with initial capital of
C2.5million that will financed by proceeds of the World Bank loan. It will be administered by the
implementing agency of the whole Project, HAMAG-BICRO. The objective of this component is to
strengthen the early stage investing industry in Croatia by providing smaller amounts of risk capital
O
C.       financing alongside investors in the market such as angel investors and incubators. It is envisaged
that the fund will provide smaller amounts of financing than will be made available by the Pilot VC
Fund. The Co-Investment Fund is expected to provide a range from C30k- C200k (ticket size; C300k
maximum per beneficiary) of flexible debt financing to innovative SMEs (including startups) with
the locus of activity in Croatia. Specifically, the Seed Co-Investment Fund will provide financing
through loans that will be subordinated to other debt holders, and will not require collateral. The loan
will be paid out of income from the investment over the 15 year life of the loan. The terms of the
loan are envisaged to be that the initial income generated from the investment will be paid to the co-
investor(s) and HAMAG-BICRO on a pro rata basis. Once the return on the investment has exceeded
a hurdle rate (6 percent) the subsequent income will be distributed asymmetrically to the benefit of
the co-investor(s). After the hurdle rate has been achieved HAMAG-BICRO would receive around
10 percent of any additional income from the investment.
Component 3: Technical Assistance (C 1.5 million)
This component of the program would be established to assist in the creation and operation of the
program. This component will have four sub-components.
(a)    Sub Component 3.1: The Global Advisory Network (£400 k). The objective of this sub-
component is to establish a network of experts who will provide advice and guidance for the
implementation of both funds designed under this Project (Pilot VC Fund and Co-Investment Fund).
Page 2 of 9


﻿(b)    Sub Component 3.2: Capacity Building and Networking (E400 k). The objective of this sub-
component are twofold. First, to develop human capabilities of the main actors involved in the infant
early stage financing industry in Croatia; such as HAMAG-BICRO staff, investors and
entrepreneurs. Second, to strengthen social capital and networks - both local and global among
O
Q)       incubators, accelerators, business angel networks, matchmaking services, entrepreneurs and larger
investors.
(c)    Sub Component 3.3: Monitoring & Evaluation (C100 k). The aim of this subcomponent is to
ensure accountability in the use of government's money, and provide guidance on how the program
can be improved
(d)    Sub Component 3.4: Project Management (C600 k). This subcomponent will finance
necessary activities for establishment of the PIU, project management and implementation, and
carrying out outreach activities.
The key beneficiaries of the proposed Project will be innovative SMEs and startups. Due to their
innovative potential, these firms are in a position to leverage the country's low cost base, to boost
productivity and to export. However, as their track record and products are difficult to collateralize,
these firms face a substantive funding gap. In this sense, to the extent that lack of risk capital
financing undermines the innovation ecosystem by preventing innovative ideas with commercial
potential from reaching the market, the proposed project seeks to fill in this funding gap and
strengthen the innovation and entrepreneurship system.
An eligible investee company to receive finance by the Pilot VC Fund or the Seed Co-Investment
Fund to be established under the proposed Project is the one that, on the date of the initial
investment:
a)     is classified as an "SME" or small and medium-sized enterprise - as defined in Annex I to
Commission Regulation (EU) No 651/2014 which uses a combined criteria of staff headcount
combined with annual turnover or annual balance sheet.
b)     is engaged in innovative activities with the aim of creating new (or upgrading existing)
products (good or services), processes and/or business models which are new to Croatian or to other
markets.
(i) According to (EU) 651/2014 art. 2 (80), 'innovative enterprise' means an enterprise:
(1)    that can demonstrate, by means of an evaluation carried out by an external expert
a        that it will in the foreseeable future develop products, services or processes which are new or
substantially improved compared to the state of the art in its industry, and which carry a risk of
technological or industrial failure, or
(2)    where the research and development costs represent at least 10 percent of the firm's
total operating costs in at least one of the three years preceding the granting of the aid or, in the case
of a start-up enterprise without any financial history, in the audit of its current fiscal period, as
certified by an external auditor.
c)     is at the early expansion stage of its business development for the Pilot VC Fund.
(i) According to (EU) 651/2014 art 21, eligible undertakings shall be undertakings which at the
time of the initial risk finance investment are unlisted SMEs and fulfill at least one of the following
conditions:
(3)     they have not been operating in any market;
(4)    they have been operating in any market for less than 7 years following their first commercial
sale;
(5)     they require an initial risk finance investment which, based on a business plan
prepared in view of entering a new product or geographical market, is higher than 50 percent of their
Page 3 of 9


﻿average annual turnover in the preceding 5 years.
d)     or at the start-up or seed stage for the Seed Co-Investment Fund.
(i) According to (EU) 651/2014 art 22, eligible undertakings shall be unlisted small enterprises
up to five years following their registration, which have not yet distributed profits and have not been
O
U         formed through a merger. For eligible undertakings that are not subject to registration the five years
eligibility period may be considered to start from the moment when the enterprise either starts its
economic activity or is liable to tax for its economic activity.
e)     is a legal entity registered in Croatia and has the locus of their activities in Croatia; this
includes companies owned by foreigners but which are based in Croatia. However, as companies
develop their locus may shift outside the country.
f) is not classified under the negative list of activities as described in the overall Program Operations
Manual.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The eligible applicants will come from all over the country and the project will be implemented
countrywide.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Natasa Vetma (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The Environmental Management Framework is prepared
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               for the project prior to appraisal and defines
environmental procedures and due diligence for the
project as a whole. The EMF builds on existing Croatian
Science and Technology Project II which has the same
implementing agency.
For Component 1 Pilot Venture Capital Fund and
Component 2 Seed Co-Investment Fund, an EMF is
developed focusing on variety of environmental impacts
that come from knowledge intensive based (including life
sciences and bio-tech) and innovative start-up companies.
Sub-projects might range from low to high category B
projects, implying possible preparation of various due
diligence documents like: EIA, EMP, EMP checklist, for
which criteria are well defined in EMF. Category A
projects will be excluded, as well those listed on IBRD
non-eligible project list. The EMF as well deals with
environmental and ethical risks posed by some of the
activities (like life science - biotech) supported by the
Funds. The EMF makes sure that the implementation of
the project complies with both National and WB
safeguards procedures.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Page 4 of 9


﻿Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          No. The project will not support purchasing pesticides and
project activities will not lead to their increased usage.
Physical Cultural       No          No. The project will not support any rehabilitation of
Resources OP/BP 4.11                protected buildings or buildings of high historical
significance.
70     Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No         The project would not trigger OP 4.12. The eligibility
OP/BP 4.12                          criteria defined in EMF specify that no potential
beneficiaries can participate in the project if they would
need land acquisition for the activities to be supported
under this project. Re-habilitation and reconstruction
(which could involve demolition of no longer suitable
structure and erection of a new one) of existing buildings
within the roughly same footprint would be permissible,
although unlikely to be supported by the project.
Investments will only be accepted if they involve
unencumbered land or property (i.e. no squatters or
encroachers or not requiring the eviction of anyone
resident in such property). The PIU should verify for each
sub project the unencumbered status of the property prior
to approving any sub-project which could raise such
issues. The EMF clearly notes the above.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
O
U         Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project triggers Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) policy. The project structure
classifies the project under FI category. The Ministry of Entrepreneurship and Crafts will
intermediate the funds to Pilot Venture Capital Fund (to be managed by future Fund manager) that
will finance eligible sub-projects. Also in Co-investment Fund, HAMAG BICRO will act as the
implementing and fund managing agency approving and financing eligible sub-projects
implemented by the sub-borrowers (SB).
Environmental due diligence will be applied through set of procedures defined in the
Environmental Management Framework (EMF) prepared by the HAMAG-BICRO. EMF defines
Page 5 of 9


﻿screening, assessment, review and selection procedures for sub-projects upon which the decision
on funding will be reached. These procedures are agreed upon by the Bank, and beneficiary
institutions (HAMAG BICRO and later VC Fund manager) and is in line with the national, EU
and WB environmental procedures. The EMF will become integral part of project Operational
O
Q)          Manual. HAMAG-BICO will make sure that the safeguards requirements stipulated in EMF
become part of the operating practice of VC Fund, upon its establishment. In addition, EMF
defines procedures, requirements, roles and responsibilities regarding environmental management
and monitoring in project design, implementation as well as operation phase of the sub-project.
The EMF looks at the environmental impacts that could come from innovative and knowledge
based startup companies to be supported under the project related, but not limited to information
communication technology (ICT), life sciences, medical and health related fields and
biotechnology.
It is not expected for the overall project to have large, significant or reversible environmental
impacts. Sub-project classified as A project category will not be eligible for funding as these
represent sub-projects with significant environmental impact. Only environmental assessment
categories B and C will be funded under this project. The eligible sub-project as envisaged would
not produce significant, adverse or long-term impacts to the environment or human health.
Environmental mitigation measures are not expected to be complex or expensive.
The project will not fund any land acquisition activities thus does not trigger Involuntary
Resettlement (OP/PB 4.12) policy, nor it would support any construction, re-construction or
rehabilitation activities in or on protected objects or those of high cultural value thus Physical and
Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) policy is not triggered.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The project will support a wide range of innovative and knowledge intensive sub-projects varying
in theme from information communication technology (ICT), life sciences, medical and health
related fields to biotechnology, etc. It is not expected that any of implemented sub-projects will
produce long-term, adverse, significant or irreversible impacts. The screening procedures and
eligibility conditions specified in the EMF are set to eliminate possibility of funding such projects.
o
The sub-projects might include medical, biotechnological or other scientific research where
cancerogenic and mutagenic agents might be used. Some ethical issues related practices might be
applied such as testing on laboratory animals. As a member of EU, Croatian legislation is in line
with EU legislation on management and disposal of chemicals, toxic agents as well as treatment of
laboratory animals. To ensure compliance, EMF requires description of procurement, supply,
management, handing and disposal to be submitted with funding application as well as related
permissions, contracts (e.g. with hazardous waste management authorized company) and
authorizations.
The EMF also includes list of the type of projects that will be excluded from the support like
Category A projects and those listed on IBRD non-eligible project list. The environmental due
diligence procedures identified in the EMF comply both with Croatian national and World Bank
environmental safeguards procedures.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The project will exclude from funding all projects (i) classified as the A Category project, (ii)
Page 6 of 9


﻿projects which include land acquisition thus might trigger Involuntary Relocation WB policies,
(iii) non-eligible projects listed in the EMF (IBRD and WB list of non-eligible projects).
Category B projects might vary in the potential impacts hence are divided in two sub-categories;
Category B+ projects are considered those that carry potential impacts lesser than Category A, and
are short term, but impacts still potentially adverse and significant.
Projects classified under category B- are those including smaller scale research, re-construction,
assembling and activities causing intermediate predictable or accidental emissions. This includes
research activities that might use cancerogenic and mutagenic agents, or perform animal testing.
Environmental compliance of implementation with Bank's and national policies will be regularly
reported by project beneficiaries to PIU and the Bank as a part of general progress reporting.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower prepared the EMF which contains a set of approval procedures, measures and
monitoring activities to address the potential negative impact of the project on the environment
and human health. All these are included in project Operation Manual.
Environmental screening, assessment and approval procedures are a part of the procedures of
selecting and approving the sub-loan applications. In accordance with EMF the applicants will be
required to carry out an appropriate type of environmental assessment for the applied sub-project
in line with WB procedures as well as national legislation. Project Beneficiaries (HAMAG-
BICRO and VC Fund) processing for sub-project applications include defining environmental
categorization, checking the eligibility, defining scope and checking quality and validity of
environmental assessment, emissions permitting and other environmental documentation. Project
Beneficiaries will monitor the sub-borrower's compliance with EMP and report to WB.
O
Depending on the assigned environmental category, the sub- project application package would
include one of the following: a) EIA with EMP; b) EMP alone; c) simplified (checklist) EMP
alone; d) explanation why no EA or EMP is required.
*           EMF includes templates for development of specific Environmental Management Plans (EMPs)
and EMP Checklists that are developed to provide guidance on implementation of mitigation
measures and monitoring activities for sub-projects. Sub-borrowers are obliged to implement
EMPs and EMP Checklists to their projects and report on their implementation regularly.
The World Bank will assist HAMAG-BICRO and VC Fund in screening procedures according to
EMF. In addition, WB will perform environmental evaluations and review procedures on ad hoc
basis. WB will perform: a) a prior review and clearance of all sub-projects falling in category B+
requiring EIA and/or full EMP, prior review of first five (5) category B- sub-projects under each
PB; as well as those involving use of mutagenic, teratogenic or cancerogenic substance and b) post
review for all other projects.
HAMAG-BICRO has long experience in financing and assessing the projects according with the
national and EU legislation as well as WB policies, since they had implemented a similar (Science
and Technology I and II) project previously. In order to participate in the Project, both, HAMAG
Page 7 of 9


﻿BICRO has identified a person and VC Fund Manager, will identify a person or a team in charge
of environmental due diligence during the project implementation. Training was and will be
provided for the staff in charge of the safeguards issues. The main purpose of this training is to
enhance the capacity of HAMAG BICRO and VC Fund to successfully review sub-project
O
applications, perform environmental screening of proposed projects and monitor implementation
of environmental requirements set in environmental due diligence documentation. HAMAG
BICRO staff underwent safeguard trainings in Belgrade in 2011 and Dubrovnik 2015 while for
VC Find Manager staff the training will be organized upon the appointment.
*         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders in the project are MSES, HAMAG BICRO, the Ministry of Finance and
SME and knowledge intense community.
The draft Environmental Management Framework (EMF) along with an announcement of the
public consultation meeting was disclosed in English and Croatian language on the web-pages of
the HAMAG-BICRO (http://www.hamagbicro.hr/poziv-na-javnu-raspravu/) on March 17, 2015.
The hard copy of the document was also available at HAMAG-BICRO premises. The draft
document, along with individual invitations was sent out to the key stakeholders in the Project.
The Public Consultations presentations meeting was held at the premises of the HAMAG-BICRO,
on March 31, 2015. Final EMF which included minutes from public consultation was sent to
InfoShop on May 14, 2015.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                             13-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                          14-May-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Croatia                                                 17-Mar-2015
O
Comments: The draft Environmental Management Framework (EMF) along with an
announcement of the public consultation meeting was disclosed in English and
Croatian language on the web-pages of the HAMAG-BICRO (http://www.
hamagbicro.hr/poziv-na-javnu-raspravu/) on March 17, 2015. The hard copy of the
document was also available at HAMAG-BICRO premises. The draft document,
along with individual invitations was sent out to the key stakeholders in the Project.
The Public Consultations presentations meeting was held at the premises of the
HAMAG-BICRO, on March 31, 2015. Final EMF which included minutes from
public consultation was sent to InfoShop on May 14, 2015.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Page 8 of 9


﻿OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Mariana lootty De Paiva Dias
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Paloma Anos Casero (PMGR)            Date: 29-May-2015
Manager:
Page 9 of 9


