                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                  Report No.: ISDSA12723

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Feb-2016
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Feb-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Pakistan                          Project ID:   P154777
                                                       Parent        P126833
                                                       Project ID:
   Project Name:     PK: Additional Financing & Restructuring for FATA RLCIP (P154777)
   Parent Project    FATA Rural Livelihoods and Community Infrastructure Project (RLCIP)
   Name:             (P126833)
   Task Team         Kamran Akbar,Shobha Shetty
   Leader(s):
   Estimated         26-May-2015                       Estimated   01-Apr-2016
   Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    GFA06                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                       Instrument:
   Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%), Vocational training
                     (15%), Other non-bank financial intermediaries (10%), Ot her social services
                     (15%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (20%)
   Theme(s):         Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (5%), Participation and civic
                     engagement (20%), Conflict prevention and post-conflict rec onstruction (15%),
                     Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Other rural development (30%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP Yes
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:       7.30           Total Bank Financing:                 0.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                      Amount
     Borrower                                                                                0.00
     MDTF for Crisi Affected Areas of NWFP/FATA/
                                                                                               7.30
     Balochistan
     Total                                                                                     7.30
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:



                                             Page 1 of 8
Is this a            No
Repeater
project?

2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   To improve livelihoods and access to basic service infrastructure in selected Agencies in FATA.

   B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


3. Project Description
The original project is supported through a Multi Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) Grant of US $12
million and is currently operational in Bajur, Mohmand and South Waziristan agencies whereas
North Waziristan Agency was added in to its area of operation on January 29, 2015. The proposed
additional grant would help finance the costs associated with expanding project coverage from four
(4) agencies in FATA to all the agencies as well as the adjacent Frontier Regions (FR), especially in
locations affected by the military operations as well as return and movement of Temporarily
Dislocated Persons (TDPs) . The additional grant will facilitate the project TDPs for rehabilitation
and restoration of their livelihoods as well as essential community infrastructure. The project will
continue supporting the eligible returnees throughout the life of the project facilitating them to lead
their development through participatory approaches and access infrastructure and services and
improve their livelihoods. Post restructuring the nature of activities will remain largely unchanged
and will cover inhabitants of the project agencies as well as FRs residing within the agencies and FRs
as well as in the TDP camps and in host communities.
The TDPs will be prepared in advance for their return in a manner that on one hand capacitates them
to meet rehabilitation and reconstruction needs and on the other it makes their rehabilitation ‘self-
driven and prompt’. The regular RLCIP interventions in this regard, undertaken with TDPs, are
likely to contribute to all the Strategic Objectives of PCNA, especially SOs 1 and 2.
RLCIPs will start undertaking mobilization process in TDP camps to begin with, followed by
mobilization with hosted TDPs. Depending upon how camps are arranged; social mobilization
methodology will be adjusted to focus ‘state-citizen relationship’ as well as the ‘individual good’.
The mobilization process will help in identifying social activists, who will be trained in carrying out
needs assessment, developing baselines and act as community resource persons. Capacity building
for livelihoods restoration will especially focus on youth within the area of operation as well as in
make-shift facilities within TDP camp(s) and subsequently with hosted TDPs. The capacity building
for livelihood development will not only look at skills development but will also intervene in areas
like micro and small business development. During the capacity building phase, TDP beneficiaries
will be provided with food and a relevant toolkit. It is understood that a small number will be trained
in entrepreneurship, based on their potential.
Once the TDPs start returning, the project will move with them by establishing an Agency
Implementation Unit (AIU) or any other appropriate structure agreed by the Bank. With community
members already mobilized and trained, it will facilitate the government to kick start the
rehabilitation process without any major time lag. The needs assessment will remain an evolving
process for some time. With trained community members and implementing partners, it will be less
difficult to establish baselines in an otherwise difficult area. It will enable beneficiaries to be part of
the needs assessment process in a leadership role, develop understanding that ‘state’ has acted as a


                                               Page 2 of 8
‘friend’. With restoration of livelihoods, income generation will start, especially among the youth.
Under Component A ‘Community Development and Social Organization’, Sub-Component A-1 in
revised form would include social mobilization with TDPs capacitation and preparing them for
livelihood restoration and rehabilitation upon their return. Sub-Component A-2 Institutional
Strengthening of Local Groups includes training and capacity building of the involved local
communities as well as farmers and other community groups formed and /or revitalized by the
project (No Change). A new Sub-component A-3 ‘Communications and Knowledge Program’ will
finance a communications and knowledge program to reach the local communities and other
stakeholders.
Component B ‘Community Infrastructure and Services’ will continue to focus on community
physical infrastructure prioritized by the communities through their organizations. Inhabitants of the
project’s operational areas will be provided with training and other allied support while they are
displaced and afterwards for rehabilitation.
Component C ‘Livelihood Support’, will support livelihoods development activities. In sync with KP
SADP, this component will have two sub-components. Sub-component C-1 ‘Advisory Services and
Development Support’ will support context based interventions for livelihood development which
may include: skills training, support for apprenticeship, microenterprise development or any other
intervention based on contextual needs including agriculture and livestock. The Sub-Component C-2
‘Support to Vulnerable Individuals and Groups’ will support vulnerable individuals and groups,
fulfilling eligibility criteria as defined in the project operations manual. Component D ‘Project
Management and Implementation Support’ will primarily finance project management.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project will be implemented in the crisis-affected rural areas of Federally Administered Tribal
Areas (FATA), a semi-autonomous tribal region in the northwest of Pakistan lying between the
provinces of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Baluchistan and neighboring country Afghanistan. The
insurgency and counter insurgency action s in 2009 led to a displacement of approximately 3 million
people in FATA and the neighboring Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) regions, have long-term effects on
their socio-economic growth, with high unemployment and large scale internal migration. The
situation is further exacerbated by the long-standing social inequities and sense of deprivation among
the masses resulting from decades of weak governance and the inadequacy of social, economic and
physical infrastructure and service delivery systems. FATA region has historically remained amongst
the poorest and underdeveloped parts of Pakistan with over 60% of its population living below
national poverty line. Though livelihood of majority of people depend on subsistence agriculture and
livestock, however, support to these sectors through infrastructure development, institutional
strengthening, and community participation has remained minimal. FATA also lags behind other
provinces across a wide range of social and economic indicators, with a lag even more pronounced
when viewed through a gender lens.
FATA region is basically a hilly terrain with dominant dry barren mountains. Figures for forest cover
in FATA are unreliable, ranging from 1% to 8% of the total reported area (FATA Directorate of
Forest, 2005) and is declining rapidly due to uncontrolled grazing and timber extraction for
commercial usage and fuel wo od. The inability of barren hills to retain soil and water is not only
causing soil erosion in the area but affecting the quality and quantity of fodder for livestock, drawing
down of water table, besides increasing incidences of flash floods. Quality of fresh water resources
is also under stress due to over exploitation and inappropriate disposal of wastes.
Under the restructuring the project coverage will be expanded to the remaining FATA agencies and
FRs.



                                              Page 3 of 8
   5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
  Javaid Afzal (GEN06)
  Salma Omar (GSU06)

   6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
   Environmental               Yes            The project activities under its component B and C can
   Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      potentially have localized and moderately significant
                                              negative impacts. Hence OP 4.01 is triggered
   Natural Habitats OP/BP      No             The project schemes will be implemented within the
   4.04                                       communities where the natural habitat has long been
                                              modified.
   Forests OP/BP 4.36          No             Same as above. No forests are exists at or near the places
                                              where the schemes will be implemented.
   Pest Management OP 4.09 No                 The small livelihood schemes though include agricultural
                                              schemes are unlikely to cause any increased usage of
                                              agro-chemicals.
   Physical Cultural           No             No PCR have been identified in the project area.
   Resources OP/BP 4.11
   Indigenous Peoples OP/      No             No IPs exist in the area.
   BP 4.10
   Involuntary Resettlement    No             Schemes requiring land/asset acquisition are excluded
   OP/BP 4.12                                 from the project.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             No dams are involved in the project.
   4.37
   Projects on International   No             No schemes are located in any international waterway.
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed        No             No disputed areas exist at or near the project location.
   Areas OP/BP 7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     a. The interventions under Components B and C could potentially cause adverse environmental
     and social impacts triggering Bank’s environment policy OP 4.01. Most of the environmental
     impacts are likely to occur during the rehabilitation and reconstruction of basic productive and or
     social infrastructure and may include water and soil contamination, higher dust and noise levels,
     health and safety hazards for the construction workers as well as nearby communities, and
     temporary odor issues. Some of the operations related impacts are health related and may result
     due to the inadequate source for water supply schemes, water contamination due to inadequate
     water distribution system, and localized water logging due to poorly maintained irrigation
     channels. Most of these impacts are expected to be temporary and confined to local environment
     and would be direct, reversible and of short duration. RLCIP has therefore been rated as
     Environment Category B project.


                                                Page 4 of 8
  b.       The project restructuring does not involve any significant changes in the Components B
  and C hence the potentially negative impacts and environmental category of the project remain the
  same.
  c.       There are no indigenous people residing in the project area so none of the Bank’s social
  safeguard policies will trigger. All land acquisition for community infrastructure and livelihood
  schemes is acquired through voluntary land donation (VLD). The procedures for these have been
  finalized in detail and the Project is currently implementing them. VLD procedures have been
  designed in accordance with Bank guidance and ensure that there are no impacts on the poor or
  marginalized groups and are truly voluntary in nature. These procedures will continue.. during
  the implementation of restructured project as well. However, given the large scale displacement of
  people from North Waziristan and the resultant hardship that people have faced due to the security
  situation, it is important that the Project does not exacerbate poverty through land donation. The
  Project will also use third part validation of VLD to ensure that project interventions are truly
  voluntary in nature and do not place additional burden on impoverished and relocated
  communities.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  No indirect or long term adverse environmental impacts are expected to be associated with the
  project interventions, primarily because of the extent and nature of the small infrastructure
  schemes being undertaken under the project. On the other hand, the social and productive
  infrastructure schemes will have long lasting positive impacts on the beneficiary communities.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  a.       The only other alternative is ‘no-project’ option, which could have detrimental effects by
  denying basic services to the rural population of the project areas. In addition the restoration of
  such services is linked with enhancing confidence of the local populace in the State and will
  contribute towards peace building efforts. The ‘no-project’ alternative would though avoid the
  insignificant, minor and temporary adverse environmental impacts associated with the
  rehabilitation, expansion and/or up-gradation and construction of the community infrastructure and
  services; however, would also result in continued environmental degradation; health hazards for
  the population associated with non- or poorly-functioning services such as water supply and waste
  management; and less opportunities for livelihood strengthening.
  b.       At preliminary stage of every sub-project technical design, different design options will be
  considered to avoid resettlement impacts and minimize other social and environment impacts.
  However, all identified and selected sub-projects will be subject to environmental and social
  (including resettlement) impact screening in accordance with the ESIA and detailed procedures for
  these will be included in the project’s Operations Manual. The PMU, line directorates and local
  community groups in consultation with tribal elders/Jirga and Political Administration will be
  responsible for following the procedures described in the Operations Manual, in a transparent
  manner without duress. Those sites will be selected which involve minimum loss of productive
  land and other resources from the construction and operations of infrastructure.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The original project was processed as an Emergency Operation under OP 8.0 and was guided by
  the overall Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF) prepared
  for all projects under MDTF. The ESSAF defined the environmental and social impact assessment
  requirements, the planning approach and requirements for assessing and mitigating adverse


                                             Page 5 of 8
environmental and social impacts. In pursuance of the ESSAF requirements, the project conducted
an environmental and social assessment (ESA). The ESA that includes an ESMP also identifies
potentially negative environmental impacts associated with the activities under Components B and
C of the RLCIP and proposes appropriate mitigation measures to mitigate if not totally eliminate
these impacts. The ESA also describes institutional arrangements for safeguards management,
monitoring mechanism, training needs, and reporting protocols – in order to ensure that the
mitigation measures identified in the ESA are adequately implemented and documented/reported.
b.       The borrower has limited prior experience of safeguard implementation though during the
implementation of the original project, some capacity building has taken place in this respect. The
original ESA as well as the Addendum include capacity building and trainings to be conducted for
the PMU as well as district staff. Close monitoring and oversight by the Bank’s safeguard team is
also essentially needed to ensure satisfactory safeguard compliance.
c.       To address the proposed inclusion of the remaining FATA agencies and FRs in the project
area, the PMU will prepare a brief Addendum to the existing ESA (including ESMP) and obtain
clearance from the Bank, before any physical interventions can be initiated in the new areas. The
Addendum will also include lessons learned so far with respect to ESMP implementation. The
ESA Addendum is likely to be completed by middle of March 2016 and disclosed subsequently.
d.       Current status of ESA implementation and lessons learnt. The ESA is under
implementation for the original project and the safeguard performance is moderately satisfactory.
The institutional setup for safeguard implementation is in place and a fulltime safeguard specialist
exists in PMU. Through this specialist, the PMU is preparing mitigation checklists before
implementing the infrastructure schemes under Components B and C, as required by the ESA; the
PMU is also carrying out safeguard monitoring of the under-implementation schemes; and the
PMU is preparing ESMP QPRs as per the formats provided by the Bank’s safeguard team for this
purpose. The PMU needs to ensure that the mitigation checklists filled before implementing the
schemes are included in the construction contracts. Because of the weak capacity for safeguard
compliance within PMU and at the agency level, the Bank’s safeguard team provides close
supervision and guidance on an on-going basis. Frequent meetings and working sessions are held
with the PMU for this purpose given that the Bank safeguard team cannot go to the field because
of the security concerns. Similar arrangements will need to be continued for the AF and
Restructuring as well. The project has established and implemented the procedures for VLD. The
VLD criteria ensured that the land should be voluntarily donated without contested ownership and
must be free of encroachers, squatters or other claimants and that the owner has the transferrable
rights to it. It was also ascertained that the land donation should be less than 10% of total land
holding and with f ree consent and free will without any internal or external undue influences.
Once land screening is completed, VLD agreement (a legal document) is duly signed and
registered with the Political Administration. This agreement is properly documented and kept as a
record by the project to avoid any future issues that may arise due to land donation in the agencies.
To increase the capacity of the PMU for developing and implementing VLD procedures, several
working sessions were done by the Bank safeguard specialists with the project team. VLD training
modules were prepared for capacity building of PMU, AIU, SMP and communities. To enhance
the communities’ understanding of VLD, topic of VLD was made part of the community
consultations, brochures were developed and trainings are also being imparted to the communities
by SMP. Similar arrangements will need to be continued for the AF and Restructuring as well.

In accordance with the Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) policy of the project, an effective
multitier GRM has been established and presently functioning at AIUs, PMU and FATA
Secretariat levels. GRM policy and protocols have been translated into Urdu for easy
understanding of the targeted communities of FATA. These translations are being disseminated in

                                           Page 6 of 8
  the form of leaflets and brochures amongst the VOs and COs for increasing awareness about
  GRM. All complaints received so far have been redressed. Similar arrangements of GRM will
  continue for the AF and Restructuring as well.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Despite the fact that the project is a low-risk category B project, the client has been undertaking
  public consultations to assess the perceived environmental and social risks associated with the
  project and to suggest and recommend grievance redressal mechanism.Stakeholders of this project
  involve Directorate of Projects-FATA Secretariat, line directorates, political administration,
  beneficiary population, local structures including agency development councils, peace (aman)
  committees, tribal elder (Maliks), Jirga (council of elders), existing community organizations, and
  other formally or informally organized community groups. The Directorate of Projects has
  established the Project Management Unit (PMU) which has been ensuring that all relevant
  stakeholders are fully informed of ESSAF, ESA and the World Bank Safeguard Policy
  requirements.
  Consultations will be continued during the restructured project as well. Before the preliminary
  technical design of each sub-project, the IA and line agencies will consult the potentially affected
  groups on the potential environmental and social issues, and will take their views into account.
  The IA will initiate these consultations right after the identification of sub-projects. For the initial
  consultation, the IAs will provide a summary of the proposed sub-project's objectives, description,
  and potential impacts.
  b.       The ESSAF has been shared with the FATA Secretariat and Directorate of Projects. It has
  been disclosed locally by the FATA Secretariat on December 15, 2010 on its website and has also
  been disclosed at the WB InfoShop. The ESA of the original project has also been disclosed
  locally and copies sent to InfoShop for its disclosure. The executive summary of original ESA has
  been disclosed in Urdu and English to the general public and locally to project beneficiary
  communities, local organizations and shared with all relevant agencies, line directorates, and made
  available at the websites of FATA Secretariat.
  The ESA Addendum to be prepared for the Restructuring will also be disclosed in the same
  manner.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                          13-Dec-2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                       15-Dec-2010
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Pakistan                                                             15-Dec-2010
  Comments: If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources
                policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the
                Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. NA
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                                              Page 7 of 8
   NA
  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
   OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    report?
    If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
    Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the credit/loan?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader(s): Name: Kamran Akbar,Shobha Shetty
   Approved By
   Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                        Date: 17-Feb-2016
   Practice Manager/    Name: Shobha Shetty (PMGR)                           Date: 17-Feb-2016
   Manager:




                                              Page 8 of 8
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
