                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSR17394
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Jul-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Jul-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Georgia                                      Project ID:           P147348
                            Project Name:       Transmission Grid Strengthening Project (P147348)
                            Task Team           Joseph Melitauri
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           25-Mar-2014             Estimated     13-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEE03                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                      No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        61.88           Total Bank Financing:      60.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                                Financing Source                                                 Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                               1.88
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                 60.00
                              Total                                                                                                 61.88
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives


                            3. Project Description
                           The Transmission Grid Strengthening (TGS) Project will: (i) provide transmission services to the
                           newly constructed hydropower station, (ii) improve stability of the south-western part of the
                           transmission grid, (ii) establish power exchange platform, and (iii) assess the environmental impact
                           of the sector strategy.


                                                                                 Page 1 of 14
                         Component 1. Transmission System Strengthening. This component finances construction of a high
                         voltage transmission line from Akhaltsikhe to Batumi. As a result of restructuring, it will provide
Public Disclosure Copy




                         resources for; (i) rehabilitation and upgrade of the three 220 kV lines; Sataplia, Ajameti-1,2 and
                         Kolkhida-1, (ii) rehabilitation of four substations; Menji; Tskaltubo, Kutaisi and Zestaponi, and (iii)
                         the upgrade of the Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition and Energy Management Systems
                         (SCADA/EMS).

                         This component originally had three activities:
                         i)       Construction of a high voltage transmission line, including the supply and installation of a
                         double-circuit 220 kV TL from Akhaltsikhe back-to-back (BTB) and 500/400/220 kV substation
                         (Akhaltsikhe station) to Batumi 220 kV substation. It will connect with the two hydro power plants
                         (HPPs): 175 MW Shuakhevi HPP and 150 MW Koromkheti HPP. The estimated length of the TL is
                         142 km. It is composed of two sections: Section 1 is a 91 km TL from Shuakhevi HPP to Akhaltsikhe
                         station and Section 2 is a 52 km TL from Batumi substation to Shuakhevi HPP via Koromkheti HPP.

                         ii)     Construction supervision through procurement of consultant services for the supervision of
                         the supply and installation of Akhaltsikhe-Batumi TL and

                         iii)     Evaluation of bids through procurement of consultant services for evaluating of bids for
                         works on Akhaltsikhe-Batumi TL, as well as procurement of consultant services for the preparation
                         of (a) new transmission-system expansion plan, (b) prospective transmission line feasibility studies,
                         and (c) basic designs for the prospective transmission.

                         The proposed restructuring will add fourth activity: rehabilitation and upgrade of the 220 kV
                         substations Menji, Tskaltubo, Kutaisi, and Zestaponi, and of the 220 kV TLs connecting them. This
                         will include provision of goods and equipment for rehabilitation and upgrade the total 102 km of the
                         three 220 kV transmission lines; (i) Sataplia line connecting high voltage substations Tskaltubo and
                         Kutaisi, (ii) Ajameti line connecting substations Kutaisi and Zestaponi, and (iii) Kolkhida line
Public Disclosure Copy




                         connecting substations Menji and Kutaisi and provision of protection and control equipment for the
                         four substations; Menji, Tskaltubo, Kutaisi and Zestaponi. The goods and equipment include towers,
                         foundations, conductors, Optical Ground Wire (OPGW), fittings, steel structures and protections and
                         control equipment, and spare parts for the substations. Rehabilitation and upgrade will entail; (a)
                         replacing the existing 15 km single circuit 220 kV transmission line from Tskaltubo to Kutaisi with
                         220 kV double circuit line; (b) replacing of the existing 21 km 220 kV single circuit line between
                         Kutaisi and Zestaponi substations with 220 kV double circuit line; (c) rehabilitating the existing 66
                         km 220 kV single circuit line between substations Menji and Kutaisi; and (d) installation of the
                         protection and control equipment in the substations Menji, Tskaltubo, Kutaisi, and Zestaponi. The
                         fourth, new activity, will be carried out by GSE.

                         Component 2. Wholesale Power Exchange Platform. This component finances provision of hardware
                         and software for the power exchange systems. It has two activities:
                         i)      Supply and installation of power exchange platform which includes hardware and software
                         for metering, balancing, and trading systems, and

                         ii)     Preparation of the design and supervision for the above platform.

                         The proposed restructuring will provide resources for updating the SCADA/EMS.



                                                                      Page 2 of 14
                         Component 3. Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment. This component finances preparation
                         of the Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment report.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         No change in this activity is proposed.

                         Component 4. Project Management. This component finances Georgian State Electrosystem (PIU)
                         for the effective project management.

                         No change in this activity is proposed.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Most part of the Akhaltsikhe-Batumi transmission line corridor, being financed by the original
                         project, passes through the Autonomous Republic of Adjara, and the rest of it is located in Adigeni
                         and Akhaltsikhe provinces of Samtskhe-Javakheti region of Georgia. Part of the corridor gets pretty
                         close to the Georgia's State border with Turkey. The transmission line will connect the town of
                         Akhaltsikhe - located on the plateau of semi-arid hills with continental climate, to Batumi - a sea port
                         and beach resort on the Back Sea coast. The line will get over the Goderdzi mountain pass located
                         2025 meters over the sea level. The corridor will pass through highly diverse types of terrain, ranging
                         from alpine meadows to subtropical forests and the coastal zone. These areas include populated and
                         cultivated parcels of land, pastures, as well as parts remote and minimally transformed forests.

                         The proposed restructuring will finance rehabilitation and upgrade of the existing transmission lines
                         and substations located in Imereti region, West Georgia. The rehabilitation will be carried out within
                         the existing TL corridor. No new land take or relocation of towers is expected. However, should
                         there be any cases requiring land acquisition for the new component, GSE will prepare site-specific
                         as per the projects RPF.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Darejan Kapanadze (GEN03)
                         Jorge E. Villegas (GSU03)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes            TGS Project supports construction of a new power
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      transmission line (TL) between Batumi and Akhaltsikhe
                                                                     in a difficult terrain, including forested areas and river
                                                                     crossings, rural settlements, and cultivated land plots.
                                                                     Certain sections of this TL alignment may overlap with
                                                                     bird migratory routes. Rehabilitation and upgrade of TLs
                                                                     and substations in Imereti region to be financed after
                                                                     restructuring will have considerably lesser negative
                                                                     environmental and social impacts. The Project triggers
                                                                     OP/BP 4.01 and according to this Policy, is classified as
                                                                     an Environmental Category A, however additional works
                                                                     included after restructuring will be handled as
                                                                     environmental category B due to considerable lesser risks
                                                                     and expected impacts.




                                                                      Page 3 of 14
                                                        The Borrower financed Environmental and Social Impact
                                                        Assessment (ESIA) of the construction of Batumi-
                                                        Akhaltsikhe TL, and environmental and social
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        management planning for the rehabilitation of Sataplia,
                                                        Ajameti-1, 2 and Kolkhida-1 TLs, as well as of the
                                                        Kutaisi, Zestaponi and Tskaltubo substations. ToR of
                                                        works on the Batumi-Akhaltsikhe TL was publicly
                                                        disclosed and discussed with stakeholders. Draft ESIA
                                                        report for this TL as well as Environmental and Social
                                                        Management Plan for rehabilitation of Sataplia,
                                                        Ajameti-1, 2, and Kolkhida-1 TLs were also disclosed and
                                                        consultation meetings held. Safeguard documents were
                                                        finalized afterwards with incorporation of the public
                                                        feedback.

                                                        The construction of Akhaltsikhe-Batumi TL is subject to
                                                        the EIA, State ecological expertize, and environmental
                                                        permitting as per the national legislation, while
                                                        reconstruction of Ajameti-1, 2, Sataplia and Kolkhida TLs
                                                        is not subject to ecological expertize. The Borrower is
                                                        expected to fully meet all requirements of the Georgian
                                                        law.

                                                        Works required for the rehabilitation and upgrade of
                                                        Sataplia, Ajameti-1,2 and Kolkhida-1TLs and Menji,
                                                        Kutaisi, Zestaponi, and Tskaltubo substations were
                                                        screened for their potential environmental and social
                                                        risks. Potential negative impacts of these work were found
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        minimal because all of them will be undertaken within the
                                                        existing environmental footprint. Main types of works to
                                                        be performed are: replacement of towers (new ones to be
                                                        of the same size and to be located in the same corridor),
                                                        stringing between them, and installation of additional
                                                        equipment in the existing substations within fenced
                                                        territories of these substations. Potential impacts are
                                                        confined to those that may happen in case of applying
                                                        generally improper construction practice: poor technical
                                                        condition and inadequate operation of construction
                                                        vehicles and machinery, disorganized disposal of
                                                        construction waste, and neglect of work-site safety rules.
                                                        Mitigation measures for such possible impacts are
                                                        conventional, easy to apply and to monitor, and all of
                                                        them are included into the Environmental Management
                                                        Plan.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats is triggered by original
                         4.04                           project because about 10 km long lower section of the
                                                        Akhaltsikhe-Batumi TL alignment falls within the



                                                         Page 4 of 14
                                                      important international migratory corridor of birds, out of
                                                      which the potential impacts of the TL construction and
                                                      operation may be significant within 5-6 km segment,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                      where birds are known to fly closer to the earth surface.
                                                      The original project is expected to have modest impact on
                                                      the forest habitats as well.

                                                      There is no additional impact on natural habitats that may
                                                      be caused by the activities to be included into TGS
                                                      Project after restructuring. The safeguard policy will
                                                      remain triggered due to the originally planned activities.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36     Yes   Significant part of the Akhaltsikhe-Batumi TL corridor
                                                      that is being constructed under original project passes
                                                      through forested areas. Placement of towers and
                                                      arrangement of service roads require tree cutting. Natural
                                                      forests, predominantly located on mountain slopes, will
                                                      therefore be affected. A land strip under the power cables
                                                      shall be maintained free of high-growing vegetation
                                                      throughout operation of the TL. OP/BP 4.36 Forests is
                                                      triggered to address risks associated with the expected
                                                      impacts of the original project on the forest stands.

                                                      Additional activities proposed through restructuring will
                                                      have no additional impact on forests, as the rehabilitated
                                                      and upgraded lines will remain within the right of way
                                                      (ROW) of the existing lines. The safeguard policy will
                                                      remain triggered due to the originally planned activities.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No   OP 4.09 Pest Management was not triggered under
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                      original project, because ESIA confirmed that no
                                                      herbicides will be used during construction and operation
                                                      of the TL with the purpose of clearing and/or controlling
                                                      vegetation.

                                                      It will not be triggered upon restructuring either, because
                                                      the ESMP developed for the additional works confirms
                                                      that there will be no herbicide use for the purposes of
                                                      operating Sataplia, Ajameti-1, 2, and Kolkhida-1 TLs
                                                      either.
                         Physical Cultural      Yes   Akhaltsikhe-Batumi TL will pass the area with a number
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11         of registered historic monuments. Although the TL is
                                                      designed the way to avoid direct impacts on the these
                                                      cultural assets, a need for the construction and operation
                                                      of service roads, construction camps and other supporting
                                                      infrastructure carries certain risk of negative impacts.
                                                      Also, there is a likelihood of encountering chance finds
                                                      during earth works required for the construction of towers
                                                      under original project. OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural


                                                       Page 5 of 14
                                                        Resources was triggered by the original Project to manage
                                                        any possible impacts on the cultural property.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        No such impacts are expected from works to be financed
                                                        through restructuring. However, the safeguard will remain
                                                        triggered due to the originally planned activities.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No
                         BP 4.10
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   GSE carried out ESIA for the construction of the
                         OP/BP 4.12                     Akhaltsikhe-Batumi TL, which included analysis of
                                                        alternatives to ensure minimal physical and economic
                                                        displacement of people. However, some economic and
                                                        physical displacement was unavoidable and for this
                                                        reason GSE prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                        (RPF) and six separate Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)
                                                        in line with Bank policy and the national regulations.
                                                        Some RAPs have been updated to reflect the fact that
                                                        during the micro-alignment design by the Construction
                                                        Contractor further impacts and risks were avoided. These
                                                        RAPs have been received No Objection from the Bank
                                                        and are being implemented. To date GSE has
                                                        demonstrated commitment and capacity to manage risks
                                                        and impacts associated to land take and resettlement.
                                                        There is a Grievance Redress Mechanism in place being
                                                        managed by GSE in coordination with local
                                                        municipalities. The Bank coordinates with GSE as needed
                                                        to respond to questions and complaints received directly
                                                        by the Bank. To date only one complaint has been
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        received directly by the Bank from the Adjaristskali
                                                        village regarding land acquisition and it is being
                                                        addressed.

                                                        Regarding the activities under the proposed restructuring,
                                                        including the rehabilitation and upgrade of Sataplia,
                                                        Ajameti-1, 2 and Kolkhida-1 TLs as well as of the Menji,
                                                        Kutaisi, Tskaltubo and Zestaponi substations will be
                                                        carried out within the existing corridor of TLs and fenced
                                                        territories of the existing substations, and therefore no
                                                        land acquisition or economic of physical displacement
                                                        resettlement is expected. Should there be any need for
                                                        land acquisition of land the Borrower will prepare RAPs
                                                        as per the projects RPF.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP    Yes    TGS Project - neither originally nor after restructuring -
                         4.37                           includes any physical activities on dams and is not
                                                        directly dependent on the safe operation of dams,
                                                        however, construction of HPPs associated with TL entails
                                                        placement of two large dams with the height of 22m and


                                                         Page 6 of 14
                                                                       39m and the OP 4.37 is triggered. The Bank team
                                                                       reviewed arrangements in place for ensuring dam safety
                                                                       under the IFC-supported Adjaristskali Cascade Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       and will track how the quality control will actually work
                                                                       at the dams design, construction and operation phases as
                                                                       activities for the arrangement of HPP reservoirs progress.
                                                                       The restructured project activity does not include any
                                                                       additional physical activity on dams. The safeguard will
                                                                       remain triggered due to original project activity.
                            Projects on International   No             TGS Project - neither originally not after restructuring -
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       will trigger OP 7.50. Three HPPs to be constructed under
                                                                       the associated Adjaristskali Cascade Project, under
                                                                       original project, will abstract water from the rivers of
                                                                       Chorokhi basin that drains into the Black Sea in the
                                                                       territory of Georgia. Construction of these HPPs will not
                                                                       have any trans-boundary impacts. The activities under
                                                                       restructured project will have no impact on rivers,
                                                                       therefore the safeguard will not be triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                The TGS Project supports construction of a new Akhaltsikhe-Batumi TL, most part of which will
                              pass through the Autonomous Republic of Adjara, and the rest of it will be located in Adigeni and
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Akhaltsikhe provinces of Samtskhe-Javakheti region of Georgia. Part of the TL corridor gets
                              pretty close to the Georgia's State border with Turkey. The transmission line will connect the town
                              of Akhaltsikhe - located on the plateau of semiarid hills with continental climate, to Batumi - a sea
                              port and beach resort on the Back Sea coast. The line will get over the Goderdzi mountain pass
                              located 2025 meters over the sea level. The corridor passes through the highly diverse types of
                              terrain, ranging from alpine meadows to subtropical forests and the coastal zone. These areas
                              include populated and cultivated parcels of land, pastures, as well as parts remote and minimally
                              transformed forests.

                              Despite proximity to several designated protected areas, historic monuments, an evolving skiing
                              resort, and numerous human settlements, works in the TL corridor will not affect these protected
                              areas, will not destroy or fragment significant natural habitats, will have the least negative impact
                              on the aesthetic appearance of the landscapes, and will carry minimal needs of resettlement. The
                              selected most optimal alignment of Akhaltsikhe-Batumi TL still has a few kilometers overlap with
                              a sensitive section of an international migratory corridor of birds, where the only option is to
                              design the TL towers and conductors applying best practice features to reduce the likelihood of
                              bird collisions and electrocutions. This will include placing of conductors within the distance
                              established to avoid electrocutions while perching, and equipping the cables with bird reflectors to
                              increase their visibility and rescue collisions. Bird monitoring will be ensured at Akhaltsikhe-
                              Batumi TL operation phase to check bird mortality rate, verify effectiveness of mitigation, and

                                                                         Page 7 of 14
                         determine the need for additional measures. Mitigation of the construction-phase negative impacts
                         will be possible by applying conventional good environmental practice and strong supervision of
                         works. In addition to that, the humid subtropical climate of the Autonomous Republic of Adjara
Public Disclosure Copy




                         provides favorable conditions for a rapid natural regeneration of a number of construction impacts
                         in most parts of the Project area.

                         Adjaristskali Cascade Project is an ongoing activity for the construction of four HPPs in the
                         Autonomous Republic of Adjara, implemented with financial participation of IFC, MIGA and
                         EBRD, which is associated with the construction of TL. Namely, TL will evacuate power
                         generated in the four HPPs under construction. In accordance with IFC Access to Information
                         Policy, early drafts of the ESIA of Adjaristskali Cascade Project were disclosed at IFC's website
                         on May 24, 2013. Updated ESIA documents were re-disclosed on October 3, 2013 along with an
                         Environmental and Social Summary prepared by IFC. The Banks Task Team preparing the TGS
                         Project reviewed the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) report, Environmental
                         and Social Management Plan, Construction Environmental Management Plan, Resettlement Plan
                         and several other thematic management plans developed for Adjaristskali Cascade Project, and
                         was satisfied to see that all important environmental, social, and cultural heritage aspects related to
                         the Cascade Project are covered in these reports and it received clarifications as required. The WB
                         has been in close contact with IFC and shared information about community complaints and how
                         they are being addressed.

                         IFC requires that AGL maintains in-house environmental staff and also hires a technical
                         supervisor (Owner's Engineer) or tacking compliance of construction contractor performance with
                         IFC's Performance Standards. Environmental Manager of Owner's Engineer will undertake
                         internal auditing of work at least quarterly. IFC, ADB, and EBRD, in the capacity of lenders, may
                         require independent external monitoring of works by an industrial environmental management
                         specialist every six months. MIGA, as a provider of financial guarantee to the project owner, will
                         also track environmental and social performance of the Adjaristskali Cascade Project. The Bank
                         maintains dialog with IFC be up-to-date on the status of project adherence with the Performance
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Standards and will receive environmental audit reports on regular basis. Joint supervision of the
                         associated projects of TGS and Adjaristskali Cascade may also be considered, as suggested by
                         IFC.

                         IFC has hired a lender's environmental and social monitor which undertakes quarterly reviews
                         comprising alternating site visit and desk review. There have been audits/review beyond the
                         monitor reviews including the owner's engineer hired by AGL. In addition, Tata group, as a
                         shareholder of Adjaristskali Cascade Project, undertook an owners review in March 2016.

                         Inclusion of the rehabilitation and upgrade of 220 kV Sataplia, Ajameti-1, 2 and Kolkhida-1 TLs
                         as well as the Menji, Kutaisi, Tskaltubo and Zestaponi substations into the Project work plan
                         through the Project restructuring will not trigger any safeguard policies in addition to those already
                         triggered by the TGS Project. Environmental category of the TGS Project remains A.
                         Restructuring of the three additional TLs will imply (i) upgrade of Sataplia TL to double circuit,
                         (ii) upgrade of Ajameti 1, 2 TL to triple circuit, (iii) connection of the newly built double circuit
                         sections of Ajameti 1 and Ajameti 2 TLs with a 50-60 meter long new power line; (iv)
                         replacement of conductor for Kolkhida line; (v) upgrade of the switch gears, and of the control
                         panels in Menji, Tskaltubo, Kutaisi and Zestaponi substations; and (vi) upgrade of SCADA/EMS.
                         Tower replacement will be performed within the existing tower spotting. Overall heights and
                         widths of towers will remain the same. Works at substations will be confined to the installation of

                                                                    Page 8 of 14
                           the additional equipment within the fenced boundaries of these substation and will not include
                           replacement of batteries and transformer oils. Hence handling of hazardous substances will be
                           excluded.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            The operation and maintenance of the Batumi-Akhaltsikhe TL under the original project will
                           cause a number of specific environmental and social impacts. There will be certain limitations to
                           the land use within the right of way due to the need for protecting health and safety of people from
                           the potential threats of living and/or working under a high voltage overhead TL, for which an RPF
                           and RAPs are in place. Despite the initially provided bird safety installations, collisions and
                           electrocutions may not be entirely ruled out. Monitoring data for the first several years of TL
                           operation would allow to judge sufficiency of the provided means and design additional mitigation
                           measures as required. Maintenance works will imply common risks for health and safety of
                           workers which are usually effectively managed by strict adherence to the rules of conduct of
                           maintenance works and regular use of personal protective gear.

                           No additional long indirect and/or long term impacts will be caused by supplemental activities to
                           be included into the TGS Project after restructuring, because these activities will improve
                           reliability and quality of power transportation through the existing infrastructure which will be
                           upgraded within the existing environmental footprint.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            No project alternative without the electric transmission infrastructure would have zero adverse
                           impacts on the environment however, this would disallow provision of electricity produced at the
                           Adjaristskali Cascade Hydropower Scheme to surrounding communities, Georgian grid and for the
                           export to Turkey, having significant negative economic and social implications. Furthermore,
                           because the Adjaristskali Cascade Project is already underway, power evacuation from its HPPs is
                           not optional and the Government will provide transmission infrastructure using any available
Public Disclosure Copy




                           source of funding.

                          Several design and routing alternatives were considered during development of the preliminary
                          design of the Akhaltsikhe-Batumi TL. An underground cable system was one design alternative.
                          Though visually appealing in the long run, it would cause more disruption during construction and
                          decommissioning as would involve a larger area for excavation and hence greater negative
                          environmental and socio-economic impacts, especially in residential areas. Also, the TL right-of-
                          way runs through the areas prone to erosion and landslides, making any extensive excavation
                          activities highly disruptive. So the reasons why underground options are not considered as
                          alternatives to the Project are, first - technical difficulties, complexity, as well as safety and
                          reliability of an underground line, and secondly - a significantly higher cost.

                          A number of alternative solutions were considered for aligning Akhaltsikhe-Batumi TL and
                          selecting locations of its towers. Final choices were made after examining geotechnical,
                          environmental, heritage, and social aspects. Boundaries of the existing protected areas and more
                          valuable forest stands were avoided. Much effort was applied to choosing the TL alignment in the
                          sections were its corridor overlaps with the migration routes of birds and technical means for
                          decreasing chances of collusion and for safe perching were provided. Alignment was designed the
                          way to follow the natural topographic lines, so that geology and vegetation pattern would allow to
                          minimize scope of intervention and decrease visual impact. Throughout the design work, the goal

                                                                     Page 9 of 14
                           of keeping the need for involuntary resettlement as low as possible had been pursued.

                           Re-routing of parts of Sataplia, Ajameti-1, 2 and Kolkhida-1 TLs had been considered at an early
Public Disclosure Copy




                           planning stage for their upgrading. Although re-routing would shorten the overall length is these
                           TLs in the benefit of their operation, associated costs of mitigating the considerable negative
                           environmental and social impacts would be much higher pushing overall project cost up as
                           compared to TL reconstruction within the existing corridor. Therefore re-routing alternative was
                           dismissed pretty soon in the conceptual design process.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            The World Bank safeguard policies as well as the environmental legislation of Georgia required
                           carrying out of a full scale environmental assessment of the Batumi-Akhaltsikhe TL construction.
                           The Borrower financed Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) from its own
                           proceeds and carried it out through a qualified consultant company. ESIA covered environmental,
                           social, and cultural aspects of the TL construction and operation. An environmental and social
                           management matrix was developed as part of the ESIA report, which lays out measures for
                           mitigating expected negative impacts of the Project and provides a plan for monitoring
                           implementation of the mitigation plan. Because the detailed designs will not be finalized and the
                           construction works will not commence along the entire corridor or the TL at the same time, a
                           number of technical details of construction will become known at later stages of the Project cycle.
                           Works contractor(s) will be obligated to develop site-specific management plans for handling
                           waste and excess material, regulating traffic, protecting biodiversity, reinstating area, and ensuring
                           workers health and safety. The Project implementing entity will carry responsibility for ensuring
                           that all of these site-specific plans are developed prior to commencement of works in a particular
                           site, are of adequate quality, and the contractor(s) follow the plans throughout their activity within
                           the site.

                           Works required for the rehabilitation and upgrade of Kolkhida, Sataplia and Ajameti TLs as well
Public Disclosure Copy




                           as of Menji, Kutaisi, Zestaponi, and Tskaltubo substations were screened for their potential
                           environmental and social risks, and the expected impacts were found to be minor. Although the
                           TGS Project falls under category A due to new construction of Batumi-Akhaltsikhe TL, activities
                           to be included after restructuring do not carry similar risks and will be handled as category B
                           interventions. ESMP for works to be financed after Project restructuring was prepared by GSE, its
                           draft was shared with the Bank for review, disclosed upon approval, and a stakeholder
                           consultation meeting was held.

                           GSE is the implementing entity for the entire project - all components and all activities: those
                           originally planned and those to be added through restructuring. GSE has undergone an institutional
                           re-arrangement in 2014, which resulted in the creation of an Environment and Social Safeguards
                           Unit under the International Projects and Reporting Department. The unit has one full time and
                           one part time environmental staff and one full time social specialists. In addition, the GSEs
                           permitting department has a large number of specialists including; social specialists, waste
                           management specialists, forest specialists that provide cross support to the Environmental and
                           Social Unit. GSE hires addition experts such as land valuators and land cadaster specialists on an
                           as need basis. GSE also uses services of an international supervision engineer to ensure quality of
                           works under TGS Project, and monitoring of safeguards application are an integral part of the
                           consultant assignment. Additional consultancy may be sought to supplement GSE's in-house
                           capacity as required.


                                                                     Page 10 of 14
                           TGS Project rating on safeguards performance has been satisfactory throughout its life. Physical
                           works are not in a full swing but rather taking off, as the detailed designs and RAPs had to been
Public Disclosure Copy




                           under development for Akhaltsikhe-Batumi TL. GSE is now in the process of reviewing and
                           approving construction contractor's management plans covering site-specific details of handling
                           construction waste, excess soil and biodiversity; and ensuring health and safety at workplace.
                           Local population has concerns about HPP construction works carrying a threat of activating
                           landslides in the geologically active area of the IFC-financed Adjaristskali Cascade Project, which
                           has been in an active construction phase for a while. Already sensitized and mobilized
                           stakeholders are now engaging themselves into TGS Project-financed activities, demanding full
                           transparency of the consultation process on RAPs and of the information pertaining precise
                           alignment of Akhaltsikhe-Batumi TL. The Bank receives from IFC full information on the
                           grievances and their redress under Adjaristskali Cascade Project and will advise GSE on civic
                           engagement into TGS Project based on the lessons learned.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The primary beneficiaries of the Project are the retail consumers of electricity to be generated by
                           new HPPs in the Autonomous Republic of Adjara and evacuated by Batumi-Akhaltsikhe TL as
                           well those being served by Sataplia, Ajameti 1, 2, and Kolkhida TLs. Small and medium
                           businesses will also benefit from a more reliable, high-quality power supply. TGS and the
                           associated Adjaristskali Cascade projects will indirectly benefit entire country through the
                           improved transmission grid stability are additional clean energy generation. Therefore, the
                           Ministry of Energy and GSE are significant stakeholders of the Project. People residing in the
                           settlements along the TL corridors will be directly affected by the construction and operation of
                           the TL.

                           Prior to commencement of the ESIA of the construction of Batumi-Akhaltsikhe TL, the Borrower
                           shared ToR of this task with the Bank for comments to ensure that the ESIA report is in line with
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the requirements of the Bank's safeguard policy and meets quality expectations. This ToR was
                           disclosed to the Project stakeholders and a discussion was held on the scope of the upcoming
                           ESIA on September 17-19, 2013. Draft ESIA report was also disclosed and discussed with the
                           Project stakeholders in GSE's office in Tbilisi and Batumi, where centrally located stakeholders as
                           well as local communities affected by the Project had an opportunity to voice their questions,
                           concerns, and comments. ESIA report was finalized afterwards with the documented information
                           on the public consultation process attached to it.

                           Draft ESMP for the rehabilitation and upgrade of Menji, Kutaisi, Zestaponi and Tskaltubo
                           substations and the TLs connecting them was prepared by GSE, cleared by the Bank as a draft for
                           disclosure, disclosed on June 24, 2016, and discussed with stakeholders on July 25, 2016 in
                           Kutaisi.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          11-Nov-2013
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                       17-Dec-2013




                                                                     Page 11 of 14
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      17-Dec-2013
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Georgia                                                          25-Nov-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      11-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   13-Mar-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Georgia                                                          13-Mar-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected




                                                                     Page 12 of 14
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [     ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                             Have dam safety plans been prepared?                              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                             Bank?
                             Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Joseph Melitauri
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nina Chee (SA)                                   Date: 27-Jul-2016




                                                                      Page 13 of 14
                         Practice Manager/   Name: Ranjit J. Lamech (PMGR)   Date: 27-Jul-2016
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           Page 14 of 14
