                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                                          Report No.:ISDSA15069
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated:                 19-May-2017
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed               22-May-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                          Tanzania                     Project ID:               P150496
    Project Name:                     Dar es Salaam Maritime Gateway Project (P150496)
    Task Team Leader(s):              Richard Martin Humphreys
    Estimated Appraisal               20-Mar-2017                  Estimated Board           06-Jul-2017
    Date:                                                          Date:
    Managing Unit:                    GTI01                        Financing                 Investment Project
                                                                   Instrument:               Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency                    Recovery) or OP            No
    8.00(Rapid Response to Crises and         Emergencies)?
                                              Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           421.00                         Total Bank Financing: 345.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                        Amount
    BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                            64.00
    International Development Association (IDA)                                                                 345.00
    Tanzania Public Private Partnership Support Program                                                           12.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                                  0.00
    Total                                                                                                       421.00
    Environmental Category:           A - Full Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?       No

    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The Project Development Objective is to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the Port of Dar es Salaam,
    for the benefit of public and private stakeholders.
    3. Project Description
    The Dar es Salaam Maritime Gateway Project (DSMGP) has been developed as a multi-donor operation to
    improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the Port of Dar es Salaam. The components in the proposed
    program are entirely consistent with the objectives of the Government of Tanzania's objectives to address
    spatial, operational, and physical constraints in the port of Dar es Salaam. The following list of components are
    included in the DSMGP:

                                                     Page 1 of 8
Component 1: Improving the Physical Infrastructure (Estimated cost US$ 400 million). The first component
comprises the essential civil works in the port, and the key access infrastructure:

(i) Deepening and strengthening of existing Berths 1 to 7 to 14.5 m below CD, and constructing a new
multipurpose berth at Gerezani Creek;
(ii) Deepening and widening the entrance channel and turning basin in the port to the end of Berth 11 to 15.5 m
below CD;
(iii) Improving the rail linkages and platform in the port; and
(iv) Deepening and strengthening of existing Berths 8-11, to 14.5 m below CD.

Component 2: Institutional Strengthening and Implementation Assistance (Estimated cost US$21 million). The
final component comprises the following two sub-components:

(i) The Institutional Strengthening of TPA
(a) Technical assistance to support the restructuring of TPA to reflect the twin objectives of corporatization of
functional business units under TPA for those berths where TPA will remain the operator, whilst enhancing
TPA’s capacity to act as a landlord, manager and developer of the ports in Tanzania; and assess future private
sector participation;
(b) Capacity building/training for TPA staff to take on the above responsibilities, as a result of the restructuring,
including inter alia necessary support to implement the Environmental and Social Strengthening Plan (ESSP)
and obtain the ISO 14001 Certificate, and building capacity and awareness of climate resilience; and
(c) Procurement of management information systems, Terminal Operating Systems for those berths where TPA
will remain the operator, and a Port Community System for Dar es Salaam port).

(ii) Implementation Assistance
(a) Supervision of construction and dredging works in the port;
(b) Technical Assistance, as required, to the TPA PIT to facilitate the implementation of the project (including
TA to supervise the implementation of the cost accounting manual);
(c) Independent technical auditor; and
(d) Technical Assistance to update the National Port Master-plan to guide the strategic development of the
maritime sector and its hinterland in Tanzania.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics                  relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The Dar es Salaam Port is located in an area called Kurasini in Temeke Municipality of Dar es Salaam City. The
Port's operational area is the predominant land use in the eastern side of Kurasini. The Port covers the whole
area east of Kilwa Road from the south to the Gerezani roundabout in the north. A very small portion of the Port
area, notably the Malindi and Lighters Quays, is within the neighbouring Mchafukoge Ward, in Ilala District.
Dar es Salaam Port has eleven berths, seven of which are currently dedicated to general cargo (including
container, dry bulk, break bulk and Ro-Ro operations) and four to dedicated container operations. Other
facilities include the Malindi and Lighter wharves (for coastal trades), the Kurasini Oil Jetty (KOJ), and the
Single Point Mooring (SPM). The SPM is located on the open side of Kigamboni, at Mjimwema Bay, with
delivery pipelines to storage yards at TIPER and other sites. Within the project core area there are three
geophysical areas that required specific attention during the EIA. These are Gerezani Creek, which comprises
two areas of interest (the Gerezani Creek, within TRL land, and the seaward portion where the future Ro-Ro
Terminal is proposed), and the intertidal area at Kurasini that supports mangrove forests (protected reserves
under the Forestry Act).

The Dar es Salaam Port is within the metropolitan area characterized by a highly built up environment. The Port


                                                  Page 2 of 8
is surrounded by the city centre to the north, consisting of business areas and offices and Tanzania Railway; to
the west are residential areas (Keko and Kilwa Road areas) and small factory areas (especially garages and BP
bulky oil storage areas). The south consists of Kurasini, Mtoni and Mbagala residential areas, public institutions,
bulk oils storage tanks and the Mtoni Dumpsite (now closed). To the east, there is Kigamboni residential area,
TIPER refinery plant, and a few undeveloped plots. The city centre has a central sewer system that discharges
sewage in the harbour mouth through the sea outfall pipe. Many of the areas surrounding the harbour lack
sewers and sewage is largely handled by septic tank and soak away systems. Considering the sandy nature of the
soils, leaking septic tanks and soak away systems are a source of sewage pollution into the harbour through the
groundwater flows.

Generally, the marine ecosystem in the Dar es Salaam harbour is highly exposed to many sources of pollution.
The major pollution sources include port operations, harbour activities (maritime), urban drainage (streams,
rivers and open channels), uncontrolled solid waste and liquid waste disposal in the city centre and urban
periphery areas (directed in the storm water channels). Others include the Kivukoni fish market, the Band beach
swimming club, Kigamboni ferry operations, the Sea outfall sewage pipe, leachate from Mtoni dumpsite,
drainage from Kurasini bulk oil handling areas, underground seepage of liquid wastes from septic tanks etc.
Conceptually Dar es Salaam harbour receives pollutants from within and without the Port environment. The
major concerns are drainage channels and natural water courses that bring in the harbour a variety of pollutants
including sediments. Runoff through Gerezani Creek and the Kizinga River are directly impacting on the
harbour water quality through incessant ingress of polluted water.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the                     Team
 Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez( GEN04 )
 Mary C.K. Bitekerezo( GSU07 )
6. Safeguard Policies That Might Apply
Safeguard Policies                             Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01            Yes             The project is classified as Category A according to
                                                               the Bank's OP/BP 4.01. A comprehensive
                                                               Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                                                               (ESIA) was undertaken for the first stage of works
                                                               proposed in the Project, and to guide the
                                                               preparation of Environmental and Social
                                                               Management Plans (ESMPs) for this and
                                                               subsequent phases of works. The ESIA included a
                                                               detailed analysis of alternatives, and specific
                                                               mitigation measures for the rehabilitation of berths
                                                               1-7, and the construction of the multipurpose berth
                                                               at Gerezani Creek.

                                                               The ESIA included a detailed analysis of
                                                               alternatives, and specific mitigation measures for
                                                               each component of the project in order to select the
                                                               best option from the technical, economic,
                                                               environmental and social point of view.
                                                               Appropriate consultation was undertaken on the
                                                               terms of reference, the draft, and the final version,
                                                               consistent with the domestic legislation and the
                                                               World Bank’s operational policies. NEMC issued


                                                 Page 3 of 8
                                             the Environment Certificate in December 2016.

                                             The TPA will be responsible for the Project
                                             environmental and social management, ensuring
                                             compliance with the national law and the Bank’s
                                             safeguard policies. In respect of safeguards, the
                                             Environmental Management Section (EMS) within
                                             TPA has prepared an Environmental and Social
                                             Strengthening Plan (ESSP), in order to improve the
                                             capacity of TPA to manage environmental and
                                             social issues in the ports. The main objective of the
                                             ESSP is to achieve long-term environmental, social,
                                             and economic benefits through resource
                                             conservation, waste reduction, and pollution
                                             prevention. The ESSP include some activities
                                             related to training, equipment, and some initiatives
                                             to comply with international standards to be a green
                                             port and to obtain the ISO 14001 Certificate. The
                                             project will support the implementation of the
                                             ESSP.

                                             Separate ESIAs and ESMPs will be prepared for the
                                             proposed dredging of the entrance channel and
                                             turning basin, and the rehabilitation of Berths 8-11,
                                             respectively. The draft Terms of Reference for the
                                             ESIA for the dredging have been shared with the
                                             Bank for comments, and will be subsequently
                                             disclosed. The ToR for the ESIA for the latter will
                                             be prepared during project implementation, but
                                             approved and disclosed before any works will start,
                                             in either of the two sites.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes            This policy is triggered because within the project
                                             are two geophysical areas that requires
                                             consideration and are potentially at risk: a)
                                             Gerezani Creek, which comprises two areas of
                                             focus, and the Gerezani wetland, within Tanzania
                                             Railways Ltd land, and the seaward portion where
                                             the future Ro-Ro Terminal is proposed; and the
                                             intertidal area at Kurasini that supports mangrove
                                             forests (protected reserves under Forestry Act). In
                                             respect of Gerezani, the wetland serves to trap
                                             sediments and pollutants that drains during heavy
                                             rain, and is a feeding ground for avifauna.
                                             According to the ESIA, there are no particular
                                             sensitive or endangered plant or animal life in the
                                             area, but there is a risk the wetland could be flooded
                                             during the construction phase. Appropriate
                                             mitigation measures have been specified to mitigate
                                             any risk. Kurasini is not expected to be affected by
                                             the project activities, as concluded by the ESIA, but

                               Page 4 of 8
                                                                  the mangroves are within the port boundary, but
                                                                  well to the south of the area of works.
    Forests OP/BP 4.36                            No              This policy was not triggered since the project
                                                                  activities are not expected to impact forested areas,
                                                                  forest dependent communities or involve changes in
                                                                  management of forests.
    Pest Management OP 4.09                       No              This policy was not triggered given that the project
                                                                  activities do not include the use of pesticide.
    Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11        Yes             This policy is triggered because dredging activities
                                                                  are included in the project, specifically the
                                                                  deepening and strengthening of Berth 11; and the
                                                                  deepening and widening of the entrance channel
                                                                  and turning basin to the end of Berth 11, could
                                                                  result in chance finds of cultural property. All
                                                                  ESMPs will include appropriate "chance finds"
                                                                  procedures and mitigation measures.
    Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                 No              This policy was not triggered as there are no known
                                                                  Indigenous Peoples groups in the project area.
    Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12           No              No land acquisition or involuntary resettlement is
                                                                  envisaged in this project. The execution of works
                                                                  will take place on only TPA owned land.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                     No              This policy was not triggered as the project will not
                                                                  support the construction or rehabilitation of dams.
    Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No                  This policy was not triggered as the project will not
    7.50                                                          affect international waterways as defined under the
                                                                  policy.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60         No              This policy was not triggered as the project will not
                                                                  affect disputed areas as defined under the policy.
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
    any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    The potential environmental negative impacts identified in the ESIA are the following: i) Extraction of raw
    materials from quarry sites; ii) Increased demand on existing infrastructure and utilities in Temeke Municipal;
    iii) Potential flooding of upper Gerezani Creek area due to accidentally blocking surface water flow into the
    harbor; iv) Reduced berth space at Malindi Wharf impacting existing users transporting goods to Zanzibar; v)
    Increased vehicle traffic; vi) Changes in marine water quality due to potential release of chemicals and heavy
    metals while dredging or backfilling; vii) Marine pollution due to disposal of dredged materials; viii)
    Occupational risks and accidents; ix) Increase in invasive species from increased shipping traffic; x) increased
    marine pollution from improper disposal of waste from marine vessels; xi) Increase in HIV/AIDs infection rate;
    xii) Accidental vessel collisions during dredging; xiii) Accidental collisions of vehicles and trains within the
    port area; and xiv) Accidental spills of oils. This ESIA covers the construction of the multipurpose berth at
    Gerezani Creek, and the rehabilitation and strengthening of Berths 1-7. A separate ESIA will be prepared for
    each subsequent capital project: including the dredging of the entrance channel and turning basin, and the


                                                    Page 5 of 8
rehabilitation and strengthening of Berths 8-11.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
All the major project activities are expected to take place within the port boundaries, on TPA owned land and
therefore no land acquisition is envisaged for this project activities. TPA’s current work force, both formal and
informal worker in the port, as at March 31, 2016, amounted to 3,691 permanent staff, of which 2,793 are male
and 898 are female. The majority of these employees work in Dar es Salaam Port. TPA have confirmed that the
project will have no impact on TPA employees, or casual workers in the port.

The main social impact is the potential impact resulting from an influx of labor into the area during construction,
for example, increase in the incidence of HIV/AIDS/STD infections in the project area, etc. As part of their
Environmental, Health and Safety Management Plan (EHSMP), contractors/construction companies will
establish a HIV/AIDS/STD management plan that includes education and sensitization on HIV/AIDS/STD,
zero-tolerance on sexual harassment, exploitation of minors, etc., which will be implemented in collaboration
with the relevant existing district systems and structures. Following recent events elsewhere in the East Africa
Region, this project will benefit from the guidance note that has been prepared on this specific topic.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
The ESIA presents project alternatives in each component to avoid or minimize the environmental and social
negative impacts or issues that are expected throughout the project cycle i.e. mobilization phase, construction,
demobilization, and operation for the preferred alternative.

The environment analysis of alternatives were considered for the following components: a) Construction
alternatives for deepening and strengthening of Berths 1 to 7; b) Location alternatives for the proposed Ro-Ro
terminal/multipurpose berth at Gerezani Creek; c) Construction alternatives for the proposed Ro-Ro terminal; d)
Alternative backfilling material source for the Ro-Ro terminal; e) Alternative disposing of dredging material
from Ro-Ro terminal and Berths 1 to 7; and f) Alignment alternatives for railway links at the port.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Chapter 7 of the ESIA lists the mitigation measures required for pre-construction, construction, and operation
phases, together with those for cumulative and unplanned impacts.

The TPA is the responsible for the environmental and social management in the project. TPA will ensure
compliance of the national law and the World Banks Operational Policies on Safeguards. The unit responsible
for environmental and social management in TPA is the Environment Management Section (EMS), which was
established in 2010. The EMS has experience and capacity to manage the environmental aspects of the project,
but requires capacity building and strengthening to meet the requirements and risks associated with the projected
increase in traffics. The TPA with the support of the EMS has developed an Environmental Management
System in order to implemented good environmental and social practices in all Tanzanian ports, and to achieve
international accreditation ISO 14001-2004 (in process). Additionally, the EMS has developed an Occupational
Safety, Health, and Environment (OSHE) Policy in 2008; the TPA OSHE Regulations in 2010; and the TPA
OSHE Guidelines and Procedures in March 2013. TPA is also establishing ship waste facilities by end of 2016,
to meet the requirements of the MARPOL Convention.

A specific Environmental and Social Strengthening Plan (ESSP) was prepared by EMS in coordination with the
Bank during the preparation of the project, which will be supported by the project, to strengthen TPA's
environmental and social management.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on


                                                   Page 6 of 8
   safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
   According to the domestic law, and the World Bank's Operational Policy requirements, during the preparation of
   the ESIA, the following stakeholder groups were identified and consulted in a participatory process to ensure
   that they were informed about the main issues related to the project and had the opportunity to raise any
   concerns: 1) Ministries (Ministry of Lands, Housing and Human Settlement Development (MLHHSD), Ministry
   of Natural Resources and Tourism (MNRT), Ministry ofAgriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MALF),
   Ministries of Home Affairs (MOHA), Ministry of Water and Irrigation (MOWI); 2) Other public institutions
   (Tanzania Revenue Authority (TRA), Tanzania National Roads Agency (TANROADS), Marine Parks and
   Reserves Units (MPRU), Tanzania Social Action Fund (TASAF), Tanzania Railway Limited (TRL), National
   Health Insurance Fund (NHIF)); 3) Private Institutions (Tanzania International Containers Terminal Services
   (TICTS), National Microfinance Bank (NMB), Bandari branch, CRDB Bank, Bandari branch; 4) Donor (Trade
   Mark East Africa (TMEA)); 5) Local Government (Dar es Salaam City Council, and Temeke Municipal
   Council); 6) Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) along Bandari Road (North Star Alliance, and Wake and
   Support Other Organisations (WASO); 7) Ward Executive Officers and Mitaa (Kurasini Ward, Mivinjeni Ward,
   Mivinjeni Street, Kiungani Street, Kurasini Street, and Kiungani Street); 8) Malindi Wharf users; 9) Labour
   agencies (service providers within the Port); 10) Food vendors along Bandari Road; 11) Fishermen (Kurasini
   landing site and Vijibweni); 12) Motorcyclists; and 13) Shipping Agents.

   The establishment of a grievance redress mechanism and the development of a strategic communication plan
   during the project execution are requirements in the ESIA. The Bank is supporting TPA to develop the latter, as
   part of a broader based citizen engagement initiative.
   .




B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            15-Feb-2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         25-Feb-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive            25-Feb-2016
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




    Tanzania                                                                     26-Feb-2016
 Comments: The ESIA was posted on the TPA website on 26 February 2016
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [X]        No []         NA           []
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [X]        No []         NA           []
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP                Yes [X]        No []         NA           []
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes []         No [X]        NA           []
 degradation of critical natural habitats?

                                                   Page 7 of 8
          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes []      No []       NA    [X]
          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
PHCompliance




          OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          property?
          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
PHCompliance




          The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          World Bank's Infoshop?
          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a           Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          public place in a form and language that are understandable
          and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




          All Safeguard Policies
          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
          measures related to safeguard policies?
          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been             Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          included in the project cost?
          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
          related to safeguard policies?
          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
          the project legal documents?


         III. Approval
         Task Team Leader(s):                   Name:Richard Martin Humphreys
         Approved By:
         Safeguards Advisor:                    Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (SA)      Date: 22-May-2017
         Practice Manager/Manager:              Name: Aurelio Menendez (PMGR)        Date: 22-May-2017




                                                          Page 8 of 8
