                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                           RESTRUCTURING STAGE
            Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon       approval of the project restructuring
.




                                                                                          Report No.:ISDSR22103
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated: 30-May-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                           China                           Project ID:               P117596
    Project Name:                      China: Guangdong Social Security Integration and Rural Worker Training
                                       (P117596)
    Task Team Leader(s):               Dewen Wang,Lansong Zhang
    Estimated Appraisal                10-Dec-2012                     Estimated Board           20-Jun-2013
    Date:                                                              Date:
    Managing Unit:                     GSP02                           Financing                 Specific Investment
                                                                       Instrument:               Loan
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency                      Recovery) or OP               No
    8.00(Rapid Response to Crises and         Emergencies)?
                                               Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           149.71                             Total Bank Financing: 80.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                           Amount
    Borrower                                                                                                           69.71
    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                              80.00
    Total                                                                                                         149.71
    Environmental Category:            B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?        No

2. Current Project Development Objectives


Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)


3. Project Description
The project has two main components: (i) Social Security Integration, and (ii) Urban and Rural Worker
Training

Component One supports activities in two main areas:
(i) Development of an integrated MIS for social security programs allows for exchange of beneficiary and

                                                      Page 1 of 6
transaction information throughout the province, and integrated records management across social insurance
and employment services programs.
(ii) Policy development, TA, M&E provides technical assistance on policy and design elements of the
evolving social security system; promote capacity building for provincial and selected city officials, and
finance monitoring and evaluation of both the project interventions.

Component Two supports two-ways of intervention of skills development, plus policy studies and M&E:
(i) The project tests a new approach for training with the introduction of modular, competency-based
programs with a particular focus on short-term training of urban and rural workers. This would involve
investments in training equipment, curriculum development, school-industry linkages, staff and school
management training capacity, and civil works in two of the three project schools (for which Environmental
Codes of Practice (ECOP) have been prepared); and
(ii) Policy Studies, Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics                relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project has been carried out in Guangdong province. In addition to a provincial level social insurance
system which covers all residence of the province, the project also includes three project training schools
within the province. The schools are in Guangzhou city (two of them) and Yunfu City.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the                   Team
 Meixiang Zhou( GSU02 )

 Yiren Feng( GEN2A )

6. Safeguard Policies                         Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01           Yes             The project finances the construction of new
                                                              school buildings, workshops, and laboratories
                                                              for additional training space and skills training.
                                                              All planned civil works are built on the existing
                                                              land within the campus of 2 of the three
                                                              schools. By considering the type, location,
                                                              sensitivity, and scale of the proposed project,
                                                              the project will have limited adverse impacts
                                                              during the construction and operation phase.
                                                              During the Concept Note stage, the project was
                                                              classified as Category C for its minimal
                                                              adverse environmental and social impacts as
                                                              per the Bank OP 4.01. However, during project
                                                              preparation the team discovered ongoing land
                                                              acquisition for which a due diligence report
                                                              was prepared. Therefore the project had been
                                                              re-categorized as a Category B project.
                                                              However, in order to avoid and minimize any
                                                              potential impacts and risks, Environmental
                                                              Codes of Practice (ECOP) were prepared for
                                                              the Project.

                                                              In accordance with the Bank's information


                                                  Page 2 of 6
                                                         disclosure policy, prior to project appraisal, the
                                                         ECOP was disclosed on the website of the
                                                         project schools on November 26 (for Light
                                                         Industry) and November 27 (for Yunfu), 2012,
                                                         and also submitted to the World Bank InfoShop
                                                         on November 23, 2012.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04               No             This policy is not triggered.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                        No             This policy is not triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09                   No             This policy is not triggered.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11    No             This policy is not triggered.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10             No             This policy is not triggered.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12       Yes            Guangdong Provincial Technical School of
                                                         Light Industry (GPTSLI) required over 1128.42
                                                         mu land for the school new location and
                                                         expansion, which includes a 189.17 mu small
                                                         pond. The land acquisition process started in
                                                         July 2008, and was almost completed by end of
                                                         2011 except for a few remaining activities. A
                                                         due diligence report was prepared for this case
                                                         of land acquisition by an external professional
                                                         consulting team. The report shows that it has
                                                         affected one village-Mache Village and five
                                                         farmer's cooperatives, 102 households with 389
                                                         people. There was no house demolition. The
                                                         due diligence review did a systematic
                                                         assessment of this land acquisition and
                                                         recommended follow-up actions to take for
                                                         monitoring and evaluation during the Bank
                                                         project implementation. The team concludes
                                                         that the Bank safeguards policy OP/BP 4.12 is
                                                         triggered.

                                                         At the project restructuring in May 2017, there
                                                         is no resettlement legacy issue nor additional
                                                         demand for new land. No additional land is
                                                         needed.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                 No             This policy is not triggered.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No             This policy is not triggered.
7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60     No             This policy is not triggered.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

                                               Page 3 of 6
The project finances the construction of new school buildings, workshops, and laboratories for additional
training space and skills training. It brings in significant social benefits through improved vocational
training, employment information services and facilities and institutional capacity building for service
providers for migrants. All planned civil works are built on the existing land within the campus of 2 of the
three project schools. But Guangdong Provincial Technical School of Light Industry (GPTSLI) required over
1128.42 mu land for the school new location and expansion, which includes 189.17 mu small pond, of which
20.28 mu (1.5 ha, or 57656 m²) land are used for the civil works supported by the World Bank project. The
land acquisition process started in July 2008 and was almost completed by end of 2011. A due diligence
report was prepared for this case of land acquisition by an external professional consulting team. In total the
reports shows that it has affected one village-Mache Village and five farmer's cooperatives, 102 households
with 389 people. There was no house demolition. The team concludes that the Bank safeguards policy OP/BP
4.12 is triggered.

The due diligence report for the Light Industry School also confirmed that the acquisition process and
compensation of GPTSLI was in compliance with the local government laws/ regulations and consistent with
the Bank safeguard policy OP/BP 4.12. Nevertheless, the borrower monitored the involuntary resettlement,
compensation and livelihood restoration during project implementation. In accordance with the Bank's
information disclosure policy, prior to project appraisal, the due diligence report was disclosed on the website
of the Light Industry School on November 26, 2012, and also submitted to the World Bank InfoShop on
November 23, 2012. The due diligence report was updated re-disclosed on May 20, 2013 on the school's
website and re-submitted to InfoShop on May 20, 2013.

By considering the type, location, sensitivity, and scale of the proposed project, the project will have very
limited adverse impacts during the construction and operation phase. During the Concept Note stage, the
project was classified as Category C for its minimal adverse environmental and social impacts as per the
Bank OP 4.01. However during project preparation the team discovered ongoing land acquisition for which a
due diligence report was prepared. Therefore the project has been re-categorized as a Category B project.
However, in order to avoid and minimize any potential impacts and risks, the team decided to take a prudent
approach in preparing for an Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOP) for the Project. The ECOPs for the
Light Industry School and the Yunfu Technical School have been reviewed by the Senior Environmental
Specialist of the World Bank and approved. They were sent to the InfoShop on November 23, 2012 and
published on the websites of the schools on November 26 and 27, 2012 respectively. No ECOP was needed
for the third project school as there are no civil works there.

By the project restructuring in May 2017, monitoring and evaluation were done with reports. The monitoring
and evaluation results show that there is no resettlement legacy issue and no new land acquisition or
resettlement needed.

The proposed project restructuring will not trigger any new safeguard policies, it will not change the category
of the EA, no new/ additional / supplemental safeguard instruments need to be prepared since no new
safeguard related issues or changes are involved in the project restructuring.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
See above.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
NA
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment
of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

                                                  Page 4 of 6
    There are no major safeguards policy issues as noted above. The Borrower appears to have reasonable
    capacity to conduct construction and project implementation consistent with the ECOP. The training
    component is managed by the PMO of the DHRSS and has shown satisfactory capacity to implement and
    manage safeguards compliance. Even though the team discovered ongoing land acquisition in the project
    area, the due diligence report indicates that this was undertaken in compliance with the local government
    laws/regulations and consistent with the Bank safeguard policy OP/BP 4.12. Nevertheless, the PMO has
    monitored the compensation and livelihood restoration during project implementation and as necessary,
    remedial action would be taken. The World Bank project team supervises the monitoring process as part of
    regular implementation support.

    The environmental and social safeguard specialists supervised the project regularly during the
    implementation, and concluded the ECOP was generally well implemented, and the environmental and social
    performance of the project are satisfactory.
    5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
    safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
    The key stakeholder on issues related to minor environmental impacts are the staff and students of the
    schools themselves, the campuses of which will be the sites for the civil works. These groups have been
    consulted in the preparation of the ECOPs.

    In accordance with the World Bank's information disclosure policy, prior to project appraisal, the ECOP was
    disclosed on the website of the project schools on November 26 (for Light Industry) and November 27 (for
    Yunfu), 2012, and also submitted to the World Bank InfoShop on November 23, 2012. This updated ISDS of
    the project restructuring is also disclosed at the InfoShop upon the management approval.
    .




 B. Disclosure Requirements
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to    Yes        [X]      No []        NA           []
 the World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a     Yes        [X]      No []        NA           []
 public place in a form and language that are
 understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
 and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional Yes        [X]      No []        NA           []
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been       Yes        []       No []        NA           [X]
 included in the project cost?
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes          []       No []        NA           [X]
 include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
 related to safeguard policies?
 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been         Yes        [X]      No []        NA           []

                                                     Page 5 of 6
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader(s):         Name: Dewen Wang,Lansong Zhang
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:          Name:                            Date:
Practice Manager/Manager:    Name: Wendy Cunningham (PMGR)    Date: 31-May-2017




                                              Page 6 of 6
