INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12227
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Nov-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Jan-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Rwanda                      Project ID:  P150634
Project Name: Rwanda Electricity Sector Strengthening Project (P150634)
Task Team       Paul Baringanire
Leader(s):
Estimated        15-Jun-2015                Estimated    14-Dec-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEE01                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Public administration- Energy and mining (25%), Transmission and Distribution
of Electricity (65%), General energy sector (10%)
Theme(s):       Other public sector governance (25%), Other urban development (10%),
Infrastructure services for private sector development (55%), R ural services and
infrastructure (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
O
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      95.00             Total Bank Financing:    95.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                  95.00
Total                                                                        95.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to enhance the operational efficiency of the electricity utility
and increase electricity access.
Page 1 of 6


﻿3. Project Description
The project is proposed to have three main components: (i) Technical Assistance to improve sector
capacity in the short-medium term through the setting up of several, but integrated, business
improvement plans and capacity building of the relevant institutional bodies and (ii) Increased
Access to Electricity services through providing additional connectivity and up-grading the existing
networks.
o        Component A: Electricity Sector Capacity Strengthening (US$20.0 million). This component will
support development of an integrated MIS that will cover core business functions, namely, network
operations and maintenance, commercial, and management of corporate resources. The MIS will
include development of a new customer management system (CMS), an incident recording and
management system (IRMS), and an enterprise resource planning (ERP) system.
Component B: Increased Access to Electricity Services (US$70.0 million).The component will
support: (i) connection of new consumers and network reinforcements, where required, to ensure
that network expansion does not compromise the quality of supply and (ii) strengthening of the
Kigali 15KV distribution network to provide sufficient capacity to meet increased demand arising
out of increased economic activities.
Component C- Technical Assistance and Project Implementation Support (US$5.0 million). This
component will finance project implementation support, advisory services and technical assistance.
The TA will support studies required to have in place the requisite plans, bankable projects and
management capacity to foster improved sector expansion and efficient operations.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The proposed project will fund a series of investments related to the construction of medium and low
voltage distribution lines; and medium Voltage substation construction and rehabilitations in various
places across the Rwandan territory. The project may result into limited potential environment and
social impacts that will be mitigated through measures indicated in the safeguards instruments(ESMF
and RPF).
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Edward Felix Dwumfour (GEN01)
Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (GSU07)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The proposed Project is a Category B (Partial
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               Assessment). Limited potential adverse environmental
and social impacts are possible due to construction and
rehabilitation and extension of the distribution network
(T-lines and substations). As the sites and works are not
finalized, the project will prepare an Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF) that will be
consulted upon and disclosed prior to project Appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          Project target areas will be outside ecologically sensitive
4.04                                areas. Caution will be taken in siting substations and
Page 2 of 6


﻿transmission poles in areas that are not part of natural
habitats. Thus, the Project is not expected to affect natural
habitats. Using the checklist annexed to the ESMF,
implementers will screen proposed project activities to
ensure that natural habitats are avoided altogether.
Diversion routes and alternative sites will be proposed,
where possible.
o         Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           Project target areas will avoid forest areas. Caution will
be taken in siting substations and transmission poles in
areas that are not part of forests. Using the checklist
annexed to the ESMF, project implementers will screen
proposed project activities to ensurethat forests are
avoided altogether. Diversion routes and alternative sites
will be proposed, where possible.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           Project will not include the manufacture, purchase,
transport, use and disposal of agrochemicals or drugs and
hazardous substances.
Physical Cultural       Yes          Although the proposed Project will have limited earth
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 works associated with rehabilitation and construction of
distribution network, it may include chance finds of
physical cultural artifacts. Chance finds procedures will
be mandated by the ESMF and included in the earth
works (civil works) contracts.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         The project may involve some limited land take, limited
OP/BP 4.12                           and temporary displacement of people, loss of assets and
livelihoods due to construction activities, right of way
and way leave acquisition, etc. A Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) will be prepared to guide the
resettlement and compensation of PAPs, if any.
Safety of Dams OP/BP   No           The Project will not support activities associated with
4.37                                 construction or use of dams.
Projects on International  No        The Project will not result in changes to quality or
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 quantity of surface (or ground) water categorized as
international waters.
Projects in Disputed    No           The project will not take place in disputed areas.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
A. Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01-The proposed Project is a Category B (Partial
Assessment). Limited potential adverse environmental and social impacts are possible due to
Page 3 of 6


﻿construction and rehabilitation and extension of the distribution network (T-lines and substations).
The project has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The
ESMF was disclosed both in-country and the Bank Infoshop on September 30,215 and October 1,
2015 respectively.
o
B. Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12-The project may involve some limited land take, limited
and temporary displacement of people, loss of assets and livelihoods means of incomes due to
construction activities, right of way and way leave acquisition, etc. A Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) has been prepared as a separate document to the ESMF to guide the
resettlement and compensation of PAPs, if any. The RPF were disclosed in-country on October
9,2015 and at the Bank Infoshop on October 7,2015.
C.Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11-Although the proposed Project will have limited earth
works associated with rehabilitation and construction of distribution network, it may include
chance finds of physical cultural artifacts. Chance finds procedures will be mandated by the ESMF
and included in the earth works (civil works) contracts and thus the safeguard Policy has been
triggered.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
None.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not Applicable.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Preparation, Implementation and Monitoring of the safeguards instruments for the proposed
Project will be the responsibility of the Safeguards Unit and the Project Coordination Unit (PCU).
Currently, the PCU has four staff; Environmental and Social Officers (two each). The safeguards
staff have been trained in World Bank Safeguard Policies and Procedures and have adequate
experience gained through the implementation of the ongoing Electricity Access Roll-out Program
(EARP). Under this proposed project, the staff will receive further training and skills upgrading.
For any subproject that triggers the Involuntary Resettlement Policy, the Unit will be supported by
Consultants to prepare and execute specific resettlement action plans (RAPs), in collaboration with
all relevant stakeholders, including potential project affected persons.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Stakeholder consultations with public and private sector institutions, communities formed part of
the ESMF and RPF preparations. The consultative meetings were held with the purpose of
listening to the stakeholders especially the potential beneficiaries, and seeking their feedback on
the project and its potential impacts on them, incorporated their comments and suggestions
especially those related to compensation for their crops along the right of way for the distribution
lines into the safeguards instruments. Stakeholders and PAPs will be consulted on an ongoing and
regular basis during project implementation.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              28-Sep-2015
Page 4 of 6


﻿Date of submission to InfoShop                           0 1-Oct-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Rwanda                                                   30-Sep-2015
Comments: Diclosed at the EUCL's website (www.reg.rw) and all its branch offices and at the
REMA offices,Kigali, Rwanda.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              05-Oct-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           07-Oct-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Rwanda                                                   09-Oct-2015
Comments: Diclosed at the EUCL's website (www.reg.rw) and all its branch offices and at the
REMA offices,Kigali, Rwanda.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ] No[X]   NA [   ]
report?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes[X]  No[     NA [   ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes[X]  No[   NA
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes[X]  No[    NA
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?          Yes [  ] No [   ]  TBD [ X]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [  ] No [  ]  TBD [ X]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Page 5 of 6


﻿Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Paul Baringanire
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)             Date: 10-Jan-2016
Practice Manager/      Name: Lucio Monari (PMGR)                  Date: 11-Jan-2016
Manager:
Page 6 of 6


