                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC11655

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Mar-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Morocco                         Project ID:       P154280
                            Project Name:   Strengthen capacity for an inclusive design of groundwater mangement
                                            contract for green growth.
                            Team Leader(s): Amal Talbi
                            Estimated Date 13-Apr-2015
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GWADR                           Lending           Lending Instrument
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):           Climate change (20%), Water resource management (80%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    0.75                      Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:         0
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Miscellaneous 1                                                                               0.75
                            Environment       C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed development objective of the grant is to support the ABH-OER in the inclusive design
                           of groundwater management contracts.
                           C. Project Description
                           The activities of this grant will be conducted in the Oum Er Rbia river basin and in particular in the
                           Tadla groundwater system. The Tadla, a vast plain, which stretches about 320,000 ha, is located 200
                           km south-east of Casablanca, at an average altitude of 400 m. It is drained by the Oum Er Rbia river
                           (OER) and its major tributaries, the wadis Srou and El Abid. The Tadla groundwater system
                           includes, from top to bottom, the following entities: (i) a very limited groundwater in contact with the
                           crystalline basement, together with Triassic formations which are not exposed in the basin and which
                           provides only local interest; (ii) a Cénomanian-Turonian carbonated groundwater; (iii) a Senonian
                           aquifer of minor significance; (iv) the Eocene groundwater; and ultimately a complex plio-quaternary
                           groundwater made of by places of sand and gravels, conglomerates, and lacustrine limestones
                           (calcarenites).
                         The two most strategic aquifers in the Tadla system, from water quality and quantity aspects, are the
                         Turonian groundwater and the Eocene groundwater. They are the ones for which a groundwater
                         management contract is likely to be designed under this grant. Although the Turonian and Eocene
Public Disclosure Copy




                         aquifers are yearly recharged by rainfall in areas where they are outcropping (but also through
                         leakage from other aquifers), their exploitation by drilling has grown considerably from the early
                         80s, after a succession of dry years. As a result, surface water deficits induced by drought events
                         have led the farmers of irrigated areas to develop groundwater exploitation. From that time, the
                         proliferation of drilled wells resulted in a continual unbalance of each of these two aquifers. The
                         balance deficit of the two groundwater results in a continuous destocking since the early 1990s, and
                         in a steady decline of groundwater levels, variable by sector, of the order of 1 to 2 m/year (Turonian)
                         and 1 to 3 meters/year (Eocene).

                         Climate change projections in Oum Er Rbia basin predict a reduction in the annual water availability
                         for irrigation by 0.2 billion m3 by 2030 and a potential lowering of the groundwater table up to 50
                         meters by 2030. The main irrigation areas in the Oum Er Rbia basin (e.g. Tessaout Amont and
                         Tessaout Aval, Doukkala and Haouz) are expected to be affected by this reduction of water
                         availability according to one of the three climate change models used in the World Bank study on
                         climate change impacts in Oum Er Rbia Basin (2013). The potential lowering of the groundwater
                         table is a concern as groundwater is used to irrigate 10 percent of cultivated land in the basin,
                         however 9 out of the 11 different groundwater units in the Oum Er Rbia basin already are overused
                         due to irrigation.

                         As groundwater will be a resource that will be needed to reduce the impact of climate change, as a
                         result, demand management for groundwater needs to be put in place as of now. The top-down
                         option with water counter on wells and the water police have not been successful as very few wells
                         are installed and the water police is limited in number and in power. New approach is needed.

                         Groundwater management contract is an option that has been tested in other basins such as Souss
                         Massa and the ABH-OER is willing to test it in the Oum Er Rbia river basin. To increase the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         likelihood of success of this approach, the ABH OER is designing with a strong emphasis on a
                         participatory approach with a strong and direct involvement of the users.

                         One major step of the design of the contract management is to conduct a modeling of the
                         groundwater system to project the levels of groundwater over time in the next decades, based on the
                         inflows (rainfall and recharge) and the different use scenario. A firm (Anzar) conducted a modeling
                         of the groundwater system of the Tadla; however there are two shortcomings: (i) the projections of
                         the rainfall did not take into account the projected impact of climate change (i.e. the projected
                         reduced recharge of the groundwater) and hence overestimated the water storage in the groundwater
                         in the next two decades; and (ii) the use of groundwater were based on user declarations and not
                         based on actual pumping which resulted in a significant underestimation of the exploitation of the
                         groundwater. As such the current modeling needs to be updated.

                         Once the modeling is completed, with the inclusion of the impact of climate change and actual use of
                         water, different future groundwater use scenarios are discussed with users and the agreed scenario is
                         then the base of a groundwater contract management where the role a responsibilities of each
                         stakeholder is defined, the monitoring of the groundwater discussed and agreed, the allocation for
                         users agreed on, and redress mechanism for users agreed upon as part of the management contract.

                         This grant will support the ABH-OER in the design of an inclusive groundwater management
                         contract and will (i) in the first component project provide rainfall series for the groundwater
                         modeling, which is the basis for user discussion on the selection of the use scenario, and also identify
                         and discuss with stakeholder the basin’s vulnerabilities to climate change, and (ii) based on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         climate change, update the modeling (taking into account the climate change) so as to present to the
                         stakeholder accurate evolution of groundwater and establish on this basis the management contract.
                         The in-depth knowledge on the stakeholder mapping in particular for the larger group representing
                         the farmers will be conducted as part of the grant (in terms of large farmers versus small farmers,
                         type of irrigation, technologies, etc.). This stakeholder mapping is doable for the two aquifers of the
                         Turonien and the Eocene as the number of farmers is expected to be in the hundreds for the Turonien
                         and thousands for the Eocene. The more detailed description of the content of the components is
                         presented as follows:

                         Component 1: Stakeholder involvement in selecting performance indicator for a climate risk
                         assessment of Oum Er Rbia Basin

                         The key objective of this component is to establish from available information and current
                         knowledge, the evolution of rainfall/runoff, and the vulnerability in the basin based on performance
                         indicators selected by stakeholder. Indeed, most of climate change analyses focus on the change in
                         the rainfall and temperature, and in some cases the runoff. However, users are likely to be also
                         interested on performance indicators that matters to them, for example how this translates in number
                         of hectares that can be irrigated, or does it affect the energy production through hydropower, etc.

                         Main tasks: The initial planning of this component is to have the following tasks : (i) assessment of
                         current information/knowledge on the Basin (hydrology/hydrogeology) and initial climate risk
                         assessment; (ii) training on methodology for the initial climate risk assessment and consultation with
                         key stakeholders in identifying key performance indicators for main uses (and to extent possible
                         thresholds); (iii) climate risk assessment for key performance indicators (and threshold to the extent
                         possible); (iv) consultations on results of climate risk impact based on key indicators (and possibly
                         threshold) and identify potential trade-off.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Inclusive design and establishment of groundwater contract management in Oum Er
                         Rbia Basin.

                         Key objective: Morocco’s groundwater resources are strategic to ensuring notably sustainable and
                         stable agricultural revenues, including for small scale farmers, but over the past decades stocks have
                         been heavily impacted. Based on initial pilot in Morocco on a convention including water users at the
                         level of the Souss-Massa basin and on lessons learned in other basins in Morocco and in other
                         countries, key elements for increasing the likelihood of successful groundwater management contract
                         are involving stakeholder, building trust, good communication, and transparency in the process.
                         Given the long engagement of the Bank in the Oum Er Rbia Basin (in agriculture, water supply and
                         sanitation, climate change, etc.), and the interest of the ABH-OER to design and establish two
                         groundwater management contracts following these principles of bottom up approach (inclusiveness,
                         transparency, agreement), this component aims at piloting this approach in the Basin and supporting
                         the ABH-OER in the consultations and consensus building process.

                         Main task: The initial planning of this component is to have the following tasks : (i) consultation
                         with stakeholder to select the two aquifers for establishing the groundwater contract management
                         based on agreed criteria; (ii) stakeholder analysis and assessment on way forward for each contract
                           (including legal gaps and way to move forward with existing legal instruments); (iii) initial
                           consultations workshop to agree on the process and key content of contract management for two
                           aquifers; (iv) assistance to the ABH-OER in the designing process and first draft contract
Public Disclosure Copy




                           management for two aquifers; (v) consultation workshops on process and initial draft of contract
                           management (including getting the medium and long-term objective of use of groundwater be
                           stakeholder in a context of reduction of recharge of groundwater due to climate change); (vi)
                           workshop to present and exchange with other ABH-OER on the groundwater contract management;
                           and (vii) synthesize lessons learned and prospective.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The activities of this proposed grant will be in the Tadla's aquifer system of Oum Er Rbia Basin. The
                           Tadla is a vast and monotonous plain located 200 km south-east of Casablanca, at an average altitude
                           of 400 m, and which represents 320,000 ha. Shared between the provinces of Beni Mellal and Azilal,
                           it is bordered to the north by the Khouribga plateau, to the east by Oued Zem, to the west by the
                           Oued El Abid and south by the Atlas Mountains. It is drained by the Oum Er Rbia river and its major
                           tributaries are the wadis Srou and El Abid.

                           As Activities to be financed under this project will focus mainly on studies, consultations, trainings,
                           and designing of contract agreement for two existing aquifers and not involve any civil works, the
                           policy on Involuntary Resettlement, OP 4.12, does not apply to this project. In other words, activities
                           financed under this project will not result in direct economic and social impacts caused by the
                           involuntary taking of land resulting in relocation or loss of shelter; loss of assets or access to assets;
                           loss of income sources or means of livelihoods, whether or not the affected persons must move to
                           another location.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           This is a category C project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Hana Salah (GSU05)
                           Suiko Yoshijima (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          No               The project will finance assessments,
                           BP 4.01                                                consultations, and training and does not finance
                                                                                  any physical interventions. Therefore none of
                                                                                  the safeguards policies are triggered.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09               No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/       No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No
                           4.12
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
                           Projects on International                    No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP             No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Amal Talbi
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Nina Chee (SA)                                               Date: 23-Mar-2015
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Steven N. Schonberger (PMGR)                                 Date: 23-Mar-2015
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
