INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSAI 113
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Jun-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Jul-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Mauritania                Project ID:  P144183
Project Name: Mauritania Sustainable Landscape Management Project under the SAWAP
(P144183)
Task Team       Dahlia Lotayef
Leader(s):
Estimated       22-Jun-2015               Estimated    31-Jul-2015
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEN01                      Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
GEF Focal       Multi-focal area
Area:
Sector(s):      General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
Theme(s):       Water resource management (30%), Land administration and management
(30%), Biodiversity (20%), Other environment and natural resourc es
management (20%)
O
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
O
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      4.81            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                   0.00
Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                          4.81
Total                                                                      4.81
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
Page 1 of 10


﻿The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen sustainable landscape management in
targeted productive ecosystems in Mauritania.
3. Project Description
O
The Project focuses on promoting SLM practices for the recovery of Gum Arabic production and the
regeneration of related productive ecosystems. These activities are expected to enhance biodiversity,
water and soil conservation and vegetation and soil carbon storage on one hand, and improve the
livelihoods resilience of communities involved in the production and sale of Gum Arabic and other
sought after natural products (non-timber forest products and fodder), on the other hand. The latter is
expected to strengthen the sustainability of supported SLM practices. The Project also aims to enable
the development of a sustainable Gum Arabic value chain by enhancing access to commercial
markets. The Project will monitor the changes in ecosystem productivity and services as a result of
various SLM practices supported by the Project, and disseminate results and lessons learned to other
projects under the SAWAP.
The Project will be implemented over five years (2015-2020). Project-financed activities are grouped
into the following three components: (i) Component 1: Sustainable Landscape Management
Knowledge, Governance and Partnerships; (ii) Component 2: Sustainable Landscape Management
Practice; and (iii) Component 3: Project Management.
Component 1: Sustainable Landscape Management Knowledge, Governance and Partnerships (US
$1.31 million)
Expected outcome: Strengthened SLM knowledge base among various stakeholders, an improved
governance system and more effective partnerships to support the development of the sector.
Knowledge, governance and partnerships among stakeholders (national and local government
agencies, local communities, non-profit organizations and the private sector) involved in SLM in
general, and in the Gum Arabic value chain in particular, will be enhanced via the following sub-
U         components:
Sub-component 1.1: Building Sustainable Landscape Management Capacity, Governing Tools and
Knowledge Sharing: Institutional and capacity support will be provided to relevant national and local
a        governmental agencies to enhance their ability to mainstream principles of SLM into the valorization
and regeneration of degraded ecosystems, with special attention to degraded Gum Arabic
ecosystems, and communities involved in Gum Arabic production will receive relevant training. The
Project will also support MEDD in formulating a number of governance tools, finance awareness
raising activities on social and environmental requirements, support regional exchanges between
targeted local SLM associations, workshops and outreach activities, and develop knowledge sharing
products to reach a larger audience and make the knowledge accessible.
Sub-component 1.2: Strengthening Monitoring of Ecosystem Services: The MEDD, in specific the
Department of Planning, Intersectoral Coordination and Data, and local partners will receive support
that would allow them monitor changes in production of Gum Arabic and other non-timber forest
products and fodder, and changes in biodiversity conservation, water and soil conservation, and
vegetation and soil carbon storage capacity using a participatory approach. To achieve this, a
monitoring system will be put in place to enable the evaluation of the impact of the various SLM
practices supported by sub-component 2.1. The results of the SLM impact evaluation will guide
further project-funded SLM investments, and will be disseminated by MEDD to communi ties
Page 2 of 10


﻿involved in SLM practices. This sub-component will also support a more in-depth assessment of the
geographic distribution of Gum Arabic producing ecosystems and the potential for future up-scaling
of regeneration practices in terms of water availability.
O
Sub-component 1.3: Enabling Development of a Sustainable Gum Arabic Value Chain: This sub-
component initiates the development of a sustainable Gum Arabic value chain by evaluating the
current situation and making policy and regulatory recommendations for improvement, which will
subsequently be submitted to the GOM for validation.
Component 2: Sustainable Landscape Management Practice (US$3.26 million)
Expected outcome: Strengthened management of Gum Arabic producing landscapes, and enhanced
integration of SLM considerations in local development planning in the regions of Trarza, Brakna
and Gorgol.
Component 2 supports investments in SLM practices in degraded Gum Arabic producing ecosystems
and their integration into local development planning, for mutual reinforcement. The objective is to
promote and evaluate various SLM practices which aim to recover degraded Gum Arabic
ecosystems. By increasing the productivity of Gum Arabic through regeneration and conservation,
and exploitation control activities as well as enrichment of other dwindling and sought after woody
and herbaceous species that produce non-timber forest products and fodder, the component is
expected to result in enhanced biodiversity, soil and water conservation, and vegetation and soil
carbon storage. Within the regions of Trarza, Brakna and Gorgol, 116 sites of strong regeneration
potential have been pre-identified for SLM interventions; this list will be further narrowed to 60 sites
of around 50 hectares each through consultation with local governments and communities. Special
awareness and promotional material targeting women will be developed to create demand and
increase the number of women benefiting from the investment activities. Activities will be
implemented in accordance with the following sub components:
Sub-component 2.1: Investing in Sustainable Landscape Management: This sub-component finances
SLM investments in the selected 60 sites along two categories: (i) Participatory SLM investments
which support the regeneration of degraded Gum Arabic producing ecosystems; and (ii) Investments
which respond to immediate local support and enhance sound environmental management; activities
a        under this category will only be funded in conjunction with the first category investments and not as
stand-alone. There will be special focus on inclusion of women, youth and pastoralists in both
categories' investments.
Sub-component 2.2: Integrating Sustainable Landscape Management Practices in Local Development
Planning: This sub-component supports the integration of project objectives and activities into local
communal plans for mutual reinforcement, in collaboration with the LGDP and the upcoming
Regional Sahel Pastoralism Support Project (PRAPS). Up to 6 sub-regional local development plans
integrating SLM, each one concerning a number of communes in one of the regions Trarza, Brakna
and Gorgol, will be developed while building on previous efforts where possible.
Types of SLM investments supported by the Project
Category 1: Participatory SLM investments
Exploitation control:
*      Fencing and/or guarding of plots
Page 3 of 10


﻿Regeneration of Gum Arabic producing tree species:
*      Establishment of Gum Arabic tree nurseries
*      Planting of juvenile Gum Arabic trees in plots
Enrichment/revegetation with other indigenous woody species for non-timber products:
O
)         *      Establishment of tree nurseries with e.g., Adansonia digitata, Ziziphus Mauritania, Ziziphus
Mauritanica, Commiphora Africana, Sclerocarya birrea
Enrichment/revegetation with indigenous herbaceous species for fodder production: Panicum
turgidum, Aristida pungens
Soil and water conservation practices:
* Stone bunds, half-moon structures, traditional mini-water catchment practices (Zai), sand
dune fixation, gully stabilizing measures (reshaping, filling, revegetation), riverbank repair
(structural support, revegetation).
Bush-fire control/prevention measures (par feux)
Category 2: Immediate local support investments
Enhancement of vegetable gardening:
*      Establishment of vegetable gardens
*      Improving planting practices
Improvement of watering facilities:
*      Repair of existing water pumps
*      Small-scale irrigation measures (new shallow water wells)
Provision of improved fuel stoves and/or gas burners and solar energy equipment
Establishment of local community boutiques to sell natural products
Support income generating activities (dairy, fish farming, beekeeping, etc.)
Component 3: Project Management (US$0.24 million)
Expected outcome: Effective project management and M&E.
This component provides project management support to the MEDD by financing: (i) a project
management and administration training workshop, including procurement; (ii) a project launch
workshop; (iii) the hiring of a an M&E consultant and a technical advisor for a limited period of time
for capacity enhancement within the ME DD; (iv) hiring of an external auditing firm to carry out
annual external audits; (v) hiring of a full-time agro-forestry specialist and three full time local
administrative assistants; and (vi) operating costs associated with project management at the central
o        and local levels (preparation of annual work plans, procurement plans and budgets, coordination of
activities, preparation of progress and financial reports, procurement and financial management).
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project target zones are the Traza, Brakna and Gorgol districts, in the southern Mauritania. Sixty
sites of intervention have been pre-selected within the three districts. Being in the transition area
between the Sahara and the Sahel zone, the landscapes of these regions are being more degraded
because of drought and inadequate agricultural practices.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Medou Lo (GENO7)
Salamata Bal (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Page 4 of 10


﻿Environmental           Yes          No activity funded under the project is expected to have a
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                significant negative environmental or social impact. Only
some initiatives under component 2 have the potential for
minimal adverse social and environmental impacts which
are easily identified, minimized and mitigated by simple
intervention. Therefore, the Project is classified as an EA
Category B project, requiring partial assessment.
An Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) has been prepared, since the specific sites and
scale of subprojects are unknown at this stage. The ESMF
describes the standard mitigation activities for the types of
project interventions possible, and formulates standard
methods and procedures along with institutional
arrangements for screening, review, approval,
implementation and monitoring of subprojects' specific
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs).
The ESMF includes a budget for mitigation activities, and
describes training that will be provided from the national
to the local level to adequately implement and monitor
safeguard activities.
The ESMF has been developed in consultation with
potentially affected communities and other stakeholders,
and disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop on June 9,
2015
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes          The project will not lead to degradation of any natural
4.04                                 habitat. Instead, project activities will bolster natural
habitats in the three regions of Mauritania.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      Yes          Project activities are expected to improve the management
and status of forests in the three project areas.
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes          The Project may invest in agroforestry activities that may
require the use of pest control methods and pesticides
management on the part of local producers.
The Pest Management Plan (PMP) prepared for the
Agriculture Development and Food Price Response
Project (Additional Financing, P128994) and disclosed in
Mauritania and at the InfoShop in September 2012, has
been updated and re-disclosed in-country and at the
InfoShop on June 4, 2015
Physical Cultural       Yes          The Project will not support any activities that would
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 adversely impact any known physical cultural resources
as defined in OP 4.11. However, the project may finance
activities involving excavation; therefore, the ESMF
comprises standard measures to be included in the
Page 5 of 10


﻿companies' contracts, in case any chance finds occurs.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          There are no Indigenous Peoples, as defined by OP 4.10,
BP 4.10                             present in the Project areas.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes        This policy is triggered despite the fact that the planned
OP/BP 4.12                          types of activities are not expected to lead to land
acquisition or significant restriction of access to sources
of livelihood. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
has been prepared and will be used as a guide to prepare
specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) as and when
needed. The RPF was disclosed in-country and at the
InfoShop on June 4, 2015.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No          The project does not involve any construction or
4.37                                rehabilitation of dams.
Projects on International  No       This project will not take place on any international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                waterways, and will not support activities that will impact
international waterways.
Projects in Disputed    No          This project will not take place in any disputed areas as
Areas OP/BP 7.60                    defined under OP 7.60, and will nor support any activities
that will impact disputed areas.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project has been assigned the Environmental Category B because no activity funded under the
project is expected to have a significant negative environmental or social impact. The potential
environmental and social negative impacts of the proposed project are associated with the
implementation of Component 2, which is designed to support various activities in land, water and
forest management, and biodiversity conservation, in conjunction with investments to respond to
immediate locale interest. These activities may have some social and environmental impacts which
are likely to be minimal, site-specific and manageable. These impacts include: loss of vegetation
due to land clearing, soil erosion and degradation due to activities involving excavation, poor
construction-related waste management, nuisance due to dust and noise from construction
activities, risks of increased prevalence of HIV/AIDS and other STDs due to foreign workers on
construction sites, environmental and health risks associated with use of pesticides.
The Project triggers OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment (EA); OP/BP 4.04 on Natural
Habitats; OP 4.09 on Pest Management; OP/BP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources; OP/BP 4.12
on Involuntary Resettlement; and OP 4.36 on Forests. In conformity with the World Bank'
requirements and the Government's Environmental Impact Assessment legislation, an ESMF was
prepared, consulted upon and disclosed prior to appraisal, along with a RPF, and a PMP.
OP/BP 4.04 on Natural Habitats is triggered due to project activities to bolster natural habitats in
the targeted areas; OP 4.36 on Forests is triggered due to forest management activities funded by
the Project, which are expected to improve the management and status of forests in the three
project areas; OP/BP 4.09 on Pest Management is triggered because investments in agroforestry
Page 6 of 10


﻿activities may require the use of pest control methods and pesticides management on the part of
local producers; and OP/BP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources is triggered to reflect the
possibility that artifacts could be revealed during field work.
O
No large-scale or irreversible adverse impact has been identified during the participatory ESMF
and RPF analysis conducted and approved by stakeholders.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
No adverse long term impact has been identified during the EA process. Instead, the project is
expected to deliver significant environmental and social benefits by enhancing the capacity of the
MEDD and the main actors at the local level in mainstreaming principles of sustainable land,
water and forest management as well as biodiversity conservation and valorization into local
development. The dissemination of sustainable land, water (including watersheds) and forest
management practices are expected to improve the productivity of agroforestry activities and to
reduce the negative trends in land degradation. However, project activities in agroforestry could
potentially induce indirect, but manageable impacts associated with increased use of
agrochemicals, such as pesticides. These issues are addressed in the Pest Management Plan.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The ESMF and the RPF include sound institutional arrangements, outlining the roles and
responsibilities of various stakeholders involved, for screening, review and approval of sub-
projects, as well as implementation and monitoring of their mitigation measures. The ESMF
guaranties sustainability through mitigation measures. All sub-projects will be subject to
environmental and social screening to minimize the potential negative impacts of these activities.
And where applicable, a simplified Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA,
including an ESMP) and/or a RAP will be carried out, approved by the Directorate of
Environmental Control (DCE, attached to the MEDD) and the World Bank before on the ground
activities commence. All bidding documents for works contracts will have environmental and
social clauses incorporated, in order to enable contractors to follow up on environmental and
social due diligence and to mitigate the anticipated negative impacts.
Given the potential project activities in agroforestry that may require the use of agrochemicals,
such as pesticides, the Pest Management Plan specifies mitigation measures such as promotion of
best practices of pesticide management and non-chemical pest control techniques, mitigation of
negative impacts on biophysics and human environment.
Compliance with the implementation of environmental and social measures will be monitored by
the project environmental specialist in connection with the DCE.
The project will be implemented by the MEDD, through its Directorate of Nature Protection
(DNP), which has limited capacity in implementing safeguards policy requirement for the World
Bank projects. The Project Coordination Unit will comprise an environmental and social safeguard
specialist. The ESMF outlines capacity building/strengthening needed at the national, regional and
community level to adequately implement the safeguard instruments. In addition, the Local
Page 7 of 10


﻿Government Development Project (approved in May 2013) is expected to strengthen the role of
the Department of Environmental Control in overseeing project safeguard compliance.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders identified are the Government through the MEDD, decentralized services,
local authorities, affected communities and civil society. Throughout the entire process of project
preparation, consultations with stakeholders were held, and they will remain engaged during the
implementation stage of the project. The key concerns raised by the local stakeholders are related
to land degradation issues that affect their livelihood, mainly the reduction of arable lands due to
water erosion and silting of lowlands, and the decrease in traditional fishing activities (drying out
of ponds). They have been incorporated in the project design: in addition to the SLM activities of
the project, the Sub-component 2.1 will support investments to respond to immediate local
interest.
As part of the ESMF and the RPF, public consultation meetings were held to share the results of
the studies, mainstream ownership and seek input in order to improve quality and soundness of
these safeguards instruments. Final safeguards reports (ESMF, RPF and PMP) were disclosed in-
country and at the InfoShop on June 9, 2015, June 4, 2015 and June 4, 2015, respectively. The
ESMF describes a comprehensive consultation mechanism and disclosure during sub-projects
preparation.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              04-Jun-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           09-Jun-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Mauritania                                               09-Jun-2015
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              04-Jun-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           04-Jun-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Mauritania                                               04-Jun-2015
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                              04-Jun-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           04-Jun-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Mauritania                                               04-Jun-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
Page 8 of 10


﻿respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
O
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]   NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]   NA [ X ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Is a separate PMP required?                             Yes[X] No[       ]   NA [   ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a     Yes [ X] No [    ]   NA [   ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes    No         NA
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes  No         NA
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [  ] No [  ]   NA [ X ]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
does it include provisions for certification system?
Page 9 of 10


﻿The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Dahlia Lotayef
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name:                                      Date:
Practice Manager/      Name:                                      Date:
Manager:
Page 10 of 10


