INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA131 11
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Sep-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Sep-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:         Philippines                Project ID:   P153042
Project Name: Inclusive Partnerships for Agricultural Competitiveness (P153042)
Task Team        Rabih H. Karaky
Leader(s):
Estimated        16-Sep-2015                Estimated     29-Jan-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFAO2                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (30%), Agro-industry, marketing,
and trade (20%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and H ighways (20%),
Agricultural extension and research (15%), Irrigation and drainage (15%)
Theme(s):        Rural markets (30%), Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Rural non-farm
income generation (20%), Other rural development (10%), Rural policies and
institutions (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
ci 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
O
Total Project Cost:     231.72             Total Bank Financing:    100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                           Amount
Borrower                                                                     131.72
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        100.00
Total                                                                        231.72
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to improve access to markets and enhance the competitiveness
of smallholder farmers in the targeted Agrarian Reform Community (ARC) clusters.
Page 1 of 11


﻿3. Project Description
The proposed project is designed to enhance market opportunities through an inclusive beneficiary-
led approach. Farmers organizations (FOs) would be the main vehicle for delivering project support
and assistance. Participating FOs would be existing or emerging producer or marketing groups,
irrigator associations, or cooperatives. Targeted FOs would be small or large in scale but would fulfil
basic criteria of formal registration, and basic organizational governance. The project will achieve its
stated objective through the implementation of the following three components.
Component I: Support Services for Enhanced Market Linkages
a.     Extension and Business Development. This sub-component aims at enhancing the
knowledge and capability of FOs in the ARC clusters to help them respond to market opportunities.
Rapid assessments, market matching fora and subsequent technical advice will facilitate the scoping
of potential market opportunities, identify the existing constraints, devise potential solutions to
address them, and determine the corresponding capacity needs. An appropriate combination of
technical, business, and operational training will be provided using the approach of Farmer Field
Schools (FFS) and Farm Business Schools (FBS). Training of trainers will be conducted to build the
capacity of local service providers and lead FOs in providing extension and business development
services to farmers and FOs through supply chain networks. Additional, packages of technical and
organizational capacity development support for FOs will be provided once specific needs have been
identified.
b.     Land Tenure Improvement. This sub-component will encourage on-farm land investment
through securing individual land titles. Farmers holding collective land titles are unable to gain
access to loan finance and are less likely to invest in land development. The project would support
the subdivision of collective Certificates of Land Ownership Awards (CLOAs), on a demand driven
basis, through land surveying, boundary demarcation, and titles registration. In addition, the project
will support the DAR to strengthen its land tenure improvement program through conduct of policy
studies, identification of new land tenure instruments and conduct of pilot activities to clarify
succession planning for inter-generational land transfer, avoid land fragmentation and enhance the
likelihood of longer term productive land use.
c.     Rural Infrastructure. This sub-component would support critical infrastructure necessary to
enhance farm productivity and access to markets for the targeted ARC clusters. Infrastructure
investments such as farm to market roads (FMRs), small scale irrigation, community water supply
and multi-functional community buildings would contribute to increased agricultural productivity
and the reduction of marketing costs. ARC cluster plans highlight important infrastructure linking
key production areas with access networks as prioritized through joint planning between FOs, LGUs
and in line with provincial sector priorities. Government counterpart funds provided through regular
budget allocations will support investments in FMRs and bridges. Other infrastructure will be
supported through project funds.
Component II: Investments in Productive Partnerships
a.     The project would provide grants to exiting or newly emerging registered FOs to support
smallholder farmers in the ARC clusters to increase their competitiveness, business orientation and
market position and to make them attractive business partners in the value chain. The Grant would be
provided through two windows: (a) small grants between PhP 400,000 and PhP 1,000,000; and (b)
Page 2 of 11


﻿larger grants above PhP 1,000,000 and below PhP 10,000,000. To ensure ownership and
commitment, the applicants for both windows would need to match the grant amount with
counterpart funds or cost-sharing of 40% which would come from the FOs' own resources and/or
from commercial loans. Under the small grants window, up to 50% of the matching proportion put
O
U         forward by the FOs would be valued in kin d. Sub-projects would be demand driven and could
include investments to improve productivity, product quality, production facilities (nurseries, green
houses), semi-processing and marketing, production of value added agricultural products, food safety
promotion and improvement, business management, new product development, other income-
generating activities and provision of services. The project would also support the management and
implementation costs of the Matching Grant Program (MGP) including the costs of grant
management units, equipment, technical assistance, and incremental operating costs.
b.     The Borrower has indicated that it may later request to use matching funds to finance land
acquisition on pilot basis, possibly during the second half of project implementation to address the
bottlenecks of the CARP inter-generation land transfer. This will be informed by the policy studies
undertaken under sub-component 1.2, and would be contingent on the successful implementation and
evaluation of the MGP, particularly the small grant window. Should such a request be made, the
project would be restructured if necessary and RVP approval will be sought in accordance with Bank
instructions. Selection criteria developed such a pilot would need to ensure that land acquisition
would take place on voluntary basis by self-selected organized groups of eligible beneficiaries and
from willing eligible sellers. The acquired land would be free from any legal impediment,
particularly related to the tenure situation, labor situation, and/or other environmental and land use
restrictions.
Component III: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
The purpose of this component is to provide support to the project implementing agencies at the
central, regional, and provincial levels in project management and coordination, technical operation,
financial management, procurement, social and environmental safeguards, and monitoring and
evaluation (M&E). The component will finance activities on: (a) project orientation workshops and
training; (b) engagement of technical assistance and short term experts; (c) design and installation of
M&E and Management Information System; (d) conduct of M&E surveys and reviews (baseline,
mid-term and end of project evaluation); (e) procurement of office equipment and vehicles; and (f)
Sincremental operating costs.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will target 50 ARC Clusters covering 301 agrarian reform communities in 44 provinces
spread across 14 regions (CAR, Regions I, II, III, IV-A, IV-B, V, VI, VII, VIII, X, XI, XII and
ARMM). The provinces are Abra, Benguet, La Union, Pangasinan, Ilocos Sur, Ilocos Norte, Cagayan
Isabela, Nueva Vizcaya, Bulacan, Bataan, Nueva Ecija, Pampanga, Tarlac, Zambales, Batangas,
Quezon I, Quezon II, Marinduque, Oriental Mindoro, Occidental Mindoro, Palawan, Albay,
Camarines Sur, Masbate, Sorsogon, Camarines Norte, Capiz, Iloilo, Aklan, Negros Occidental,
Bohol, Negros Oriental, Cebu, Eastern Samar, Leyte, Northern Samar, Western Samar, Misamis
Occidental, Saranggani, Davao del Norte, Davao Oriental, Maguindanao, Lanao del Sur and Basilan.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz (GENDR)
Victoria Florian S. Lazaro (GSURR)
Page 3 of 11


﻿6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The project will finance demand-driven productive
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                partnerships between smallholder organizations and
private commercial sector that would contribute to raising
farm productivity and household income of beneficiaries.
Environmental impacts are expected to be mostly
temporary and/or short term and are readily manageable.
The project is categorized as a "B" consistent with the
nature of these impacts and the requirements of OP4.01.
Since the sub-projects and specific sites within the ARC
clusters targeted by the project still have to be determined,
the borrower has prepared an Environment and Social
Management Framework (ESMF), which includes a
template for the Environment and Social Management
Plan (ESMP). The ESMF also includes screening
procedures to guide the proponents on the type of
safeguards instruments that need to be prepared
depending on the sub-projects that would be funded. The
ESMF was presented in several public consultations, with
the stakeholder participation properly documented. The
ESMF was also publicly disclosed at the national and
local levels and in the World Bank's InfoShop. All sub-
projects will be screened according to the following
categories: (a) Category A subprojects - these are highly
unlikely because the environmental impacts are expected
to be modest since the scope and nature of the sub-
projects are mainly small-scale, rural and agriculture-
Q)                                             based; (b) Category B - impacts are site-specific;
reversible; less adverse than Category A and mitigation
measures can be designed more readily. (c) Category C -
minimal or no adverse environmental impacts, no EA
required. As part of the EA process, public consultations
with all stakeholder groups (potentially affected
communities, NGOs, POs and farmer groups) will be
conducted for subprojects in accordance with the ESMF.
OP 4.01 also applies to the technical assistance (TA)
activities in Components 1 and 2 which would provide
training support to the farmers and farmer associations to
enhance their technical and business management skills.
The Terms of Reference (TORs) for the capacity building
activities will be reviewed and agreed with the borrower
to ensure that the environmental or social issues relevant
to the project and raised during public consultations are
taken into account and addressed in the training modules.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes          While the project will not lead to loss of natural habitats,
Page 4 of 11


﻿4.04                                  this policy is triggered as all sub-projects can only be
identified during implementation and it is possible that
any of the subprojects might affect natural habitats. The
ESMF includes screening for impacts on natural habitats
and measures to address these impacts.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No            The project is not envisaged to trigger this policy as
project activities will be undertaken in agricultural areas.
There may be cutting of few trees for some of the
infrastructure support facilities but is not expected to
affect forests and forest health or forest-dependent
communities. The ESMF explicitly prescribes avoidance
of significant environmental impacts of proposed sub-
projects on forest areas.
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes            This policy is triggered since the project will finance
agriculture operations that could raise potential pest or
disease vector management issues and require for the
increase usage of pesticides under the project. The
screening procedures include the scanning of pest
management concerns. The ESMF is complemented by a
Pest Management Framework (PMF) that provides the
scope and coverage in the preparation and implementation
of a Pest Management Plan (PMP) to address pest
management issues. In sub-projects that require an EA,
the ESMP will be accompanied by a PMP. Where pest
management concerns are present, even if the sub-project
does not require an EA, a PMP will still be prepared to
adequately prescribe the appropriate alternative
technologies or mitigating measures. The EA will be
presented in a public consultation and disclosed. The PMP
is based on on-site evaluations of local conditions
conducted by appropriate technical specialists with
experience in participatory integrated pest management
(IPM). IPM training will be conducted as part of the
project to educate the agricultural workers and farm
organizations. The IPM approaches include certified
pesticides, its proper application and handling, as well as
biological control, cultural practices, and the development
and use of crop varieties that are resistant or tolerant to
the pests. In case the need to procure chemical-based
fertilizers and pesticides arises, the proponent will
indicate how the list of pest control products was
developed and agree this with the Bank before the list is
authorized for procurement.
Physical Cultural        Yes           OP 4.11 is triggered since the sub-projects may involve
Resources OP/BP 4.11                  the restoration and rehabilitation of existing agricultural
lands or the reconstruction of small civil works in rural,
open areas where physical cultural resources may be
Page 5 of 11


﻿present. In case of chance finds, procedures on how to
manage them are described in the ESMF. A chance finds
clause would be included in the bidding documents and
all construction works contracts.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes         Several of the target ARC clusters are located in
BP 4.10                             provinces known to have Indigenous Peoples (IPs) and
ancestral domains. However, the project is demand-driven
so it is difficult at this stage to identify whether IPs and
their ancestral domains would be involved and affected by
the project. An IP Framework (IPF) was formulated to
ensure that IP participation is not undermined and that the
design of capacity building for FOs also makes provision
for assistance to organizations of which IPs are members.
The IP Framework was presented in a public consultation,
attended by different IP groups. Together with the ESMF,
it was disclosed nationwide and locally, with subsequent
IP Plans to be disclosed in a similar manner. The IPF was
disclosed in the WB Infoshop, and the IP Plans will be
disclosed accordingly.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes        Component 2 may include small infrastructure
OP/BP 4.12                          investments as identified by the FOs and their partners to
improve access to markets. This may include production
and marketing infrastructure, such as greenhouses, storage
facilities, solar dryers, access roads and other priority
small scale rural infrastructure specific to productive
partnerships investments. While most of the expected sub-
projects are for rehabilitation of existing projects, the
demand driven approach in sub-project selection may lead
to green investments which would require new land
acquisition. This would be determined with more
certainty during sub-project preparation. A simple Land
Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework (LARF)
with clear protocol for voluntary land donation and other
land acquisition modalities have been formulated and
accepted by major stakeholders for the project in a public
consultation. DAR has satisfactorily formulated and
implemented a LARF under the ARCDP2 which was used
as a reference in formulating a new LARF for the project.
The LARF was disclosed nationwide and locally by DAR
and in the WB Infoshop. Subsequent Resettlement Action
Plans (RAPs) will be disclosed in a similar fashion.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    Yes         The menu of sub-projects includes community based
4.37                                multipurpose infrastructure such as small-scale earthen
reservoirs for irrigation and water supply which may
generate minor, localized and temporary social and
environmental impacts. Anticipated environmental
impacts include soil erosion, siltation and pollution of
Page 6 of 11


﻿waterways from agricultural activities. The project's
screening checklist identifies potentially related impacts
to ensure that appropriate measures are incorporated
during site selection, project design and implementation.
For small dams that will be supported by the project, the
project requires that these dams be designed by qualified
engineers. This requirement is spelled out in the ESMF.
For small dams that will be supported by the project, the
project requires that these dams be designed by qualified
engineers. This requirement is spelled out in the ESMF.
Projects on International  No          The project would not trigger this policy.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed     No            The project would not trigger this policy.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project will support activities that will improve farmer organizations' access to markets and
productive partnerships, directly contributing to the twin development goals of the World Bank of
reduced poverty and shared prosperity particularly by giving opportunity for poor farmers,
landless farmworkers and women to get involved in capacity building, training on technology and
participation as workers in the proposed agribusiness projects. It will also benefit private
corporations that will partner with farmer organizations for improved production and access to
market. The activities, with the exception of the construction and operation of the sub-component
on Rural Infrastructure Services, community based small-scale, multi-purpose infrastructure will
be implemented at the individual farmer level in which case environmental and social impacts are
expected to be minor, localized, and short term. As part of project preparation, the Department of
Agrarian Reform prepared an ESMF that includes an analysis on the potential environment and
social impacts of the project and proposed subprojects. Among the community-based multipurpose
infrastructure subprojects, the following may generate social and environmental impacts: farm-to-
market roads, short-span bridges, small-scale earthen reservoirs for irrigation and water supply.
Anticipated environmental impacts include soil erosion, siltation, pollution of waterways from
agricultural activities and noise, odors and wastes from processing and packaging of agricultural
products. The project may also lead to an increase in usage of pesticides for fruit and vegetable
production. However, since organic farming and IPM will be promoted and supported by the
project, any potential increase in pesticide use is assessed to be minor. Key social safeguard issues
may include the acquisition of right-of-way or the opening up of temporary alternative routes
existing residential or agricultural production sites. These activities could result in the temporary
and permanent loss of lands or livelihoods for the farmers, therefore, full and proper assessment of
land tenure and livelihood aspects, as well as Indigenous Peoples rights, will be undertaken at the
subproject level. It is difficult at this stage to identify whether IPs and their ancestral domains
would be involved and affected by the project. An IP Framework (IPF) was formulated to ensure
that IP participation is not undermined and provisions for assistance to IPs are provided. In case
Page 7 of 11


﻿there are PCR and IPs to be affected in future investments, it has been agreed with DAR that the
World Bank OP 4.10, 4.11, and 4.12 will be applied, respectively.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Long term environmental impacts are assessed to be positive with the: (a) promotion and support
of IPM; (b) water and soil conservation measures in the production activities; and (c) waste
management in the value added processing and packaging of agricultural products.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Alternative sites will be considered for the location of the community infrastructures to avoid
involuntary resettlement especially the loss of dwelling units and livelihoods. The final location
will consider use of government land that does not have any settlers that will be affected whenever
feasible. The project will adopt alternative schemes using IPM and sustainable and climate-smart
agricultural practices for the agricultural production activities and the use of environment-friendly
practices and techniques in the processing and packaging of the agricultural products to adequately
manage potential environmental impacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Department of Agrarian Reform prepared an ESMF during project preparation which was
disclosed locally in English and in the Bank's Infoshop prior to appraisal. The ESMF included,
among others, the legal frameworks, the assessment of environmental and social impacts of the
sub-projects, mitigating measures, institutional arrangements for carrying out the sub-project
screening and the implementation of the ESMF, training and capacity building, monitoring and
reporting and the screening checklist for each type of sub-project to be supported by the project.
The ESMF is also accompanied by an IPF, a LARF and a PMF and were all presented in public
consultations, with IP groups in attendance. In the initial screening, it was learned that 22 of the
target 44 provinces have IP presence in municipalities covered by target ARC clusters. This will
alert project implementers in seeking IP participation to the project where they are present.
DAR has implemented previous projects funded by the Bank where they have consistently been
able to satisfactorily met safeguards requirements. Key staff have been designated in the PMO to
manage the environmental and social safeguards requirements of the project. They will also be
responsible for the institutional arrangements and the capacity building needs of the PMO, sub-
project proponents, Local Government Units (LGUs) and farm organizations as well as the
supervision of the safeguards operations. The project includes supporting the capacity building of
the DAR with regard to the use of the ESMF, LARF, IPF, PMF and the preparation and
implementation and monitoring of safeguards instruments.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders include agricultural producers that wish to make the transition from
subsistence to semi-commercial and/or commercial agriculture. During preparation several public
consultations and focused group discussions were held by DAR with broad participation from
stakeholders including representatives of farmer and producer organizations, LGUs and NGOs,
private business and other service providers in the various regional offices and in the proposed
project sites. DAR has likewise consulted with partner implementing agencies which includes the
Department of Agriculture (DA), Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG),
Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), Department of Public Works and Highway (DPWH),
Page 8 of 11


﻿Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), National Irrigation Administration
(NIA), Bureau of Soils and Water Management (BSWM), Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP),
and the National Commission on Indigenous Peoples (NCIP), among others.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                            22-May-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                         22-May-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Philippines                                            19-May-2015
Comments: www.dar.gov.ph
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                            22-May-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                         22-Jun-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Philippines                                            19-May-2015
Comments: www.dar.gov.ph
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                            22-May-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                         22-Jun-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Philippines                                            19-May-2015
Comments: www.dar.gov.ph
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?         Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                            22-May-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                         22-May-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Philippines                                            19-May-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[X] No[    NA
report?
Page 9 of 11I


﻿If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Is a separate PMP required?                              Yes[X] No[       ]  NA [    ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a      Yes [X] No [     ]  NA [    ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [    ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?            Yes [  ] No [    ]  TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Page 10 of 1I


﻿Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [ ] No [ ] TBD [ ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                   Yes [  ] No [X]     NA [   ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [   ]
Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X] No[   ]  NA[    ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
o          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Rabih H. Karaky
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                 Date: 14-Sep-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Nathan M. Belete (PMGR)            Date: 14-Sep-2015
Manager:
Page 11 of 11


