INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC 15745
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Dec-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Haiti                      Project ID:   P155191
Project Name:   Providing an Education of Quality in Haiti (PEQH) (P155191)
Task Team       Juan Baron,Melissa Ann Adelman
Leader(s):
Estimated       30-Mar-2016                Estimated     29-Jun-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDO4                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General education sector (10%), Primary education (90%)
Theme(s):       Education for all (90%), Managing for development results (10%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      30.00            Total Bank Financing:   30.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                     30.00
Total                                                           30.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The objectives of the Project are to: (i) improve learning conditions in selected public and non-public
primary schools, (ii) maintain enrollment of students in selected public and non-public primary
schools; and (iii) strengthen public management of the education sector.
C. Project Description
Through its current Project, the Bank supports several initiatives addressing primary education
access and quality, providing a broad base for the proposed Project to build on. Under the Education


﻿For All Phase II (EFA II) Project, the Bank is investing USD $109 Million (2012-2017) primarily in
non-public school tuition waivers (EPT), rural public school construction, school health and
nutrition, teacher training, and capacity building in MENFP. Activities are spread across over 1,400
schools in eight departments, and few schools receive more than one intervention (e.g. the tuition
O
waiver program and the school health and nutrition program are provided to different schools).
Several important lessons have been learned from EFA II and will be integrated into the proposed
Project. For example, schools participating in the tuition waiver program have larger student bodies
and lower rates of late entry and grade repetition compared to schools that applied but were not
selected, indicating the high demand for free education and the effectiveness of conditioning
financing on specific rules. However, periodic verification exercises have found that the program
has been less successful in enforcing minimum inputs for learning, such as the provision of textbooks
to students, due to a lack of consequences for noncompliance. Also, interventions to improve
learning conditions, such as teacher training and school feeding, have been dispersed across schools,
reducing their impact on education quality. Under the proposed Project, interventions would be
coordinated in a smaller number of schools, and for non-public schools, financing would be
conditioned on achieving specific results. Financing would also be provided for all students in the
school, and not for individual grade cohorts, to allow schools to receive a critical mass of funding to
be able to improve the quality of education provided.
In addition, two major commitments remain from EFA II that will be assumed under the proposed
Project. While the tuition waiver program is phasing out (as described above), financing for the sixth
grade year of the program's final cohort is not available under EFA II. Regarding public school
construction, the Project is currently financing the functioning of schools in 61 rural communities in
the Grand Sud (the departments of Sud, Sud Est, Grand Anse, and Nippes), the majority of which are
operating under temporary shelter until their school buildings are constructed. While construction
will continue until Project closing, approximately 30 communities will remain without physical
school buildings. In addition, MENFP has not taken the expected steps to assume the recurrent costs
of any of the schools. Active policy dialogue on sector financing will address this issue as well, but
in the interim both the final tuition waiver cohort and ensuring access to schools in the 61 rural
communities are important commitments to be assumed under the proposed Project.
Project concept: Diminished resources, continued policy uncertainty, and institutional weakness call
a       for a focused and strategic approach that supports access to quality primary education, while
strengthening MENFP's capacity to manage the education system. The activities under the Project
are those critical to improving the quality of education, inter alia: assessment and data collection;
provision of critical inputs corresponding to needs identified through assessment, including basic
infrastructure, teacher and school director training, and school feeding; as well as technical capacity
building to increase efficient, effective functioning of MENFP. Through the planned activities, the
Project aims to focus interventions in order to produce results in terms of quality primary education,
establish systems to track progress, incentivize evidence-based decision-making, and strengthen the
capacity of MENFP to manage the system. To do this, the Project would incorporate: (i) the lessons
learned from the Education For All Phase 1 (2007-2012) and Phase 11 (2012-2017) Projects and (ii)
the new realities and priorities of the GOH five years after the earthquake. The Project would align
with MENFP's forthcoming Operational Plan 2016-2020, and exploit opportunities to leverage other
development partners' available financing and to maximize synergies with partners' activities.
Component 1: Expanding Access to Quality, Public Primary Education in Underserved, Poor
Communities. (US $17.5 Million) This component would provide access to primary education in 61


﻿poor, rural communities in the Grand Sud where schools are not available (as identified under the
EFA Phase II Project) through a school network model tailored to the situation of each community. ,
Specifically, in communities located within a reasonable distance of an existing public school,
transportation for children to access the school would be financed, and the existing public school
O
would be supported in upgrading its learning environment through a school improvement plan. For
those communities without access to an existing public school, "satellite" classrooms would be built
for early primary children unable to travel substantial distances.
Activities to be financed under this component would therefore include, inter alia: transportation;
classroom construction in a small number of communities (all meeting basic infrastructure and other
standards as defined in the quality assurance system); initial operating costs of all classrooms
constructed; school director training in leadership and management, including support in formulating
and implementing school improvement plans based on the quality assurance system assessment;
teacher training to improve pedagogical skills and content knowledge; costs of school improvement
plan implementation (including minor works); school feeding; and community engagement activities.
Sustainable and effective data collection and communication approaches, exploiting ICT as
appropriate, would be utilized to support all activities. A crucial aspect of this component would be
the use of the quality assurance system to identify needs and track progress.
Component 2: Supporting Access to Quality, Non-Public Primary Education in Poor Communities.
(US $7.5 Million) This component would consist of two sub-components:
(1)    Support to the final tuition waiver program cohort (US $2.5 Million), which would finance
the sixth grade for approximately 28,000 students currently supported under EFA II.
(2)    Support to MENFP's results-based financing mechanism of non-public schools (US $5
Million), which would include, inter alia: (i) assessing the learning conditions and learning outcomes
of participating schools using the quality assurance system, (ii) training school directors in effective
management and leadership, (iii) training teachers to improve pedagogical skills and content
knowledge, and (iv) funding per-student subsidies conditional on meeting well-defined standards on
learning conditions and learning outcomes. All students in approximately 20 primary schools
(grades 1 through 6) would be supported, and all would be located in the Grand Sud in order to
a      leverage support provided to building MENFP's local capacity under Component 3. All schools
would be required to meet quality assurance standards in order to continue to receive financing, and a
list of eligible schools would be maintained to facilitate the rapid incorporation of new schools to the
program.
Component 3: Providing Technical Assistance, Institutional Strengthening to MENFP, and Project
Management. (US $5 Million) This component would consist of two sub-components:
(1) Technical Assistance (US $4 Million) to provide strategic support to MENFP in improving its
functioning through, inter alia: (i) support to the directorates of the four geographic departments in
which component 1 and 2 activities are located, the technical directorates charged with regulating the
primary sector, and the technical directorates charged with data collection and learning assessments
in building and using sustainable monitoring mechanisms including quality assurance tools and in
incorporating evidence into policymaking; and (ii) financing sustained technical assistance and
capacity bui Iding through a placement program for internationally trained individuals of Haitian
origin to work within MENFP. This component would also provide financing for technical assistance


﻿for the achievement of DLIs, as well as Project Monitoring and Evaluation and the associated costs
of implementing the Project.
(2)    Disbursement-Linked Indicator (DLI) based Strengthening Public Management (US $1
O
Million). This sub-component would disburse based on the achievement of three indicators related
to tangible improvements in MENFP's functioning. While specific indicators are to be determined,
MENFP has agreed in principle that these indicators should be related to the Ministry's capacity to
collect and utilize data in its management of the sector. The choice of a DLI approach is justified as a
strategy to focus the attention and the efforts of the MENFP on the results, and less on the leverage
than the value of the DLI would have.
Cross-cutting areas:
Social: A social assessment was carried out during the preparation of the Education for All (APG 1).
Among the findings were: i) elite capture by school directors, ii) conflict created by the infusion of
money into schools/school management committees, iii) teachers abandoning rural areas, and iv)
inequality being exacerbated between beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries. The Project addresses
these through instilling a series of checks and balances at the local level, involving community
participants in the management of Project resources, ensuring that Project resources intended to be
managed by communities would effectively be managed by them, providing employment
opportunities in rural areas for trained teachers, and having a highly targeted Project design, such that
the Project benefits are enjoyed by those populations traditionally underserved by public services.
The social assessment prepared in the previous project continues to be relevant for the Project at
hand and thus will not be updated.
Gender: In terms of primary school participation, girls and boys enroll at roughly equal rates.
However, boys are more likely to be overage, while girls start to drop out of school earlier than boys,
around the age of 14, potentially related to social factors such as early marriage. Recent data suggests
that in Haiti, 17 percent of girls are married by age 18. In addition, gender-based violence and
women's disadvantage in the labor market are important realities in the Haitian context.
Interventions designed under the proposed Project would be informed by this context, for example
incorporating gender considerations into the design of sanitation infrastructure, teacher training, and
community engagement activities. The Project would also track gender-disaggregated data on
a numbers of beneficiaries and on student learning outcomes.
Citizen engagement: The proposed Project would engage beneficiaries in several ways. The quality
assurance system that will be used under Components 1 and 2 will include a parent and student
survey, and so measures of school learning conditions will incorporate parent and student feedback.
The rural communities targeted under Component 1 have already been mobilized under EFA II and
are actively involved in the oversight of the operation of their temporary schools and the construction
of the permanent structures. For both Components 1 and 2, a focus on data and leveraging ICT will
create direct chains of communication between parents and MENFP, as well as school officials and
MENFP. For example, schools participating in the results-based financing will be required to
provide cell phone numbers for a subset of parents, so that they can be directly contacted for
feedback. Furthermore, the safeguards official within the PIU will be in charge of visiting project
sites regularly to document grievances raised by the population and address them properly. Indicators
to measure these aspects will be developed for the Results Framework.
Coordination with development partners: The Bank continues an active dialogue with major


﻿development partners (e.g. IDB, European Union, UNESCO, Donor Group on education) in order to
align interventions and pursue potential opportunities for additional financing for the proposed
Project. Given the potential for such additional financing, the proposed Project would be structured
such that new resources would go towards scaling up well-functioning activities, inter alia: adding
O
U       new rural communities in need of public school construction, adding non-public schools to the
results-based financing mechanism, or adding results to the DLI sub-component.
Research agenda: In partnership with MENFP, the Bank will develop a research agenda and seek
financing opportunities to carry out under the proposed Project. For example, an impact evaluation of
the results-based financing mechanism would exploit the random selection of schools into the
program and the potential for gradual phase-in of additional schools if new financing becomes
available.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
While the sites for school construction were identified, donated voluntarily, and transferred to the
Directorate of School Engineering (Direction du Genie Scolaire) (DGS) in the previous project, the
current Project will reassess the need for each community-managed school and its corresponding site.
Not all sites identified in the previous project will be used. The Project will return some of the sites
to the communities and take alternative measures to improve access to education.
Since the exact location of schools would not be known before Project implementation, as per OP/BP
4.01 (Environmental Assessment), an ESMF and RPF are required to outline how sites would be
selected, and how potential adverse environmental and social impacts at these sites would be
identified, minimized, mitigated, and managed. This ESMF and RPF have been prepared by the DGS
based on a previous framework prepared by the Economic and Social Assistance Fund (Fonds d'
Assistance tconomique et Sociale) (FAES) and MENFP. Potential adverse impacts would be small-
scale in time and space related to construction/rehabilitation impacts. The ESMF focuses on how to
address construction-type impacts (what kind of training and protective gear workers would receive;
how waste, noise, and dust would be managed, etc.). Any identified sites requiring acquisition of
private land, involuntary resettlement, loss of economic livelihoods or that affect critical natural
habitats, forests or physical cultural resources would be screened out by MENFP's local offices
during the approval process of community Projects. The ESMF and RPF will also include a budget
for safeguard actions and a snapshot of the institutional arrangements for screening sites, developing
mitigation actions, implementing these actions and supervising adherence to them. The ESMPs
(Environmental and Social Management Plans) and RAPs (Resettlement Action Plans) will be
developed when the sites are identified prior to the beginning of the construction works, and DGS
would supervise the implementation of these instruments at each site through regular field visits and
providing a hotline to the project beneficiaries to obtain feedback.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
While the Education for All Project did not originally contemplate causing involuntary resettlement
and relied on a screening process for voluntary land donation, the displacement of 6 families due to
the construction of a school triggered OP/BP 4.12. As a result, the borrowers' capacity to prevent
involuntary resettlement was put into question. The Project hired a firm to screen community-
managed schools for a range of aspects including potential involuntary resettlement. The client is
currently in the process of hiring a consultant to analyze the situation in any plots of land that were
red-flagged by the firm and draft any necessary RAPs. The Project will take active steps to enhance
the safeguards capacity of the client. Unlike the Education for All Project, which did not count with a


﻿dedicated safeguards position, the Project at hand will hire a full time staff member in charge of
safeguards.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Ash Gurkan (GSURR)
Felipe Jacome (GSU04)
o
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
afeguard Policies         Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The OP/BP 4.01 will be triggered due to the project
OP/BP 4.01                              activities that will include the rehabilitation and/or
construction of primary schools. These works may
have adverse impacts, although they are expected to
be small-scale with easily identifiable mitigation
measures. Furthermore, the sites that have been
proposed by local communities will be evaluated on
the basis of the updated ESMF and their proximity to
an existing public school. The public schools to be
rehabilitated will also be identified and screened
using the updated ESMF. Therefore, the project is
classified as category B. The existing Environmental
and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
remains the relevant safeguards instrument but needs
to be updated, with guidelines and procedures for
assessing and monitoring the social and
environmental risks and impacts (both positive and
negative) throughout the project, including
guidelines for the preparation of Environmental and
Social Impact Statements (ESISs). This will also
include the environmental and social management
plans (ESMPs) and their implementation for school
construction/ rehabilitation. The updated ESMF will
be consulted upon and re-disclosed both in country
and at the World Bank's website prior to appraisal.
The updated ESMF will clearly reflect the issues of
the construction-type impacts and building safety,
disability access, that no asbestos-containing
materials should be used in the construction, and safe
removal of any existing materials. A standard
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)
will be used in simple situations (especially for some
school rehabilitations) where activities need no
additional assessment. Any exceptions will be
identified during the screening phase (as detailed in
the ESMF) and additional assessment work will be
done during project implementation, if required.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No          The proposed project is not meant to affect any type


﻿of habitat naturally inhabited by biological creature
that could be disturbed. However, the ESMF will
include screening procedures to ensure that adverse
impacts on natural habitats are avoided.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No           The proposed project is not meant to affect forests,
nor will it involve reforestation. However, the ESMF
will include screening procedures to ensure that
adverse impacts on forests and forest resources are
avoided.
Pest Management OP 4.09       No           This policy is not triggered. Specific activities under
the project which may involve the incidental use of
pesticides or herbicides include termite building
treatments, vector control and/or emergency response
activities. Nevertheless, the incidental use of pest
control measures will be managed by detailing
appropriate procedures in the generic standardized
EMP for inclusion into contracts.
Physical Cultural Resources   No           The proposed operations are not expected to pose
OP/BP 4.11                                 risks of damaging cultural properties. Nevertheless,
some of the construction works may result in the
destruction of artifacts of cultural significance. The
updated ESMF will include a chapter relating to
Chance-find procedures as well as historic building
screening procedures, describing the assistance for
preservation of historic or archeological sites; and no
separate no separate safeguards instrument will be
prepared.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      No           The activities of the proposed project are not
4.10                                       anticipated to trigger this safeguard policy since
there are no indigenous people in Haiti.
O
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes          OP 4.12 has been triggered to allow municipalities to
BP 4.12                                    identify resettlement needs that could be required
and to ensure that the affected people would be
provided with the required assistance and livelihood
support under the policy
While all communities have earlier identified
potential land plots of land for school construction as
part of the ongoing education project, and voluntarily
and formally transferred them to the Government, it
was agreed as part of this new project's design that
there will not be construction on most of those plots.
It is currently not known on which sites the schools
will be built/rehabilitated. Instead, the project will
identify public schools that children in the


﻿communities can access, and finance transportation
for them, as well as improvements at the existing
schools. Only in cases where there is no option to
access an existing school, the project will consider
new construction. The Project will return some of the
already identified sites to the communities and take
alternative measures to improve access to education
(i.e. increase number of classrooms of existing
school, or facilitate access to existing schools). The
project is currently in the process of hiring a
consultant to make this assessment and selection in
the next several months.
As the exact nature and location of the works
remains unknown, a "Framework" approach will be
adopted. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) of
the last project will be updated, consulted on and
disclosed before appraisal. If it is determined that
any of the sites where sub-projects are yet to be
developed require the involuntary taking of land, the
Project will prepare a site-specific Resettlement
Action Plans (RAP), which needs to be implemented
by the client prior to the start of any construction.
The affected people must have received their
compensation or relocated under conditions equal to
or better than their conditions before the investments.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     No            This policy is not triggered, as there will be no dam
construction or rehabilitation of dams that will
necessitate safety status reports.
Projects on International     No            This policy is not triggered, for the project sites will
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                        not affect international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No           This policy is not triggered because project
BP 7.60                                     intervention sites will not be within disputed areas.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 25-Jan-2016
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
25 January 2016
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Juan Baron,Melissa Ann Adelman
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)                     Date: 10-Dec-2015
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿Practice Manager!      Name: Yves Jantzem (PMGR)                      Date: i O-Dec-20 15
Manager:
0
G-)
0
Ut
0
Ut
0
0
G-)
0
Ut
0
0
Ut
0


