                                  The World Bank
                                  India Digital Financial Inclusion of Informal Sector




                                                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                    Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                 Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Oct-2018 | Report No: ISDSC25028




                         Oct 09, 2018                                                                                              Page 1 of 12
                                  The World Bank
                                  India Digital Financial Inclusion of Informal Sector



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                            Project Name                   Environmental Category   Country
                                                                 India Digital Financial        B - Partial Assessment
                           P167886                                                                                       India
                                                                 Inclusion of Informal Sector   (B)
                           Team Leader(s)                        Estimated Date of Approval     Managing Unit            Financing Instrument
                           Varsha Marathe Dayal,
                                                                                                                         Investment Project
                           Ciliaka Millicent Wanjiru                                            GFCSS
                                                                                                                         Financing
                           Gitau
Public Disclosure Copy




                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                           SUMMARY                    -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                       2.73
                           Total Financing                                                                                                          2.73
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                            0.00

                           DETAILS      -NewFinEnh1




                           Non-World Bank Group Financing
                              Trust Funds                                                                                                          2.73
                                  Japan Social Development Fund                                                                                    2.73


                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to foster increased use of digital financial services by informal sector
                           women in low-income households in selected States.
                           The project will reach at least 500,000 women from low income and marginalized households in six states namely
                           Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Meghalaya, Assam and Gujarat. The project will enhance financial literacy and
                           proficiency in using mobile technology among target groups, and catalyze adoption of digital financial services so that
                           these households can access formal financial instruments for improved livelihoods.


                           C. Project Description
                                 1. The project client is Self-Employed Women’s Association (SEWA). The project envisages empowering
                                    low-income households, particularly women who are members of SEWA to help them build



                         Oct 09, 2018                                                                                                         Page 2 of 12
                                  The World Bank
                                  India Digital Financial Inclusion of Informal Sector




                                        sustainable livelihoods by improving their financial literacy, making them proficient in mobile
                                        technology and strengthening their access to digital financial products / services.
                                 2.     The project's approach incorporates lessons and best practices from successful WBG initiatives in
                                        the region. Financial inclusion projects in the region such as the WBG initiative in Bangladesh aimed
                                        at leveraging Mobile Financial Services to accelerate women's financial inclusion have shown promise
                                        in reducing gender gap in access to financial services.
                                 3.     The project leverages the lessons and delivery systems developed as part of the previous SEWA-
                                        JSDF partnerships. The first SEWA-JSDF project resulted in the establishment of SEWA Manager's
                                        School (SMSc) that has shown success in developing a range of learning modules across skill /
                                        knowledge areas in partnership with expert institutions and training grassroots women at scale. The
                                        project trained 823,746 women across a number of training areas spanning technical, managerial and
                                        leadership skills, resulting in increased household income (77% of beneficiaries) and increased
                                        employability (84% of beneficiaries). The second project facilitated the creation of decentralized and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                        sustainable Community Learning and Business Resource Institutions (CLBRCs) to provide business
                                        support to grassroots women entrepreneurs. 524,566 members were linked to services provided by
                                        these CLBRCs. 192,889 members were trained in various programs including technical skills, green
                                        livelihood areas and ICT skills. 85,000 women were linked to livelihood opportunities and 16,375
                                        women were linked to markets, trade inputs and micro-credit. The second project also piloted several
                                        ICT initiatives that successfully demonstrated the process of demystifying technology for marginalized
                                        women and expanding their use in livelihood activities. The proposed project focuses specifically on
                                        the relatively new field of digital financial services which has made rapid strides in recent years and
                                        has shown great potential to promote financial inclusion. The project aims to increase awareness,
                                        literacy and usage of digital finance applications and technologies among women from low income
                                        and marginalized households by leveraging systems and building on experiences from the earlier
                                        SEWA-JSDF projects.
                                 4.     The project will focus on demonstrating innovative approaches that can be scaled up in other World
                                        Bank supported interventions in the region. This will include mapping and customizing products /
                                        technologies for underserved target segments; piloting open online learning platforms and scalable
                                        training approaches for marginalized, rural women; innovatively leveraging existing networks and
                                        member-to-member transactions to catalyze Fintech adoption; and supporting innovative ICT and
                                        MIS projects that promote Fintech adoption and strengthen monitoring and evaluation.
                                 5.     Multiple rounds of consultations have been carried out with target beneficiaries of the project,
                                        SEWA grassroots leaders and SEWA managers. Consultations included field visits to SEWA CLBRCs,
                                        visits to SEWA social enterprises as well as small-group discussions with all stakeholders. These
                                        consultations have been instrumental in shaping the project design, and identifying activities based
                                        on constraints, aspirations and explicit demands of target beneficiaries and grassroots leaders.
                                        Activities are expected to be community-driven, with the involvement of women from marginalized
                                        and excluded communities in all stages of implementation.
                                 6.     Project Components:

                           Component A: Needs assessment and technology mapping (US$ 0.26 million): This component will support
                           foundational activities such as orientation workshops at the central, district / block and community level,

                         Oct 09, 2018                                                                                                  Page 3 of 12
                                  The World Bank
                                  India Digital Financial Inclusion of Informal Sector




                           detailed needs assessment of target beneficiaries, other assessments to understand footprint of ongoing
                           digital financial services / schemes on the ground, product / technology identification and mapping, and
                           partnerships with multiple categories of external institutions. Subcomponents include:

                                 a. Orientation: The component will support a series of orientation workshops for SEWA management,
                                    district / state leadership, state implementation partners, ICT team at central / district / block levels,
                                    SEWA Bank and other sister SEWA institutions, partners and external stakeholders, as well as target
                                    beneficiaries of the project. These workshops will outline project objectives, share and seek feedback
                                    on implementation strategy and action plan, and develop a strong foundation for launch of
                                    subsequent activities.
                                 b. Needs assessment: The component will carry out a detailed assessment of target beneficiaries to
                                    understand their socioeconomic status, access to digital devices such as smartphones, livelihood
                                    activities, financial needs, level of digital literacy, level of financial literacy, the gaps, concerns and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                    issues with adopting technology, and other related aspects. The assessment will study the lifecycle
                                    needs of the livelihood activities undertaken by marginalized women and vulnerable communities to
                                    identify points / areas where adoption of Fintech can increase productivity, sustainability and
                                    incomes. The assessment will similarly identify the needs and possible Fintech intervention points in
                                    SEWA's various ongoing activities / programs including organizing activities, agriculture support
                                    program, green livelihood initiatives, SEWA's agro-produce Rural Distribution Network (RUDI), artisan
                                    support programs, microenterprise support programs, new-age initiatives such as rural homestays
                                    with Airbnb, e-commerce partnership with Amazon, and other initiatives. The component will support
                                    surveys to identify how banks including payment banks and other prepaid instruments market their
                                    services to customers. The component will strengthen understanding banks' initiatives towards
                                    fostering financial literacy and onboarding women through surveying their financial literacy centers.
                                    The status of Government of India's Digidhan Abhiyan's initiatives in improving awareness of digital
                                    payments in the target states will be assessed as well.
                                 c. Partnerships and technology mapping: Based on assessments, the component will identify technology
                                    products most suitable for the needs and aspirations of target beneficiaries and their livelihood
                                    activities. This may include applications / digital products for banking, mobile wallets, utility
                                    payments, money transfer / remittances, applying for small loans, micro-savings, mutual fund
                                    investments and others. Technology mapping will be undertaken for multiple digital mediums
                                    including smartphones, feature phones and computers. Shortlisted technology products / services will
                                    be pilot tested with a sample set of beneficiaries to seek feedback and ascertain suitability. The
                                    project will establish partnerships with various technology providers including telecom companies
                                    such as Vodafone, Airtel, Reliance Jio, Idea; financial institutions such as State Bank of India (SBI), ICICI
                                    Bank, Axis Bank, HDFC Bank, Bank of India and Bank of Baroda; credit card services such as
                                    Mastercard; payments / remittance service providers such as Paytm, Mobikwik, Eko; unsecured small
                                    loan providers / marketplaces such as Capital Float, Suvidhaa; Fintech think tanks such as iSpirit; other
                                    financial service providers and including young organizations offering innovative financial services
                                    leveraging the India Stack architecture. These partnerships will focus on making digital products /
                                    applications available to beneficiaries in a manner that takes into account their literacy levels and
                                    level of familiarity with technology. This can mean easy-to-use workflows, simplified interfaces and

                         Oct 09, 2018                                                                                                   Page 4 of 12
                                  The World Bank
                                  India Digital Financial Inclusion of Informal Sector




                                        multi-lingual forms. Wherever possible, the project will work with partners to suitably customize the
                                        applications for beneficiaries. The project will also explore building customized applications to digitize
                                        workflows for activities undertaken by SEWA members if a suitable off-the-shelf solution is not
                                        available in the market. The component will support roundtable discussions, brainstorming
                                        workshops with these partners, external experts and other stakeholders to facilitate establishment of
                                        these partnerships. These discussions / workshops will be led by a Digital Finance Advisor.

                           Component B: Strengthening SEWA's delivery system for improving financial and technology awareness
                           (US$ 0.95 million): This component will focus on strengthening SEWA's institutional capacity to generate
                           digital and financial awareness at the grassroots, train grassroots members in digital finance applications and
                           effect large scale Fintech transformation in the target states. Subcomponents include:

                                 a. Strengthening SEWA Management School (SMSc) by developing modules and digital learning
Public Disclosure Copy




                                    platform: The component will develop interactive and innovative classroom, digital and mobile-based
                                    training modules to train members in using digital finance to perform key financial functions such as
                                    accessing bank accounts, conducting transactions, conducting payments, savings, accessing credit and
                                    other areas identified in Component A. In addition, it will focus on developing training modules to
                                    disseminate basics of finance, basic mobile functions, mobile applications, internet banking, and a
                                    range of other related areas. SEWA will partner with financial institutions, management schools,
                                    research institutions and other relevant organizations and leverage GoI's Digidhan Abhiyan initiative
                                    and ongoing WBG initiatives in the region (e.g. Bangladesh) to adapt / customize existing modules as
                                    well as develop new learning modules. The component will also invest in developing an open online
                                    learning platform tailored to the needs, capacities and aspirations of informal sector beneficiaries.
                                    This platform will host interactive audio-visual based learning modules in digital financial services, as
                                    well as modules in other areas (that may be developed independently by SEWA)
                                 b. Building grassroots training capacity – training of master trainers: The component will create a cadre
                                    of grassroots master trainers or local resource persons proficient in using digital finance technologies
                                    and applications identified in Component A. These master trainers will drive the training, capacity
                                    building and awareness generation at the grassroots. They will be drawn from the pool of SEWA
                                    aagewans or grassroots leaders, 'Internet Saathis' trained under an ongoing SEWA initiative with Tata
                                    Trust, resource persons trained by other civil society or private sector institutions in the target areas,
                                    and other motivated youth from target communities who have demonstrated interest and aptitude
                                    for ICT. Trainers trained under MeitY programs will be co-opted as well, as per need and relevance. All
                                    trainers will be selected from local communities so that they are readily accessible at the village /
                                    block level and continue to educate and train rural households beyond the project period.
                                 c. Strengthening and expanding SEWA centers / touch points: SEWA takes its programs to its vast base
                                    of rural members through a network of CLBRCs and Community Learning Centers (CLCs). The
                                    component will focus on (a) Strengthening existing CLBRCs and CLCs by creating the necessary
                                    additional facilities within these centers to facilitate interventions under this project. This will include
                                    improving ICT facilities and communication mediums (such as video conferencing, social media
                                    platforms, whatsapp groups etc.). This will also include onboarding centers onto SIDBI's Udyami Mitra
                                    portal, and training SEWA members and other motivated youth from the larger community as credit

                         Oct 09, 2018                                                                                                    Page 5 of 12
                                  The World Bank
                                  India Digital Financial Inclusion of Informal Sector




                                    counselors in each center. (b) Increasing outreach by establishing additional centers, particularly in
                                    states other than Gujarat, where SEWA may not have a strong network of centers. The component
                                    will support the onboarding and capacity building of at least one ICT officer for each center.
                                 d. Strengthening SEWA’s digital team: The component will also support the onboarding and capacity
                                    building of a strong digital team at the central level to oversee the various digital activities of the
                                    project and achieve key development objectives. The team will be led by a Chief Technology Officer
                                    and will comprise of a Digital Financial Services Officer and a Mobile Technology / Services Officer.

                           Component C: Catalyzing Fintech adoption at the grassroots (US$ 1.27 million): This component will drive
                           large-scale awareness building, capacity building and Fintech adoption at the grassroots in the target states.
                           Subcomponents include:

                                 1. Rollout of trainings: The component will support large-scale rollout of Fintech training and capacity
Public Disclosure Copy




                                    building activities in the target states through trained master trainers via SEWA's network of rural
                                    centers (CLCs / CLBRCs), with regular monitoring and direction from SMSc and the project
                                    management team. Master trainers will undergo refresher trainings once a year to consolidate skills
                                    and incorporate new developments in the Fintech space. The rollout plan will take into account the
                                    cultural and socioeconomic differences in target states as well as livelihood-specific needs of
                                    members. Systems developed and experience gained under past SEWA-JSDF projects will be
                                    leveraged, particularly SEWA's grassroots reach through its network of CLBRCs, the SMSc training
                                    infrastructure and lessons learnt from key ICT pilots for grassroots women. The project will target
                                    SEWA members as early adopters by leveraging their trust and familiarity with SEWA programs. SEWA
                                    members will in turn be the progressive drivers to encourage others to adopt new technologies.
                                    Focusing on youth is a key part of the strategy. Experience in WBG projects and earlier SEWA-JSDF
                                    initiatives has shown that younger members adopt technology faster and later drive adoption among
                                    their families and friends.
                                 2. Digitization of key SEWA activities: The component will foster large scale Fintech adoption by
                                    supporting the introduction of digital transactions in ongoing SEWA economic activities that are
                                    operating at scale. Key SEWA activities that have been identified for digitization are savings / credit
                                    activities, annual membership fee collection, social enterprises such RUDI, SEWA Trade Facilitation
                                    Center (STFC) as well as other economic activities undertaken by SEWA members in the target states.
                                    Majority of the transactions in these activities are currently cash-based. The component will support
                                    transition of cash-based transactions to digital payments in each of these identified activities by
                                    training members in the relevant technologies, facilitating access and encouraging regular use. In
                                    addition, the component will support the upgradation of existing SEWA web and mobile-based
                                    applications such as mBachat and RUDI apps (developed under an earlier SEWA-JSDF project) to
                                    enable digital financial transactions. The component will also support integration of various SEWA
                                    MIS and ICT systems to produce better data / intelligence for improved M&E and stronger project
                                    impact. Furthermore, the component will explore leveraging of new-age technologies to digitize key
                                    SEWA activities and improve digital literacy of SEWA members. This includes use of blockchain
                                    technology to digitize SEWA’s electoral process, use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) / Bigdata to generate
                                    business intelligence that can strengthen and expand SEWA’s social enterprises.

                         Oct 09, 2018                                                                                                Page 6 of 12
                                  The World Bank
                                  India Digital Financial Inclusion of Informal Sector




                                 3. Promotional material and events: The component will promote digital technologies / products
                                    through a mixture of classroom sessions, events, village meetings, community radio broadcasts,
                                    narrowcasts, videos, street plays, radio advertisements, whatsapp broadcasts and other channels
                                    available to SEWA. Partnerships with technology/telecom firms will be leveraged in order to change
                                    the mindset of the rural customer towards adoption and address their key concerns regarding the
                                    technology providers. Advocacy programs arranged in partnership with technology firms will boost
                                    the trust building process and speed up adoption.
                                 4. Grievance Redressal Mechanism (GSM): The component will support the set up of a Grievance
                                    Redressal Cell to receive, record and address grievances of intended beneficiaries and SEWA
                                    members at large. A complaint registration window will be opened in designated SEWA centers
                                    (CLBRCs / CLCs) in a manner that ensures easy access to beneficiaries across all project states. This
                                    will be supplemented by a toll-free phone number as well as an online complaint submission form on
                                    SEWA's website. An MIS will be created to record complaints and track progress in resolution of these
Public Disclosure Copy




                                    complaints. Operators will be trained to handle complaints registered over the toll-free phone
                                    number. Majority of these operators will be women, with proportionate representation for native
                                    languages of all project districts. The project manager will undertake regular review of the Cell's logs
                                    to ensure timely resolution of all complaints.

                                        Component D: Project Management and Administration, Monitoring and Evaluation, and
                                        Knowledge Dissemination (US$ 0.25 million): This component will support incremental project
                                        management and administration expenses, monitoring and evaluation activities and knowledge
                                        dissemination activities. Subcomponents include:

                                 1. Project Management and administration: The component will support a small project management /
                                    administration unit dedicated to managing the implementation of the project, including a full time
                                    Project Manager, Procurement Specialist and Financial Management Specialist. The unit will be
                                    responsible for implementing the grant, including hiring and supervising of implementing partners,
                                    facilitating contacts with key partners, facilitating partnerships, organization trainings, preparation of
                                    TORs for consultants, organizing consultations / workshops and overseeing other aspects of project
                                    implementation. The component will also support incremental administrative and operational costs
                                    of the project at SEWA, including key activities during the project lifecycle such as project launch,
                                    annual audits and other fiduciary aspects.
                                 2. Monitoring and Evaluation: The component will support key M&E activities including baseline survey,
                                    midline survey, endline survey, impact assessment and development of ICM report. Baseline / midline
                                    / endline / impact assessment studies will be undertaken by independent agencies onboarded
                                    through a competitive process. M&E activities will be led by an M&E specialist, who will closely
                                    monitor PDO and intermediate indicators and track progress towards Project Development Objective.
                                    Besides managing independent survey / impact assessment agencies, and tracking progress, the M&E
                                    specialist will oversee regular assimilation of data through SEWA's MIS systems, and complement this
                                    with participative approaches such as Participative Rural Appraisals, Focus Group Discussions and
                                    case studies. M&E data will be regularly shared with project beneficiaries, and their feedback / inputs


                         Oct 09, 2018                                                                                                Page 7 of 12
                                  The World Bank
                                  India Digital Financial Inclusion of Informal Sector




                                    will be recorded and incorporated in project implementation activities, to ensure ownership and
                                    sustainability.
                                 3. Knowledge dissemination: The component will support activities to disseminate the lessons and
                                    experiences from the project with government agencies, civil society institutions, donor agencies,
                                    academic and research institutions, financial institutions and other relevant stakeholders. The
                                    component will support two knowledge dissemination workshops at the national level, as well as the
                                    publication of a book detailing project impacts, key lessons as well as case studies of beneficiaries.

                                 1. The financial and mobile literacy programs organized under the project will include not just the
                                    program participants but the larger community. The resources created under the program such as
                                    literacy material, mobile phone applications, and technology-based delivery models will be open for
                                    the use of the community, and will be widely disseminated with other institutions through
                                    knowledge-sharing workshops. Moreover, the resource persons trained at the village level will be a
Public Disclosure Copy




                                    valuable addition to the local rural financial eco-system. The innovative model of the community’s
                                    partnership with corporate payment providers and financial institutions will have a demonstration
                                    effect for other developmental programs. The lessons thereof and the final impact assessment are
                                    expected to provide practical lessons for financial inclusion programs, especially to reach women,
                                    tribal communities and other vulnerable sections of the society.
                                 2. Monitoring & Evaluation process will be systematic and participative. The implementing agency will
                                    monitor the results of project interventions continuously and systematically by gathering data using
                                    appropriate MIS, prepare reports and consulting with the World Bank on a periodic basis, as and
                                    when necessary. An independent impact assessment exercise will be undertaken to evaluate project
                                    results by an external agency identified based on World Bank guidelines. Monitoring and Evaluation
                                    will include participatory approaches. M&E by SEWA and independent impact assessments will be
                                    complemented by beneficiary assessments through Participatory Rural Appraisals, Focus Group
                                    Discussions, Interviews, and Case studies. M&E data will be shared with project beneficiaries and
                                    other stakeholders on a regular basis, qualitative observations of beneficiaries and other stakeholders
                                    will be recorded, and discussions on actions to be taken will be conducted.
                                 3. Beneficiary selection will be undertaken through a participative process, and rigorously monitored
                                    through MIS systems to ensure target beneficiaries from marginalized households and excluded
                                    communities are covered by project activities. The project's capacity building / training programs and
                                    learning modules will be open to all beneficiaries - SEWA members as well as individuals from the
                                    larger community. Risks associated with targeting / selection of beneficiaries are expected to be low
                                    as SEWA is a reputed community-based organization that is known to work for poor, informal sector
                                    women regardless of caste, creed or religion. SEWA members include a significant number of women
                                    from minorities, SCs and STs (indigenous communities). The project will mitigate risks through regular
                                    community consultations as well as strong feedback mechanisms that will allow project activities to
                                    be community-driven and relevant to the needs and aspirations of intended beneficiaries.
                                 4. Key project activities are expected to be sustainable after grant closure. Experience has shown that
                                    sustainability can best be achieved through integrating projects with local institutions' management
                                    and activities. Key activities such as promoting literacy / capacity building and catalyzing Fintech
                                    adoption will be integrated / aligned with ongoing activities of SEWA institutions and social

                         Oct 09, 2018                                                                                             Page 8 of 12
                                  The World Bank
                                  India Digital Financial Inclusion of Informal Sector




                                    enterprises. The project's decentralized approach focuses on creation of local resources (through
                                    Training of Trainer or TOT model) and public goods for sustainability of activities and results at local
                                    level. The project will focus will be on identifying sustainable technologies / products that will stay
                                    relevant beyond the project period. The project will also develop linkages with GoI's Digidhan
                                    Abhiyan. Earlier JSDF grants to SEWA demonstrated significant success in turning many of SEWA's
                                    CLBRCs into sustainable business units. The training and facilitation activities planned under the
                                    project at the CLBRC level will adopt appropriate revenue models to ensure continued sustainability
                                    of the centers.
                                 5. The DEA request for the activity was received on April 19, 2018. The relevant Government
                                    Departments for digital financial inclusion (i.e. DFS - Department of Financial Services, Ministry of
                                    Finance and MeitY) will be consulted regularly during project implementation. Initial discussions have
                                    already been held to explore synergies, particularly in using training material and trainers trained
                                    under MeitY programs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 6. Collaboration with IFC: The team has been collaborating with the IFC team who are supporting
                                    SEWA’s transformation program (360 Strategic Business Review) and will explore the synergy
                                    between the two engagements with SEWA.

                           The project time-period is four years given the behavioral change targeted at women members of SEWA.
                           Literature indicates that increased financial knowledge is the first step in the causal chain towards changes in
                           financial decisions.




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          The project will work with women from low-income and marginalized households in the target states. The
                          identified states for project engagement are Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Assam, Meghalaya and Gujarat.
                          Overall, the environmental impacts of the project are expected to be positive due to improvement in
                          livelihoods and financial literacy of the rural women [also marginalized/excluded] in low-income States. Key
                          project activities include needs assessment, application customizations, training, capacity building and
                          increasing and upgrading SEWA ‘touch points’. The project is not expected to fund any major civil works.
                          Based on gaps identified through assessments [Project Component A], the project may fund minor
                          renovations, increasing or expanding the ‘touch points’ [community learning centers where
                          poor/marginalized women get trained], purchase of equipment and furniture, and encourage rural women to
                          purchase mobile phones/smart phones. Since exact project locations are not known, safeguards
                          management would be through providing guidance for avoiding, minimizing and mitigating impacts on the
                          environment due to various activities.




                         Oct 09, 2018                                                                                               Page 9 of 12
                                  The World Bank
                                  India Digital Financial Inclusion of Informal Sector




                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          SEWA has substantial institutional capacity both centrally and in the field with extensive experience in
                          participatory processes, implementing environmentally and socially-sensitive projects with vulnerable
                          populations in India, and delivering relevant training and capacity building. SEWA has prior experience on
                          similar projects. They have penetrated rural India by upscaling Community Learning centers and Community
                          Learning Business Resource Centers, through an earlier JSDF Grant. Potential environmental impacts [though
                          mostly small-scale and localized] of proposed activities include disposal of wastes [including e-wastes from
                          discarded mobiles], dust and emissions. These can be mitigated by incorporating good design and civil works
                          practices, including proper housekeeping measures, proper storage, and disposal of excavated earth
                          materials and wastes, pollution management. For this, it is necessary that the project staff are provided with
                          appropriate guidance material on environmental aspects and trained to identify and address any issue that
                          might arise. To guide their staff to manage the potential environmental impacts [though mostly small-scale
Public Disclosure Copy




                          and localized] of these activities, a simple Environmental and Engineering Code of Practice [EECOP] will be
                          prepared by SEWA. The EECOP will also provide guidelines which outline simple rules and procedures
                          regarding identification, monitoring, and mitigation of possible environmental impacts. This include [but not
                          limited to] guidance for (i) good civil works practices (ii) construction and demolition (C&D) waste
                          management in case of minor renovations, (iii) plans for safe management of e-wastes from discarded
                          mobiles, and, (iv) educating on safe usage of mobile phones, purchase of better equipment and furniture; (v)
                          upgrading touch points with adequate water, proper sanitation facilities [and thereby minimizing and
                          managing pollution] disabled friendly features, (vi) locational decisions, health and safety, (vii) training /
                          capacity building needs and other such aspects. Since the exact location of all program activities are not yet
                          known and few activities under the Program may have minor short-term implications, the environmental
                          safeguards category at this stage has been determined as “B”. The environmental safeguard policy that it
                          triggers is Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01). The impacts are proposed to be managed using
                          EECOP.



                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Gitanjali Chaturvedi, Social Specialist
                          Deepa Balakrishnan, Environmental Specialist


                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project                    Triggered?             Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                   Yes                   The project aims at assessing the needs of
                                                                                                      the rural women for Fintech applications,
                                                                                                      developing training modules for financial
                                                                                                      awareness, capacity building, and
                                                                                                      monitoring/evaluation. The project is not
                                                                                                      expected to fund any civil works, purchase

                         Oct 09, 2018                                                                                                    Page 10 of 12
                                  The World Bank
                                  India Digital Financial Inclusion of Informal Sector



                                                                                                  of equipment / furniture which may lead to
                                                                                                  any significant, irreversible or major
                                                                                                  environmental impacts.
                                                                                                  However, OP/BP 4.01 is triggered since
                                                                                                  OP/BP 4.10 is triggered given the expected
                                                                                                  positive impacts on indigenous population.
                                                                                                  Indigenous People Framework will be
                                                                                                  prepared, and the social assessment part of
                                                                                                  said framework will be used as the
                                                                                                  safeguards instrument for OP 4.01.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                           No
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                    No
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                               No
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                No
                                                                                                  Although the exact project locations and
                                                                                                  the profile of beneficiaries is not known,
                                                                                                  the project is likely to have positive impacts
                                                                                                  on indigenous populations if indeed, they
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                         Yes               are covered in its scope. An Indigenous
                                                                                                  People's Framework will be prepared to
                                                                                                  guide the project in the event that
                                                                                                  scheduled tribes are reached at any stage
                                                                                                  in the project's lifetime.
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                   No
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                             No
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50        No
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                 No


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? Yes
                           SafeguardAppraisalStage
                           a) Tentative target date for disclosing the appraisal stage ISDS
                           30-Oct-2018
                           b) Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                           Indigenous People's Framework will be prepared by appraisal.


                           APPROVALS



                         Oct 09, 2018                                                                                                  Page 11 of 12
                                   The World Bank
                                   India Digital Financial Inclusion of Informal Sector




                              Team Leader(s):                                  Varsha Marathe Dayal

                              Approved By

                              Safeguards Advisor:                             Maged Mahmoud Hamed                               12-Jul-2018

                              Practice Manager/Manager:                       Esperanza Lasagabaster                            26-Sep-2018


                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Oct 09, 2018                                                                                                                            Page 12 of 12
