INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC12832
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:          Sierra Leone               Project ID:   P155339
Project Name:     Strengthening the Capacity of Local Councils to Respond to Ebola
Team Leader(s): Randa G. El-Rashidi
Estimated Date     10-Nov-2015
of Approval:
Managing Unit:    GSPDR                      Lending       Lending Instrument
Instrument:
Sector(s):        Sub-national government administration (30%), Other social services (60%),
General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (10%)
Theme(s):         Decentralization (20%), Natural disaster management (20%), Other social
protection and risk management (40%), Other communicable diseases (20%)
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:   3                    Total Bank Financing: 0
Financing Gap:        0
Financing Source                                                           Amount
Japan Social Development Fund                                                    3
Environment       C - Not Required
Category:
B. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to bolster social trust, community participation in the
delivery of social assistance services and resilience to disasters through strengthened capacity of
Local Councils to effectively respond to the Post Ebola Recovery Strategy.
C. Project Description
Summary: The proposed project consists of three components:
Component 1: seeks to promote long-term psychosocial health and resilience through the
implementation of selected sensitization and community building activities, via capacity building
support for Local Councils (LCs) to adequately adapt the delivery of social assistance services to the
Ebola and post-Ebola context with new activities. The component also seeks to strengthen the
devolution process, since its effective operationalization will contribute significantly in enhancing
the capacity of LCs in the post-Ebola context and hence in ameliorating the quality of service
delivery.


﻿Component 2: focuses on disaster risk management to build LC resilience and to promote a pre-
determined action strategy in face of future external shocks, strengthening ongoing technical
assistance to LCs and Ward Committees (WCs). Community engagement interventions will be
O
)       promoted through the creation of social accountability teams, and open training activities for citizens
on communication, advocacy and other relevant skills to ensure effective citizen interaction with
local public institutions. Similarly, funding will be apportioned to scale up a Community Monitoring
(CM) intervention piloted under the Decentralized Service Delivery Program (DSDP) II project. The
component will also strengthen data collection and data management of LCs through training and
capacity building to enhance their responsiveness to community needs.
Component 3: consists of the operational support geared towards project management, monitoring
and evaluation.
The project will complement existing strategies, such as the Agenda for Prosperity (A4P), Vision
2035, the Ebola Emergency Response Plan (EERP) and the Ebola Recovery Strategy (PERS). The
program, therefore, seeks to strengthen existing frameworks to ensure sustained and robust delivery
of social services and focus on the general development direction defined by the GoSL. The leading
priority of the EERP and PERS is restoring national healthcare delivery services, adapting service
provision, and putting in place a solid framework for a mechanism that is robust to respond to future
outbreak of health emergencies. Yet, achieving desired health outcomes is hinged on achieving
desired outcomes in other sectors. Accompanying priorities include: (i) restoring other social services
such as education, water, environmental sanitation and hygiene; (ii) increasing support for social
protection and safety nets; and (iii) restoring and stimulating economic activities to increase
employment and government revenue. The current epidemic has tested the efficacy of service
delivery at the community level, and suggests reviewing decentralization programs and redoubling
efforts in this direction.
This project has been designed in close partnership with staff from the Government of Sierra Leone's
Decentralization Secretariat (DecSec) , the Local Government Finance Department (LGFD) and the
Integrated Project Administration Unit (IPAU), at the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Development (MoFED). Consultations have also been held with communities and members of WCs.
The alternative of working with Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) to implement this project
a were explored, however, given the ongoing EVD crisis, the capacity and availability of strong
NGOs/CSOs has been overextended and largely fragmented. Given the importance and urgency of
ensuring that the services are delivered to the communities as rapidly and efficiently as possible, the
project team strongly recommends recruiting IPAU to undertake the implementation of the project.
IPAU has a strong track record of effectively coordinating a number of donor-funded projects,
including the two phases of DSDP. IPAU is well acquainted with the decentralization process and
has been actively working with communities, LCs and WCs, having exerted monitoring and
evaluation functions at the local level. The agency is therefore well positioned to play a leading role
in guiding and managing the project. IPAU will also work in cooperation with DecSec, ensuring that
capacity building and training activities for LCs, communities and WCs are effectively provided. The
project team will also promote partnerships and close coordination with other Ministries,
Departments and Agencies (MDAs).
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Project Location: Because of Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) impacting Sierra Leone nationwide, the


﻿project will focus on all 19 Local Councils and 394 Ward Committees. However, localities most
affected by EVD will receive special attention in the funding of sensitization and psychological
activities. Additional assistance and resources will be assigned to localities according to the
following pre-defmed criteria (in order of priority): (i) outbreak communities with a higher number
O
U       of cases; (ii) quarantined/formerly quarantined communities; (iii) communities with a large number
of first responders; and (iv) communities close to Ebola Treatment Centers, Interim Care Centers,
and Community Care Centers. As the situation is continuously evolving, the project will adapt the
targeting method accordingly. The funding for disaster risk preparedness and other activities
included under components 1 and 2 will be provided equitably.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The recipient implementing agency has worked with the implementation of World Bank projects and
has the institutional capacity for safeguard policies. The project Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)
team together with members of Integrated Project Administration Unit(IPAU) received safeguards
training in June 2014 to further strengthen safeguards implementation capacity. This project however
has minimal environment and social safeguards risks. Notwithstanding, the project team will work
directly with the implementing agency to build any capacity necessary for safeguard policies and will
ensure that they are followed.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Franklin Kuma Kwasi Gavu (GEN07)
Gloria Malia Mahama (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies            Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/  No
BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No
c5      Forests OP/BP 4.36            No
Pest Management OP 4.09       No
O
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  No
BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10  No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  No          This project is not anticipated to have any major
4.12                                        social risks relating to land acquisition and loss
of livelihood. As such, it does not trigger OP
4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement). The project
activities include capacity building, disaster risk
management, community engagement, citizen
participation and community monitoring.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     No
Projects on International     No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
7.60


﻿III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?: Yes
i. Explanation
U             This project does not finance any civil works or investments that have negative environmental a
The interventions expected to be rolled out in component 2 such as sensitization, training in Dis
ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
14-Sep-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.
No safeguard instrument is required.
The project design adopts a bottom-up approach and in so doing promotes voice and
representation of community members. Additionally, the project supports community participation
and voice firstly, the project will pilot the use of scorecards and community monitoring for all
activities. Secondly, the project will create a feedback loop between communities and Local
Councils (LCs) by strengthening Ward Committees (WCs) (which are interlocutors between
communities and LCs). This will require LCs to respond publicly to concerns raised by WCs and
beneficiaries.
IV. APPROVALS
Team Leader(s):        Name: Randa G. El-Rashidi
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                  Date: 10-Apr-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Stefano Paternostro (PMGR)                Date: 13-Apr-2015
Manager:
0
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.


