                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                                          Report No.:ISDSA20429
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated:                 31-Mar-2017
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed               04-Apr-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                          Western Africa               Project ID:                P154482
    Project Name:                     Sahel Irrigation Initiative Support Project (P154482)
    Task Team Leader(s):              Francois Onimus,Elisee Ouedraogo,Pierrick Fraval
    Estimated Appraisal               20-Mar-2017                  Estimated Board            23-May-2017
    Date:                                                          Date:
    Managing Unit:                    GWA07                        Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                                                                       Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00(Rapid No
    Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                              Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           192.46                         Total Bank Financing: 173.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                        Amount
    BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                            6.64
    International Development Association (IDA)                                                                173.00
    Global Partnership on Output-based Aid                                                                        5.85
    LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                                                           6.97
    Financing Gap                                                                                                 0.00
    Total                                                                                                      192.46
    Environmental Category:           A - Full Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?       No

    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The Project Development Objectives are to improve stakeholders' capacity to develop and manage irrigation and
    to increase irrigated areas using a regional ‘solutions’ approach in participating countries across the Sahel.
    3. Project Description
    1. The PDO stems from the following key principles:
    (a) Increasing the irrigated areas in Sahel will only happen if the performance of irrigation systems is improved
    and the long-term viability of new systems can be demonstrated.

                                                    Page 1 of 10
(b) The key to improve the performance of the sector is to enhance the capacity of the stakeholders in
implementing and managing irrigation systems.
(c) Capacity-building activities have to rely on ‘doing things on the ground’ in a constant cycle of policy and
planning, implementation, and learning for improvement.
2. The project will have three interrelated components that will be implemented in parallel over a period of six
years. The three components are closely related and feed one another in a complementary manner, as follows:
(a) Component A: Modernizing the institutional framework will contribute directly to institutional strengthening
and to improving the planning capacity by developing institutional frameworks, tools, and procedures that will
pave the way for the implementation of the investments identified under Component B. Component A will
institutionalize solutions experimented under Component B so that subsequent projects and programs in the six
countries can benefit from the accumulated experience. It will also increase organizational capacity and boost
investment potential by improving the general irrigation management environment.
(b) Component B: Financing irrigation investment solutions will be the laboratory to develop irrigation solutions
applicable at a regional scale. Component B will implement irrigation solutions with two broad objectives: (a)
increase actually exploitable irrigated areas and cropping intensity in the region and (b) build sufficient
momentum for irrigation scale-up and improved performance. It will thus directly contribute to increase
irrigated areas through investment in the revitalization of degraded irrigated schemes and development of new
schemes. The scope of Component B also extends beyond the SIIP as the activities will build a portfolio of
feasible projects backed with solid business cases and hence leverage other investments. The investment
program under Component B will be reviewed annually at the regional level and adapted to the evolving country
needs based on the lessons learnt from Component C. Component B will finance the financing development of
about 23,000 hectares through investment at the country level that will benefit 80,000 households and some
480,000 beneficiaries in total, and coherent technical assistance supporting the preparation of feasibility studies
for 60,000 hectares that could ultimately benefit many more beneficiaries.
(c) Component C: Information and Knowledge management and coordination will contribute to the PDO by
capitalizing knowledge, building strong M&E systems, and ensuring appropriate coordination of project
activities at the national and regional levels. Component C will capitalize knowledge generated through the
project and diffuse it back into the SIIP and other irrigation projects. The regional coordination component will
ensure that the six participating countries share knowledge effectively.
3. The project in its entirety will reshape the irrigation development approach in the Sahel region and create an
enabling institutional environment conducive to leveraging financing through convergence effects. The
underlying information and communication strategy, human networks (face to face/offline), and ICT
infrastructure/applications (online) will reinforce the connections between the three components.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The Project will be implemented in six countries: Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania, Niger and Senegal.
Detailed locations of project activities are not yet known. Investment projects under Component B will be
identified following a demand driven approach during project implementation; an in consultation with the
partners involved and other relevant programs and projects so as to develop synergy and build to the extent
possible on work already done or planned in these areas.

The areas of intervention are limited to rural areas, and are presumably some of the world’s regions most
seriously affected by climate change, with major impacts on water availability.

The countries are also sharing four river basins:
1) The Senegal river basin, shared by four countries: Guinea, Mali, Mauritania and Senegal
2) The Niger River basin which spreads over ten countries, including Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali and Niger
3) The Volta River Basin shared by six countries: Burkina Faso, Mali, Cote d'Ivoire, Ghana, Benin and Togo
4) The "conventional" Lake Chad Basin spreading over four countries: Chad, Niger, Nigeria and Cameroon


                                                Page 2 of 10
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Dahlia Lotayef( GEN07 )
 Salamata Bal( GSU01 )
6. Safeguard Policies That Might Apply
Safeguard Policies                       Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01      Yes          The project is classified Category A. The potential
                                                      environmental and social impacts of the proposed
                                                      irrigation sub-projects to modernize existing
                                                      functional irrigation systems or to develop new
                                                      small scale ones are expected to be local, site-
                                                      specific, and easily manageable. Some medium
                                                      scale investments may however have more
                                                      substantial impacts. Moreover, some countries
                                                      intend to finance feasibility studies and engineering
                                                      designs for large scale infrastructures which calls
                                                      for a Category A classification.

                                                      An Environmental and Social Management
                                                      Framework (ESMF) has been prepared for each of
                                                      the participating country, consulted upon and have
                                                      been disclosed in each of the six countries and on
                                                      the Bank Website before appraisal.

                                                      Strategic and/or sectoral impact assessments will be
                                                      prepared during implementation, as needed, in
                                                      conjunction with the update of existing studies and
                                                      the preparation of new ones for large scale
                                                      irrigation systems development. Studies would
                                                      include Strategic Environmental and Social
                                                      Assessments (SESA), where relevant, i.e. when
                                                      there are environmental and social risks associated
                                                      with scaling up irrigation development.

                                                      Sample terms of reference for these assessments
                                                      have been developed and included in the ESMFs
                                                      for guidance.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              Yes          Although the project is not expected to intervene in
                                                      any critically important natural habitat, the exact
                                                      sites of the proposed investments are not yet
                                                      known.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No           The project does not consider financing sub-
                                                      projects impacting forest ecosystems or affecting
                                                      the rights and welfare of people depending upon
                                                      forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  Yes          The project does not intend to finance acquisition,
                                                      handling and using pesticides, but any other


                                          Page 3 of 10
                                                     techniques and practices that favor pest control
                                                     within the areas of intervention. However, the use
                                                     of chemical synthetic pesticides and fertilizers
                                                     might be opted by the project beneficiary purposely
                                                     to increase the yields. Therefore, Pest Management
                                                     Plans have been prepared by each participating
                                                     country and disclosed prior to appraisal.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes         The eligibility criteria for investment projects will
                                                     ensure that no investments are selected in areas
                                                     with a cultural heritage potential, but given that the
                                                     exact locations of these activities have not yet been
                                                     determined, chance-find procedures will be
                                                     included in work contracts.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No          There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                     areas, as defined by OP/BP 4.10.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes         No physical displacement is anticipated in the
                                                     actual design of the project. However the intended
                                                     investments and rehabilitation of small to medium
                                                     scale irrigation systems to be carried out under the
                                                     various subprojects, might call for limited physical
                                                     displacement or create a need to compensate for the
                                                     loss of crops or property loss caused by the
                                                     rehabilitation of the irrigation schemes.

                                                     As the specific subprojects are not yet clearly
                                                     defined and the exact sites of the proposed
                                                     investments are not yet known, no RAPs have been
                                                     prepared during preparation. Country specific
                                                     Resettlement Policy Frameworks (RPF) have been
                                                     prepared, consulted upon and have been disclosed
                                                     in each of the six countries and on the Bank
                                                     Website before appraisal.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                Yes         The project may finance activities aiming at
                                                     developing new irrigation schemes, or rehabilitating
                                                     existing ones, which depend on existing dams. This
                                                     situation requires the assessment of the safety of
                                                     dams, and specific guidelines and sample TORs to
                                                     conduct such assessments have been developed and
                                                     attached to the ESMFs of all countries.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP Yes        The project spans over four river basins (see details
7.50                                                 in Section D on Project location), which calls for
                                                     the triggering of this policy.

                                                     Given the nature of the project which deals mainly
                                                     with rehabilitation and renovation of small scale
                                                     irrigation schemes; and based on the likely
                                                     locations of schemes to be financed and on
                                                     conservative assumptions regarding the quantity of

                                          Page 4 of 10
                                                                  the irrigation water withdrawn from international
                                                                  waterways, one can derive that the impact on
                                                                  international waterways is insignificant.
                                                                  This more specifically means that: (a) the project
                                                                  will not adversely affect the quality or quantity of
                                                                  water flows to other riparians; (b) it will not be
                                                                  adversely affected by other riparians’ water use and
                                                                  (c) could in fact improve the water quality in the
                                                                  riparians’s countries due the application of
                                                                  improved solutions. Therefore, the exception to the
                                                                  external notification requirements of OP 7.50, set
                                                                  forth in paragraph 7(a) of OP 7.50 has been
                                                                  thought, and a draft memo to the Africa Region has
                                                                  been prepared and approved.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No             The project is not implemented in any disputed
                                                                  areas.
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
    any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    The overall project is intended to generate positive environmental benefit because it will improve water use
    efficiencies, improve natural processes which enhance soil fertility and promote maximum productivity on
    existing agricultural lands. The project will also reduce the climatic and environmental risks in its areas of
    interventions. By developing and financing irrigation schemes that are economically viable, socially beneficial
    and environmentally sustainable, the project will contribute to sustainably manage agricultural water, including
    both surface and ground water and taking into consideration transboundary water flows. Due consideration is
    also given to improved land management and reducing land degradation. The project will more generally
    increase the Sahel agriculture sector’s resilience to climatic shocks and have a broader leverage impact on the
    viability and environmental sustainability of existing and future irrigation systems and related agricultural
    development.
    Some potential adverse impacts may however arise as a result of project irrigation activities, combined with
    seasonal or periodic precipitation and/or flooding which can, inter-alia, raise the water table and result in
    waterlogging and salinization of the soils, thereby adversely impacting agricultural production. Furthermore,
    there can be other impacts such as the concentration of fertilizers and salts in agricultural drainage, impacting in
    its turn the water quality in the receiving waters and the aquatic ecosystems, as well as affecting downstream
    users. These adverse impacts will be fully addressed and mitigated in the environment and social assessment
    framework of the Project for each country.
    Though the project is not expected to intervene in any critically important natural habitat, the impacts of severe
    climate conditions, insecurity and conflicts situations may lead to expanding activities in areas requiring specific
    management considerations, such as zones located within RAMSAR sites in the Niger Inner Delta. Guidance to
    deal with such situations is included in the ESMFs.

    The project spans over four international basins, however, most of the irrigation withdrawals that would be
    financed under the project (some 3,500 to 5,000 ha for each of the 6 countries on average) are scattered, ranging
    from very small to medium scale and using groundwater or water stored in small earth reservoirs that capture
    rainwater. A preliminary assessment of the quantitative and geographic impact of these activities onto
    international rivers and/or aquifers, based on conservative likely assumptions of what the project will finance,


                                                     Page 5 of 10
has been made and one can derive that the impact on international waterways is insignificant.

Additional measures taken to address specific safeguards policy issues
- The requirements of OP 4.07 on Water Resources Management, complementary to OP 4.01, are taken into
consideration in the frameworks.
- The screening of potential subprojects will incorporate environmental and social impact assessment, including
an assessment of the cumulative impact on land and water resources.
- No potential sites located in any RAMSAR sites have been identified or pre-selected during preparation.
Guidance for application of appropriate mitigation measures have been integrated in the ESMF, for use in case
such sites are considered during implementation.
- Concerning the Safety of dams, CILSS will hire international experts who will be mobilized on call. Countries
will work with national experts who will receive support / quality control from CILSS international experts as
need be.

Triggering the Performance Standards for Private Sector Activities, OP 4.03
- This policy will be triggered in view of the activities to be implemented by a private firm (SOFITEX) in
Burkina Faso througha specific grant of US$5,750,000. The firm, as per the definition provided in OP 4.03, will
be “carrying out or is established for a business purpose, and is operating on commercial basis”.
- The firm is an existing client of IFC, is familiar with IFC’s Performance Standards and applying them in the
context of other activities. An Environmental and Social Action Plan (ESAP) has been agreed with SOFITEX
and is updated annually. The ESMS will be updated to incorporate any new impacts on environmental and social
issues as a result of implementing the project activities, and compliance will be jointly monitored by the World
Bank and IFC project teams.
- As part of the actions, SOFITEX has appointed an Environmental and Social (E&S) officer who received
training and has the competency to manage the E&S risks of the company. SOFITEX is also in the process of
establishing an Environment and Social Management System (ESMS) for its cotton processing activities, using
the action plans of national technical services agencies.
- The ESMS policy has been approved by SOFITEX senior management, and is satisfactory to IFC. The ESMS
development is being supported by a consultant, and the E&S capacity building support being provided by IFC
is ongoing.
- Furthermore, the World Bank has assessed the company’s institutional capacities for safeguards policies and
found it acceptable. The Bank will also continue to monitor, as part of its overall monitoring of implementation
of the project’s safeguards instruments, the social and environmental aspects of the Private Sector Activity with
respect to the applicable WB Performance Standards.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
The financing and implementation of any large scale irrigation schemes in the future, for which the studies have
been updated, revised or prepared by the project, may result in potential long term impacts.

Strategic Environmental and Social Assessments (SESA), where relevant, i.e. when there are environmental and
social risks associated with scaling up irrigation development, will be prepared during implementation, as
needed, in conjunction with these studies. Due consideration will also be given to assess the impacts of such
schemes on international waters and the eventual need to notify riparian countries of such future investments.
Sample terms of reference for these assessments have been developed and included in the ESMFs for guidance.

Some RAP may be prepared as needed, once the land acquisition due to the economic displacement (loss of
assets or access to assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of livelihoods) is identified for the
large scale schemes.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.

                                                 Page 6 of 10
Not applicable.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Resources and tools to efficiently coordinate the project planning, and the monitoring of safeguards mitigation
measures will be made available to the countries during project implementation.

At national level, the national procedures for compliance with the environmental and social assessment
regulations will be applied, under the general supervision of the concerned authorities (National Bureau of
Environmental Assessments (BUNEE) in Burkina Faso; the National Directorate of Sanitation, Control of
Pollution and Nuisances (DNACPN) in Mali; the Directorate of Environmental Control (DCE) in Mauritania;
the Office of Environmental Assessments and Impact Studies (BEEI) in Niger; the Directorate of Environment
and Classified Establishments (DEEC) in Senegal; the Directorate of Environmental Education and Sustainable
Development (DEEDD) in Chad).

Borrowers Capacity
The borrower’s institutional capacity for safeguard policies varies tremendously from one country to another
among the six countries participating in the project. Some of the countries have relatively mature environmental
ministries and agencies, sufficient staffing and an adequate regulatory framework, while other countries
institutions are relatively young, understaffed and the legal framework is missing important elements (annexes,
executive regulations, etc.).

The regional structure of the project does however envisage that the Permanent Interstate Committee for
Drought Control in the Sahel (CILSS) will have an overall operational management responsibility from a
technical view point. The Committee has the necessary technical knowledge and expertise in environmental and
social issues in the region and as such has the technical capacity to identify and flag any safeguards related
concerns to the implementation of the safeguards instruments for national-level investments, should any arise
during project implementation. Specifically, CILSS will hire and retain an environmental specialist and a social
specialist who will be able to intervene on call in support of the countries.

The Project also envisages regional training activities to be coordinated and supported by CILSS and other
competent bodies. In addition, capacity assessment/ building activities recommended in the ESMF of each
country, targeting the parties involved in project’s implementation, will be included in the overall capacity
building activities of each country’s project activities, annual workplans and budgets. In addition, (i) Project
implementation manual (PIM) of each country will include the comprehensive environmental and social
safeguards procedure of subprojects, as described in the ESMF; (ii) each country will recruit as part of its project
implementation team one Environmental and one Social Safeguards Specialist to ensure the implementation of
the due diligence, monitor closely all project activities and report on any safeguard issue; (iii) a sufficient
safeguards budget is earmarked, in each country project total budget, for the implementation of the subprojects’
measures, excluding the operational cost.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project is designed to include stakeholders and primary beneficiaries in decision making. A consultative and
participatory process was followed during project preparation that included interviews with relevant project
stakeholders groups (populations and local authorities in the project intervention areas). During project
implementation, the process will be continued through the steering committee, local communities, mayors,
potential project affected people, ministries in charge of irrigation, agriculture, rural development, etc. as well as
the national authorities in charge of environmental and social assessments in all six participating countries. The
concerns and recommendations of the potentially affected population and of the various stakeholders have been
addressed during the consultations held during preparation and reflected in the environmental and social

                                                  Page 7 of 10
   safeguards instruments (ESMFs and the RPFs).

   The Safeguards Specialists will oversee the preparation of the safeguard documents, liaise with responsible
   authorities, provide the necessary inputs, and coordinate the organization of the necessary consultations with key
   concerned stakeholders and the in-country disclosure of the safeguards instruments.
   .




B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                             10-Jan-2017
Date of submission to InfoShop                                          17-Jan-2017
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive             09-Feb-2017
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




    Chad                                                                          17-Jan-2017
 Comments: www.plan-td.org
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                      19-Jan-2017
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08-Feb-2017
 "In country" Disclosure
PHRESCTRY




 Burkina Faso                                                               08-Feb-2017
 Comments: http://agriculture-bf.info
 Pest Management Plan
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Y
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10-Jan-2017
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                   12-Jan-2017
 "In country" Disclosure
PHPESTCTRY




 Chad                                                                       12-Jan-2017
 Comments: www.plan-td.org
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [X]         No []         NA           []
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice        Yes [X]         No []         NA           []
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP                 Yes [X]         No []         NA           []
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or         Yes []          No [X]        NA           []
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or          Yes []          No []         NA           [X]
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the

                                                   Page 8 of 10
          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?

PHCompliance




          OP 4.09 - Pest Management
          Does the EA adequately address the pest management              Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          issues?
          Is a separate PMP required?                                     Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a             Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements
          included in project design?If yes, does the project team
          include a Pest Management Specialist?
PHCompliance




          OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural       Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          property?
          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the     Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
PHCompliance




          OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                 Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
          prepared?
          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards   Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          or Practice Manager review the plan?
          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                   Yes []    No [X]   TBD   []
          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access    Yes [X]   No []    TBD   []
          to assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means
          of livelihoods)

          1,000 Provide estimated number of people to be affected
PHCompliance




          OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                            Yes []    No [X]   NA    []
          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent        Yes []    No [X]   NA    []
          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
          Bank?
          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared          Yes []    No [X]   NA    []
          and arrangements been made for public awareness and
          training?
PHCompliance




          OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?          Yes []    No [X]   NA    []
          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the         Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
          Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and
          sent?
          Has the RVP approved such an exception?
PHCompliance
                                                                          Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          World Bank's Infoshop?
          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a          Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          public place in a form and language that are understandable
          and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?


                                                         Page 9 of 10
PHCompliance




          All Safeguard Policies
          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional    Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
          measures related to safeguard policies?
          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been          Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          included in the project cost?
          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
          related to safeguard policies?
          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
          the project legal documents?


         III. Approval
         Task Team Leader(s):                 Name:Francois Onimus,Elisee Ouedraogo,Pierrick Fraval
         Approved By:
         Safeguards Advisor:                  Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)          Date: 31-Mar-2017
         Practice Manager/Manager:            Name: Jonathan S. Kamkwalala        Date: 04-Apr-2017
                                              (PMGR)




                                                       Page 10 of 10
