INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC13581
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Jul-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Jul-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Niger                       Project ID:   P148839
Project Name:    Niger Investment Climate Support (P148839)
Task Team        Magueye Dia
Leader(s):
Estimated                                    Estimated     28-Aug-2015
Appraisal Date:                              Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTC07                         Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       SME Finance (50%), Other industry (50%)
Theme(s):        Other Private Sector Development (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       18.28            Total Bank Financing:      0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                Amount
Borrower                                                           0.00
Free-standing TFs Finance and Private Sector                      18.28
Total                                                             18.28
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The TF Project Development Objective (PDO) The objective of the Trust Fund is to improve critical
elements of the Niger investment climate. Small and medium enterprises operating in the agricultural
value chains with the greatest opportunity for growth in local value added will be targeted. Private
sector enterprises operating in the agricultural value chains with the greatest opportunity for growth
in local value added will be targeted.
In particular the Trust-Fund will contribute to the: i) development and enhancement of the
competitiveness of agricultural value-chains in Diffa and Zinder, ii) improvement of selected aspect


﻿of Niger investment climate through an enhanced PPD, iii) implementation reforms related to export
promotion for agricultural products.
C. Project Description
Component 1: Modernization of the Business Environment (DKK 19,7 million/US$ 3, 55 million):
This component will contribute to the attainment of PECEA2 (Programme de Promotion de l'Emploi
et de la Croissance Economique dans l'Agriculture) development objectives #1 and # 2: i) contribute
a       to the improvement of the Business environment through a stronger involvement of the private sector
in the reform process, ii) support the implementation of institutional reforms aiming to promote
export of agricultural products.
This component will support the Government's efforts to implement key regulatory and Institutional
reforms needed to create an enabling environment for private sector development.
Subcomponent 1.1. Implementing Investment climate reforms
The objective of this component is to improve targeted Doing Business indicators: i) starting a
business; ii) trading across borders; and iii) Dealing with construction permits, iv) enforcing
contracts. Under the latter, this activity seeks to help the Government alleviate the key investment
constraints of slow and poor quality decision making with regard to commercial disputes, as
recommended by the WAEMU council of Ministers in 2013. More specifically, this sub-component
will support the creation and operationalization of a Commercial Court; and the development of
alternative dispute resolution mechanisms.
In addition, it will support the implementation of the new OHADA "Entreprenant regime" for micro
and small informal firms to enhance formalization of the private sector in Niger. In particular,
through provision of TA and equipment, this activity will: i) support the elaboration and
implementation of tax incentives attractive enough to bring informal firms under the new regime; and
(iii) provide business development services (i.e. consultancy services and training - this will not
entail any works, or preparation of works) to firms willing to adopt the new Entreprenant Regime.
0
Subcomponent 1.2. Enabling institutions for private sector development
The objective of this component is to help government put in place institutions and instruments that
will enhance private sector development and foster investment in Niger.
i)     Public-Private Dialogue
Support will be provided to improve Public-Private dialogue for Investment Climate reforms. This
will entail financing the efforts of CNIP in implementing the Government's action plan to improve
Niger business environment in the three key priority areas. This subcomponent will help facilitate the
framework for both public-private sector and state-development partner dialogue to ensure adequate
reforms are put in place. It will also support lobbying efforts by private sector organizations to enable
them to anticipate, prepare for and participate in discussions of reforms with public authorities.
ii)    Support to the operationalization of the export promotion agency (ANIPEX)
This subcomponent will focus on support to the development and implementation of the ANIPEX
business plan. It will finance activities that will complement what is already being undertaken under
PRACC. Created in 2004 for the promotion of exports in Niger including livestock and agriculture


﻿products, ANIPEX remains a key partner in implementation of a successful reform on "Trading
across borders".
Component 2. Increase the competitiveness of selected agricultural value chains (US$ 13.75 million):
0
This component will contribute development objective #1 of the Danish program: Improve the
competitiveness of the SMEs along the agricultural value chains in Zinder and Diffa.
Sub-component 2.1 Support to the Maison de l'Entreprise (ME):
Support will be provided to buil d the capacity of the Maison de 1'Entreprise (ME) as well as private
sector organizations to offer a suite of services tailored to different types of businesses involved in
agricultural value chains.
Sub-component 2.2 Provision of Financial and non-financial business development services
This sub-component will facilitate access to business development services to actors along the value
chains with a view to improve their performance and competitiveness. To do so, the sub component
will support the operationalization of two "matching grant" schemes: i) a fund to finance the
provision of consultancy services to MSMEs operating in the identified value chains and ii) an
investment fund to provide financial support for MSMEs investment projects. These facilities will be
designed to be appropriate tools for the ME. An execution manual will elaborated in close
coordination with DANIDA and other stakeholders to outline the operating principles and procedures
of the fund, as well as the governance and internal control mechanisms, and eligibility criteria.
Beneficiaries should be located in the Diffa and Zoider area, and comply with safeguard
requirements. The project will not finance the purchase of pesticides, or activities involving pest
management.
Sub-component 2.3: Infrastructure Development
0
This sub-component will support the identification, financing and management of infrastructure to
support the development of specified agricultural value chains in Zinder and Diffa areas. Possible
infrastructure includes storage facilities, renewable energy infrastructure, access roads, and
a       connections to sewage networks. The project will work closely with the regional chambers of
agriculture, professional associations and local authorities to identify the infrastructures to be
constructed and select a model of management
Sub-component 2.4: Improving the Business environment for selected agricultural value chains
This sub-component will provide support to address key business environment constraints specific to
the targeted agricultural value-chains. The assistance could include the review of the applicable
business regulation, investment policy, or the review of the certification process etc.
Component 3: Project Implementation Support (US$ 2.18 million)
Implementation of the TF activities will be undertaken mainly through the Project Implementation
Unit (PIU) of the IDA-financed Competitiveness and Growth Support Project through the on-going
arrangements. Additional staff members, including an investment climate expert, a procurement
specialist and a financial management specialist, a matching grant expert and an agriculture value


﻿chain specialist will be added to the PIU team to ensure that proper attention is given to the
additional activities. The TF will also finance additional operating costs of the PIU including:
equipment; consultant compensation; organizational and systems development; training, capacity
building; and technical assistance.
0
In addition, Word Bank Group (WorldBank and IFC) teams will be mobilized to support the
implementation of project activities. For instance IFC advisory teams will directly support the
implementation of investment climate reforms, using its own experts or hiring external expertise.
As a consequence the TF will be implemented through two windows: i) Recipient executed window
for which the Recipient (Government of Niger) has implementation Responsibility) and, ii) Bank-
Executed window for which the World Banks has implementation responsibility including among
other things management and financing of project activities and supervision of project activities by
the Bank team.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Diffa and Zinder areas
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Capacity to manage safeguards has been developed with several Bank-financed projects in various
sectors (agricultural and rural development, energy, transport, health, education and urban
development). In addition, the ongoing Bank financed Competitiveness and Growth Support Project
will help strengthen, as necessary, relevant stakeholders' capacity to meet its safeguard requirements.
The Government has an established institutional and regulatory framework for the management of
environmental assessments (EAs). All projects with potential adverse impacts are subjected to EAs
that must be reviewed by the Office for the Evaluation of Environmental Assessment Studies
(Bureau d'Evaluation Environnementale et des Etudes d'Impact, BEEEI), subjected to public
hearings, and resulting in a certificate of compliance issued by the Minister of Environment.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
O
Abdoul Wahabi Seini (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The potential environmental impacts of the proposed
OP/BP 4.01                              operation are related to the Sub-component 2.3
which will support financing of infrastructure to
support the development of specified agricultural
value chains. The ESMF for the ongoing
Competitiveness and Growth Support Project
(P127204) will be updated, consulted upon and re-
disclosed before appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No          The proposed operation does not affect or involve
natural habitats.


﻿Forests OP/BP 4.36            No           The proposed operation does not involve forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09       No           The proposed operation does not involve pest
management.
Physical Cultural Resources   Yes          Due to potential impacts on Physical Cultural
OP/BP 4.11                                 Resources associated with civil works, the updated
ESMF will formulate standard measures to be
included in the companies' contracts, in case any
chance finds occurs.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes          Sub-component 2.3 may require some land
BP 4.12                                    acquisition related to the construction of
infrastructures to support the development of
specified agricultural value chains. The RPF for the
ongoing Competitiveness and Growth Support
Project (P127204) will be updated, consulted upon
and re-disclosed before appraisal.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No            N/A
Projects on International     No           N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No          N/A
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 17-Jun-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Environmental assessment is not required.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Magueye Dia
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                  Date: 29-Jul-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: John F. Speakman (PMGR)                   Date: 29-Jul-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


