INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC12954
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Sep-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Sep-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         China                      Project ID:   P153541
Project Name:    Shaanxi Poor Rural Areas Community Development Project (P153541)
Task Team        Guangming Yan,Wendao Cao
Leader(s):
Estimated        25-Oct-2016                Estimated     09-Feb-2017
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFADR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (45%), Rural and Inter-Urban
Roads and Highways (30%), Agro-industry, marketing, an d trade (25%)
Theme(s):        Rural services and infrastructure (60%), Rural markets (40%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     155.19             Total Bank Financing:   100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                         55.19
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development           100.00
0         Total                                                            155.19
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase income opportunities in selected
poor rural communities of Shaanxi province.
C. Project Description
Project Components. The proposed project would consist of the following three components with a
preliminary cost estimate of US$155.19 million (RMB966.35 million equivalent) including a Bank


﻿loan of US$100 million, to be implemented in five years.
(a)Component A: Livelihood Improvement Interventions. The component aims to support county and
town-level development strategies with the aim to strengthening their links with capacity building of
O
)       rural cooperatives and associations as the primary vehicle for rural poor households to engage in
commercial farming and to be linked to dynamic markets; (ii) development of farmer cooperatives,
with farmer cooperatives identifying partnering entrepreneurs, targeting and tailoring investments
for these intended beneficiaries to support various livelihood improvement activities (these may
include farming and non-farming income-generation activities, depending on available natural
resources and the applicable local development strategies). The project will establish Farmer
Cooperative Development Fund (CDF) and Enterprise Fund to provide financial support to project
farmer cooperatives and encourage private sector engagement; and (iii) strengthened
entrepreneurship through training and capacity building.
(b) Component B: Economical Infrastructure Services Improvement. This component aims to
improve the economic network infrastructure connecting the villages to the large value chains. It
would provide investment for (i) improving connectivity between villages, central small towns and
regional transport networks; and (ii) upgrading production infrastructure, including construction of
irrigation and drainage infrastructure; establishment of communications and information
infrastructure; provision of green house, cold storage and other post-harvest facilities, market
facilities, etc.
(c) Component C: Capacity Building, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), Project Management. The
component aims to support (i) training for Project Management Office (PMO) staff for project
implementation and management; skill development for participating farmers; training for out-
migration farmers; training for local handcraft skills development; and awareness raising campaigns;
(ii) monitoring and evaluation of project activities including, project physical progress monitoring,
environmental and social safeguards compliance monitoring, project impact monitoring; and (iii)
project implementation and management.
O
U       D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
O
The proposed project would be implemented in 11 counties in northern Shaanxi Province, i.e.
Longxian, Linyou, Changwu, Heyang, Baishui, Fuping, Yichuan, Yanchang, Yanchuang, Dingbian,
and Mizhi, which are designated national-level poverty counties, and located in the contiguous
poverty-stricken areas of Liupan Mountain, Luliang Mountain, Qiangba Mountain or hilly areas
along Yellow River as designed by the national or provincial authorities. About 30 communities
involving an estimated total of 200 villages are expected to participate in the project which will be
identified and selected through a competitive process, based on the agreed selection criteria and in a
phased approach.
The project area does not include villages with previous or ongoing government relocation program
of villages such as the Ecological Relocation Program. The social assessment (SA) will document
and discuss linkages or inter-faces if any with previous or ongoing government relocation of villages
and programs that may influence activities or overlap with the project area.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The proposed project will be coordinated by the Foreign Capital Project Management Center of
Shaanxi Province, physically located in the Provincial Poverty Alleviation and Development Office


﻿(PPADO), which has rich experience with Bank supported projects. A Provincial Steering
Committee (PSC), led by a Vice Governor of the Government of Shaanxi with representatives from
the PDRC, PDOF, Provincial Department of Construction (PDOC), Provincial Poverty Alleviation
and Development Office (PPADO) and Provincial Statistics Bureau, will be organized to oversee the
O
)       preparation and implementation of the project. At the provincial level, the PPADO will take the lead
in project management. This arrangement helps assure the proper preparation and implementation of
safeguard policies. The Shaanxi PPADO has previously executed similar Bank poverty reduction
projects, and is therefore experienced in safeguard requirements. At municipal level, a PMO will be
established to coordinate project preparation and implementation among participating counties within
its jurisdiction and between these counties and relevant municipal government agencies. At county
level, each county of the eleven counties has set up a Project Implementation Unit. But seven of the
eleven county level authorities are new to Bank-supported project procedures and will need guidance
from the provincial PMOs. At community level, a Project Working Station (PWS) is to be set up
once the selection process is completed which will be located at a town/township seat. A Project
Implementation Group will be set up at each participating village. The Bank will provide training to
clients on safeguards policies. Experienced safeguards consultants will be hired to assist with the
implementation of safeguards instruments.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Feng Ji (GENDR)
Songling Yao (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         It is confirmed that OP 4.01 (Environmental
OP/BP 4.01                              Assessment) is triggered. The project is proposed as
a Category B project due to the type, location,
sensitivity, and scale of the project and the nature
and magnitude of its potential environmental
impacts.
The project will bring about positive impacts and
benefits to the environment and the targeted poor
communities in the project areas, and have limited
adverse impacts. The adverse impacts mainly
include:
nuisance associated with construction/rehabilitation/
upgrading of infrastructure (e.g. roads, water supply
pipes, drainage etc.), such as disturbance to local
communities and traffic, nuisance of dust, noise,
vibration and wastewater, soil erosion, and disposal
of spoil etc.; and Adverse impacts (e.g. waste,
wastewater) caused by the livelihood improvement
interventions. But these impacts are not expected to
be significant given that the small scale investment
are largely in existing agricultural farmland and
scattered in eleven counties in the Province.


﻿Since the project will take a phased approach for
selection of project communities and implementation
of community activities, prior to project appraisal,
the details of specific investment activities cannot be
identified. PMO will prepare an Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF) following
the relevant Chinese policies, laws and regulations
and the Bank's safeguards policies. The ESMF will
identify the types of investments, set out the
principles, rules, guidelines and procedures to assess
the environmental and social impacts, and contain
measures and plans to reduce, mitigate and/or
avoidadverse impacts and enhance positive impacts.
Each subproject proposal will be screened for
potential negative environmental impacts, and
measures developed to avoid, mitigate and manage
any adverse impacts.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No           Based on the draft project proposal and site
screening, The project activities will be on existing
agricultural land or construction farmland. The
project activities will not affect protected reserves,
known as natural habitats, or established or proposed
critical natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No           The project will not finance activities that would
involve any conversion or degradation of critical
forest areas or related critical natural habitats as
defined under the policy.
Pest Management OP 4.09       TBD          The project may finance non-grain agricultural
operations which likely lead to the limited use of
pesticide or herbicides. If this investment is included
in the project, environmental friendly methods for
pest management will be promoted and incorporated
into project design, and relevant requirements for a
pest management plan included in the ESMF.
Physical Cultural Resources   TBD          Based on the draft project proposal and site
OP/BP 4.11                                 screening, the project will not likely affect sites with
archeological, paleontological, historical, religious,
or unique natural values. . Further screening will be
undertaken during project preparation. Chance finds
during construction might occur and relevant clauses
will be included in all construction contracts.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      TBD          The project is anticipated to bring much social
4.10                                       benefits for the farmers including the poor. The
positive social impacts of the project are to improve
physical capital, human capital, social capital and the


﻿empowerment of rural communities, and institutional
capacity and services.
Whether OP4. 10 Indigenous Peoples is triggered will
be decided in next stage. The Task Team's screening
did not identify any minority village in or
collectively attached to project areas in the proposed
11 counties so far. This screening will be continued
together with the social assessment process.
A full social assessment (SA) will be conducted
around the project areas and the results of the SA
will be fully incorporated into project design. The
SA will cover issues related to OP 4.10 and OP 4.12
as well as other potential social impacts covered by
OP 4.01. This includes in particular gender issue, via
investigating social and economic baseline covering
women, and integrating attitudes and opinions from
the female and male participants into the project
design. How to ensure project activities target right
beneficiaries, achieve project objectives, realize
sustainable operation of designed mechanisms after
project completion, widely engaging the locals and
adopting participatory approach are a good choice.
Participation activities on farmer cooperative will be
conducted in the project preparation and a
participation plan for implementation stage will be
designed.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes          The project may permanently and temporarily
BP 4.12                                    acquire some land for construction of infrastructure
and facilities, the OP4.12, therefore, will be
triggered. As sites of the construction can only be
clearly determined during project implementation, a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be
developed for the potential resettlement impacts.
Resettlement plan (RP) may be needed for a few
sites where the construction activities are clearly
defined before the project appraisal.
On land use in rural cooperatives: Villagers are
voluntarily participating in cooperatives, existing or
to be established by the project, in various ways:
inputting cash or term operational right of land, or
just relying on cooperative services of skill training,
product processing or trade. The participants will get
income from rental of operational right of land, or
cash input, and could get wages if they work for


﻿cooperatives. The above awill be documented in
VLD protocol to be developed based upon OP 4.12
criteria that ensure the voluntary nature of the
agreements between villager and cooperatives. In the
process, there is no land adjustment and
consolidation are foreseen.
Furthermore, the social assessment (SA) will
document and inform the project on the potential
social impacts of such initiatives and transactions.
The SA will also document and discuss linkages or
inter-faces with previous or ongoing government
relocation of villages and programs that may
influence activities or overlap with the project area.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           The project will not finance construction or
rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
policy. Thus, this policy would not be triggered.
Projects on International    No           The project is not associated with an international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      waterway.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         The project is not located in disputed areas.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Jan-2016
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
In parallel with the project feasibility study, EA safeguards documents will be drafted and
O
submitted to the Bank for review by September, 2015.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Guangming Yan,Wendao Cao
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                        Date: 17-Sep-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Nathan M. Belete (PMGR)                   Date: 22-Sep-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


