                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC12429

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Oct-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Indonesia                       Project ID:      P152551
                            Project Name:        PFM MDTF II Support to Government of Indonesia RETF
                            Team Leader(s):      C. Bernard Myers
                            Estimated Date       23-Oct-2015
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GGO14                           Lending          Lending Instrument
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           Central government administration (80%), Sub-national government
                                                 administration (20%)
                            Theme(s):            Decentralization (20%), Public expenditure, financial management and
                                                 procurement (50%), Tax policy and administration (15%), e-Government
                                                 (15%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 2.7                            Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                       0
                              Indonesia - Support Public Financial Management                                              2.7
                            Environment        C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To support the Ministry of Finance to improve its capacity for more efficient, timely, and transparent
                           public financial management in order to contribute to improved public service delivery.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed activities are part of the PFM MDTF Phase II - a continuation of PFM MDTF I - to
                           provide support to the Government's medium term public finance management reform agenda. The
                           program will address issues across a broad range of public financial management related areas that
                           emerge from on-going PFM Reform dialog in Indonesia and as ones that are reflected in the Medium
                           Term Strategy Note (MTSN). It provides continued support to GoI through improved accountability,
                           collection, allocation, usage and transparency of public resources, with a focus on supporting reforms
                           at the central level.
                         The PFM MDTF II includes BETF and RETF through which PFM activities are executed across
                         eight components. The proposed RETF part of the MDTF covers most components under the
                         proposed Strengthening Revenue and Budget Management PA of BETF program. The proposed
Public Disclosure Copy




                         RETF would initially receive $2.7 million or about 15% of total MDTF resources, a figure
                         extrapolated from the actual level of demand expressed during the 2014 Management Committee
                         meeting. Though the overwhelming majority of MDTF activities are Bank-executed, the
                         establishment of the RETF is an important step to enhance government ownership and ultimately to
                         improve the quality of the program implementation. It also functions to support the implementation
                         of activities that are mandatory implemented by the RETF. The proposed RETF builds on the
                         experience MOF gained from implementing an RETF during MDTF Phase I.

                         In line with the evolution of the Government's reform strategies and the findings of the 2011 repeat
                         PEFA, the MTSN reflects a transition away from the control and compliance framework and
                         systems, and greater focus on improving the technical efficiency of spending and the performance
                         orientation of the budget process. There is also increasing interest among donors to give priority to
                         activities that will strengthen PFM at the subnational level. Enhancing tax administration remains an
                         issue of importance to both donors and Government, despite the absence of an investment project in
                         the sector. Substantial progress made in the past year in the implementation of the Government's
                         financial management information system (SPAN) will enable some reallocations away from budget
                         execution activities during the life of the trust fund. On the other hand, institutional transformation
                         and bureaucracy reform will become a relatively small share of the MDTF activities. Prioritization
                         among activities is reflected in the indicative resource allocations to the eight MDTF components, as
                         agreed by the Policy Advisory Committee of the MDTF. The proposed RETF will be focused on
                         activities that World Bank Trust Fund guidelines describe as best suited for recipient execution, in
                         particular training activities, workshops, and studies or consultancies for which the beneficiary will
                         assume primary responsibility for the quality and supervision of the work. All eight components of
                         the MDTF will be eligible for funding under the RETF, but it is anticipated that in practice the RETF
                         will be focused toward support for components related to budget execution (IV), subnational PFM
                         (VII), and institutional transformation (VIII). This will enable the government implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         accrual accounting, refinements in the implementation of the financial management information
                         system (SPAN), ICT governance within the institutional transformation program, and improving
                         effectiveness of inter-governmental fiscal transfers. In addition to the above, the RETF may also
                         support smaller engagements in components I, III, V, and VI. MOF is interested to improve the
                         capacity to monitor progress on PFM reforms (I), continue progress in implementing budget reforms
                         such as PBB and MTEF (III), enhancing capacity of the Inspectorate General (V), and improving
                         capacity in revenue forecasting and analysis (VI). The RETF will initially begin the activities under
                         Component I, IIII, IV and VIII. New proposals are immediately anticipated for the fifth component
                         on Support to Revenue Administration.

                         The RETF program would be implementing over three years, coinciding with the end-date for the
                         MDTF as a whole. First year activities - under Components I, III, IV and VIII - have already been
                         drafted and endorsed by the previous Management Committee totaling an amount of approximately
                         $1,100,000. Any future RETF activities will follow the same review process as those for the BETF,
                         with endorsement by the Management Committee upon presentation of an activity proposal prior to
                         the Meeting. The MOF will assume responsibility for prioritizing activities across directorates and
                         related components before they are submitted to the Management Committee. As many of the
                         activities will likely pertain to training and consulting studies, the results indicators have been
                         designed to reflect this.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will be located in Jakarta, mostly at central government offices, but occasionally at local
Public Disclosure Copy




                           government offices.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The proposed activities will be focused on improving efficiency, governance, integrity, and
                           transparency of the public financial management system. It will not include any civil works such as
                           construction or infrastructure activities that are linked to the Bank's Safeguard Policies (i.g
                           Environmental Assessment, Natural Habitats , Involuntary Resettlement). Hence, the Client may not
                           need to establish or develop the required Institutional Capacity.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Isono Sadoko (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No               The project is to support the GOI to improve
                           BP 4.01                                               efficiency, governance, integrity, and
                                                                                 transparency of the public financial
                                                                                 management system, it will not finance any civil
                                                                                 work, therefore impact to environment is
                                                                                 unlikely
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No               This RETF will not include implementation of
                                                                                 Village Law. Instead, the Bank may provide a
                                                                                 limited assistance through the BETF to village
                                                                                 governments to strengthen budget execution.
                                                                                 Hence, no impact on IP is anticipated.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No
                           Projects on International            No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP     No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                              Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                         Team Leader(s):                  Name: C. Bernard Myers
                         Approved By:
                         Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Surhid P. Gautam (SA)                                        Date: 20-Apr-2015
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Practice Manager/                Name: Robert R. Taliercio (PMGR)                                   Date: 13-May-2015
                         Manager:



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                         InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                         affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
