INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12277
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-May-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Cabo Verde                 Project ID:  P146666
Project Name: Competitiveness for Tourism Development (P 146666)
Task Team Andres F. Garcia,Julian Casal,Penelope Demetra Fidas
Leader(s):
Estimated       27-Apr-2015                Estimated    05-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTCDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General industry and trade sector (50%), SME Finance (30%), General
agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%)
Theme(s):       Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (70%), Regulation and
competition policy (30%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      14.10            Total Bank Financing:   10.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          4.10
International Development Association (IDA)                                10.00
Total                                                                      14.10
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project development objective is to attract investment in the tourism sector and promote growth
in SMEs along the tourism value chain.
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 10


﻿The project addresses the goal of the Government of Cabo Verde to promote a new phase of
inclusive growth of the economy, catalyzed by a competitive tourism sector. On one hand, this
implies the attraction of large investments that bring employment, taxes, and growth to the economy
at large. On the other hand, this must be complemented by efforts to help the lower rungs of the
economic pyramid to access the income and opportunities for upward mobility that this growth can
bring. Both of these implied actions are currently impeded, however, by the regulatory and
institutional environment for the tourism sector, as well as internal constraints to firms in the tourism
value chain.
The project addresses key constraints that inhibit the competitiveness of the tourism sector: (i) the
current low capacity to proactively attract and retain FDI; (ii) the lack of coordination and strategic
vision for the development of the sector; and (iii) the limited ability of local firms to participate in the
tourism value chain. In doing so, the project will contribute to raising FDI by improving the capacity
to proactively attract and retain investment (Component 1), strengthen the institutional framework
for tourism management and diversification (Component 1), and increase the inclusiveness of
tourism-led growth by strengthening the competitiveness of local SMEs (Component 2). The
initiative will be implemented as a series of projects (SOP) consisting of two operations, beginning
with the first phase (CTD-1) during the first four years, which is the subject of this ISDS, possibly
followed by five-year second project (CDT-2).
Component 1: Strengthen the institutional framework to attract investment and manage the tourism
sector (US$3.0 million)
The objective of this component is to prepare the GoCV to better attract and retain FDI, and to
support the establishment of a Tourism Institute to effectively carry-out the country's tourism
diversification agenda. Cabo Verde has suffered a decline in FDI since 2008, when net inflows
reached 12 percent of GDP. It decreased sharply in 2009 to 2010 to 7 percent, to 5 percent in 2011, 4
percent in 2012, and a mere 2 percent in 2013. The Government must be proactive in attracting,
managing and retaining FDI, through both institutional and regulatory reforms.
O
Q         Subcomponent 1.1: Improving the ability to attract tourism investment (US$2.0 million)
This subcomponent will carry out a program of activities to support key institutions in attracting
foreign direct investments, including: (a) establishing collaboration mechanisms for investment; (b)
developing a comprehensive market intelligence study, a tourism mobilization strategy, a value
proposition analysis, and an outreach strategic plan; (c) designing pre-packaged investment-ready
proposals; (d) carrying out capacity building activities for investment promotion; (e) designing and
implementing a shared investor tracking system; (f) conducting investment outreach campaigns; (g)
carrying out feasibility and other studies on infrastructure; and (h) supporting legal and regulatory
reforms to improve access to finance.
Firstly, this subcomponent will provide support to CVI and SDTIBM to build their capability to
proactively attract, retain and expand FDI, mainly focused on hotel and resort investments. In order
to increase the support effectiveness, CTD- 1 will pilot the approach in selected islands (i.e. Boa Vista
and/or Sao Vicente). The subcomponent activities will help to polish pre-packaged investment-ready
proposals, while supporting CVI and SDTIBM in proactive investment outreach, facilitation, and
aftercare. Key to this is the project's support to developing comprehensive market intelligence, a
coherent mobilization/outreach strategy, establishing collaboration mechanisms between CVI,
SDTIBM, MTIBD, MFP, the Tourism Chamber, and other stakeholders. The project will also
leverage IFC's interest to invest in the tourism sector.
Page 2 of 10


﻿Secondly, the subcomponent will finance a series of studies to identify small and medium-sized
infrastructure that can unlock FDI in Cabo Verde. The project will initially finance feasibility studies,
which will be conducted in a manner that reflect the principles of the Bank safeguards, taking into
O
account relevant environmental and social issues. Thereafter, for investments that are deemed
feasible and identified as priority by the government, the project will finance detailed technical
designs and other studies for the eventual investments (whether or not those are funded by the Bank
under a possible CTD-2 project). The studies will be implemented in cooperation with the National
Investment System (NIS), currently supported by an IDF grant. The studies and the NIS will help
define, analyze and prioritize the infrastructure portfolio. The MTIBD and MIME have prioritized
studies on the urban plans of Sal Rei and Santa Maria, as well as upgrading roads in the southern part
of Boa Vista, which might be considered for under the project provided that they meet eligibility
criteria.
Thirdly, the project will support reforms to improve access to finance. Activities under this
subcomponent are aimed at implementing the recently produced Cabo Verde: Strategy for Increasing
Access to Finance for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, facilitated by the Finance and Markets
Global Practice. Financial infrastructure to facilitate the extension of credit to MSMEs in Cabo
Verde identified in the strategy includes (i) establishing a movable collateral registry for secured
transactions (ii) building a functioning credit information bureau to complement the public credit
registry, (iii) implementing a modern insolvency framework. The Government has prioritized the
drafting and implementation of a new framework for insolvency, under the coordination of ADEI.
Such a framework would provide for the resolution of business insolvency cases to liquidate unviable
firms, while reorganizing viable firms. Having such a legal framework in place, along with its
practical and institutional application, is expected to contribute to increased access to finance,
particularly for SMEs. The prioritized activities include support to: (a) update the legislative
framework to be aligned with the new draft insolvency law and draft implementing regulations; (b)
conduct training and outreach on the new insolvency framework for all stakeholders; (c) support to
Camara de Comercio de Sotavento to establish their arbitration and mediation center; (d) create a
pilot committee with technical experts to lead the public-private dialogue (PPD) on the insolvency
implementation; and (e) publicity, outreach, and communications for the new insolvency framework.
The project will further support the GoCV to identify and implement additional reforms, such as a
feasibility assessment for the introduction of a movable collateral registry and improvements to
a         existing credit information systems in order to improve the business environment to release
bottlenecks that would increase access to finance.
Subcomponent 1.2 Strengthening the institutional framework for tourism management and
diversification (US$1.0 million)
This subcomponent will carry out a program of activities to strengthen the institutional framework
for tourism management and diversification, including: (a) drafting the institutional framework and
action plan for a new tourism institute; (b) advising on the implementation of the action plan for a
new tourism institute; (c) establishing an advisory council for the Recipient's Tourism Institute; (d)
designing and implementing of a tourism market observatory; and (e) designing a strategic
environmental and social assessment for the tourism value chain.
Following a World Bank funded South-South Knowledge Exchange (SSKE) with Seychelles,
MTIBD committed to improving its institutional set up to support the tourism sector. One of the
main goals is to plan the tourism sector growth-that is, to consolidate existing destinations (e.g., Sal
and Boa Vista) and create a strategy for new destinations within the country. The Tourism Institute
Page 3 of 10


﻿will be established with government resources raised by the tourism tax. The role of the Tourism
Institute will be instrumental in guiding the sector towards greater diversification and
competitiveness. Therefore, this subcomponent will provide MTIBD and its Tourism Institute with
strategic technical support. First, it will facilitate assistance in the drafting of the Tourism Institute's
Q)     Institutional Framework and Action Plan. This should detail the structure of the institution, its
specific roles and responsibilities, including those that relate to environmental protection and risk
mitigation, and therefore, the project will support the preparation of a Strategic Environmental and
Social Assessment (SESA) for the tourism value chain, identifying the environmental and social
*       elements to be mainstreamed in sectoral policies and strategies, as a means to promote sustainable,
and inclusive sectoral growth. Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) should be formulated so as to
enhance Tourism Institute's performance and accountability.
Once staff have been hired, a full-time expert will be embedded within the Tourism Institute to
support action plan implementation while building capacity of Tourism Institute staff. Additionally,
an Advisory Council will provide the Tourism Institute with guidance on strategic issues. The
council will convene twice per year and consist of current or former executives of highly successful
NTOs/NTAs. Also, assistance will be provided for the creation of a new tourism market observatory
that will enable the Tourism Institute to regularly track key market trends. The observatory will be
initiated through a foundational market research study that provides in-depth data on relevant niche
segments, in the process helping the Tourism Institute prioritize target markets. The tourism market
observatory will also be fed by intelligence gathered through biannual visitor surveys conducted by
the National Statistics Institute (INE). The survey will also allow for monitoring and evaluation of
the project. Technical assistance for specific marketing and statistics collection initiatives may also
be provided.
In order to oversee and coordinate the efforts of the Tourism Institute and other agencies involved in
the management and attraction of investment to the tourism sector, the MTIBD will receive
consultancy support. At the moment, all units within the ministry report directly to the Minister, so
there is a need for an intermediate responsible body that can oversee the technical aspects of these
units, along with an advisor on overall strategy for the ministry.
Component 2: Increasing the inclusiveness of tourism growth by strengthening the competitiveness
of SMEs (US$6.0 million)
oThe objective of this component is to increase the competitiveness of SMEs to benefit from tourism
growth. The component will support both sides of the value chain through a small accommodation
quality label, as well as a matching grant facility. The quality label aims to increase occupancy rates
through the design and implementation of a quality label that will be easily recognizable by tourists,
thereby increasing their interest and willingness to stay in small, locally-run accommodations. The
matching grant facility further supports SMEs to enter the overall tourism value chain, both as
suppliers to resorts and as retailers and service-providers directly to tourists.
Subcomponent 2. 1: Designing and implementing a quality label for small accommodation
establishments (US$1.0 million)
This subcomponent will design and implement a quality label for small accommodation
establishments. While the Government wishes to diversify the accommodation supply for tourists,
the current quality of small accommodation establishments is uneven. International best practice
indicates that quality labels can be an effective means of improving service standards of small
accommodations. This should result in increased revenues for business owners. A well-designed
quality label program would also help position Cabo Verde as a multi-faceted destination; encourage
Page 4 of 10


﻿more environmentally-sustainable practices; promote the inclusion of women in this sector, as they
are more likely to own and manage small establishments (compared to resorts); and promote
collaboration among small accommodations owners.
O
U         The development and implementation of the quality label in Cabo Verde will be led by MTIBD's
Institute of Quality Management and Intellectual Property (IGQPI) in collaboration with the Tourism
Institute and the Chamber of Tourism. The program will target accommodations establishments on
all nine inhabited islands, both in urban and rural areas. The component will involve the following:
(i) adapting service and facilities standards to the Cabo Verde context; (ii) providing extensive
training and technical assistance to participants; and (iii) promoting the label (and its adherents)
through the Tourism Institute's destination marketing activities.
Subcomponent 2.2: Improving the competitiveness of SMEs (US$5.0 million)
This subcomponent will improve the competitiveness of SMEs through Subprojects, including: (a)
providing support to Beneficiaries in preparing proposals for Subprojects; and (b) providing
Matching Grants to Beneficiaries for carrying out of Subprojects. The support to SMEs will be done
through a matching grant facility that provides direct support to eligible companies, with a concerted
effort to include women-led firms. The matching grant facility (Fundo de Crescimento e
Competitividade, FCC) has been in implementation since 2003 and was supported by the recently
concluded SME Capacity Building and Economic Governance Project, where firms supported by the
FCC recorded increases in revenues of over 30 percent.
Eligible uses of funds include the purchase of services such as business development services,
training, and small goods. Moreover, funds can be used to finance training and activities that bring
enterprises or groups of enterprises to international standards, such as those sponsored by the
International Standards Organization, or those needed to meet the requirements of the quality label
for small establishments under subcomponent 2.1, for example. An adequate selection of
beneficiaries is key for the FCC to become successful. Therefore, the management of the FCC will
be assisted by a private sector firm (FCC Facilitator) with the necessary experience to proactively
work to create the linkages between potential beneficiaries and the tourism value chain, facilitate the
preparation of business plans, carry out the necessary appraisals, and monitor plan implementation.
The FCC Facilitator will report to an Investment Committee that will include participation from
MTIBD and the chambers of commerce.
CTD-2: The implementation of the quality label and FCC will continue under CTD-2, reflecting the
lessons learned during Phase I.
Component 3: Project implementation (US$1.0 million)
This component will strengthen the capacity of UGPE for Project management, coordination,
monitoring and evaluation, including fiduciary (i.e. financial and procurement management),
environmental, and social safeguard compliance, and reporting.
The component will also provide of technical assistance to the Chambers of Commerce to facilitate
the selection and implementation of the Subprojects under Part B.2 of the Project (Subcomponent
2.2).
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
One of the main goals of MTIBD is to plan the tourism sector growth-that is, to consolidate
Page 5 of 10


﻿existing destinations (e.g., Sal and Boa Vista) and create a strategy for new destinations within the
country. The MTIBD and MIME have prioritized feasibility and other studies on the urban plans of
Sal Rei and Santa Maria, as well as upgrading roads in the southern part of Boa Vista, which might
be considered under the project provided that they meet eligibility criteria. However, the project is
O
)         nationwide, and no specific investment sites are known.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Luciano Campelo Bornholdt (GSURR)
Maman-Sani Issa (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The project triggers OP/BP 4.01 because of the feasibility
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                studies under subcomponent 1.1 and the SMEs' activities
supported through the FCC (a matching grant facility) of
subcomponent 2.2. The environmental impacts of these
activities are expected to be site specific and not
unprecedented. I and the project is classified category B.
The project uses a negative list and any activities that
could be categorized as "A" will be ineligible. The
implementation sites of eligible sub-projects are not
known. Therefore, an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) and draft feasibility
study TORs have been prepared, consulted upon, and
disclosed in country and at the World Bank's Infoshop. In
addition, the project will finance the preparation, approval
and dissemination of the Tourism sector Strategic
Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) to
contribute fostering sustainable tourism and inclusive
green growth in the country.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           The project will not finance any activity that threatens
4.04                                 natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           The project will not finance activities related to forest
exploitation, harvesting, or direct or indirect forest
degradation.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           The project will not finance acquisition, transport, storage
and/or use pesticides and chemicals.
Physical Cultural       Yes          The project will finance SME activities through the FCC
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 as well as a series of studies to identify small and
medium-sized infrastructure, which when implemented,
could have impacts on physical cultural resources.
Feasibility studies will only be done for infrastructure
investments that are aligned with the safeguard policies
triggered in this project and not for investments classified
as category A. In the case of feasibility studies, the TOR
for the studies will seek to ensure that relevant issues are
taken into account. Furthermore any ESIAs/EMPs that
prepared under the ESMF will have to include chance find
Page 6 of 10


﻿procedures.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           There are no indigenous people in the project areas.
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes        The project will finance SME activities through the FCC;
OP/BP 4.12                           however, any activities that may involve taking of land is
ineligible for funding from FCC. Furthermore, the project
will finance a series of studies to identify small and
medium-sized infrastructure, whichwhen implemented
could require involuntary resettlement. Feasibility studies
will only be done for infrastructure that are aligned with
the safeguard policies triggered in this project and not for
investments classified as category A. In the case of
feasibility studies, the TOR for the studies will ensure that
relevant social issues are taken into account in conducting
the studies in a manner that reflects the principles of Bank
safeguards. If the feasibility studies identify feasible
investments, then the detailed technical designs will
prepare a resettlement action plan in accordance with the
Resettlement Policy Framework that has been prepared
and disclosed.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation
4.37                                 of dam or activities associated to existing dam.
Projects on International  No        The project will not finance activities that will affect with
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 international watercourses; either in terms of water uptake
or discharge of pollutants.
Projects in Disputed    No           The project intervention areas are not under dispute.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
U
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
a         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is category B with no expected sensitive diverse or unprecedented negative
environmental and social impact. Conversely, SMEs' initiatives supported under component 2 will
contribute to job creation, integrate sustainability in the tourism value chain and promote
environmental labeling in the tourism sector. The overall environmental and social impact is
expected to be positive.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Not applicable.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not applicable.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Page 7 of 10


﻿assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project has been classified category B due to the expected low to moderate magnitude of the
potential negative environmental and social impacts associated to the activities supported through
the matching grant fund (the FCC) in subcomponent 2.2 and the feasibility studies and technical
designs supported under subcomponent 1.1. The project triggers OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental
Assessment, OP/BP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources and OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary
O
Resettlement. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) including draft
TORs for a feasibility study, and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been prepared,
consulted upon on April 2nd, 2015, and disclosed in-country on April 24th, 2015 and at the Bank
Infoshop on April 29th, 2015, to guide the identification and management of potential
environmental and social impacts.
Under subcomponent 1.1, the project will not finance any actual infrastructure work, but only
studies to identify future works that would offer the best return and the lowest impact. As
indicated in the ESMF, feasibility studies financed under subcomponent 1.1 will only be done for
infrastructure investments that are aligned with the safeguard policies triggered in CTD-1 and not
for investments classified as category A. In the case of feasibility studies, the TOR for the studies
will ensure that relevant environmental and social issues are taken into account in conducting the
studies in a manner that reflects the principles of Bank safeguards. These TOR will require No
Objection from the World Bank. Furthermore, the ESMF and RPF that have been prepared for the
project will guide the preparation of RAPs and EISAs as may be needed.
In the case of subcomponent 2.2, the ESMF provides a set of criteria which serve as an "exclusion
list" that aims at filtering the SMEs proposals prior their processing through the screening
procedure. Activities that require involuntary resettlement will be ineligible. The screening
procedure and tools include: (i) categorization of the sub-project; (ii) environmental work (ESIA,
stand-alone ESMP, simple mitigation measures) and permit issuance; (iii) integration of mitigation
measures and clauses in sub-project design and implementation; (iv) monitoring and evaluation of
compliance. This due diligence will be under the responsibility of the FCC Facilitator, with the
O
technical support of a part - time environmental and social safeguard specialist, and the business
advisors. All the stakeholders will benefit from capacity building activities (training, mentoring) to
help them adequately carry out their due diligence with regards to the safeguards implementation.
Further, the project (CTD1) will finance the preparation and adoption of a Strategic Environmental
and Social Assessment (SESA) of the tourism sector to help (i) the mainstreaming of green growth
and sustainability objectives and in the sector, thereby promoting sustainable tourism in the
country, and (ii) inform further environmental and social assessments of specific investments in
the sector.
The country has a comprehensive institutional and regulatory framework to sustain acceptable
implementation of the project safeguard documents. The DGA is fairly familiar with the Bank
safeguard policies requirements. However, the project will provide training and technical support
to the coordination unit and the key players of this domain.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Apart from municipalities and local communities, which will host the SMEs' investments, the
other stakeholders include the General Directorate of Environment (GDE), General Directorate of
Tourism (GDT), General Directorate of Industry and Commerce (GDIC), SpecialProjects
Page 8 of 10


﻿Management Unit (UGPE), Cabo Verde Investments (CVI), Institute for the Management of
Quality and Intellectual Property (IMQIP), Chamber of Commerce, Industry and Services of
Sotavento Islands (CCISSI), Agency for Corporate Development and Innovation (ACDI), Tour
Operators, private sector, extended service providers in the tourism industry. Consultations were
O
held on the ESMF report on April 2, 2015, and on the RPF on April 24, 2015.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              24-Apr-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           29-Apr-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Cabo Verde                                               24-Apr-2015
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              24-Apr-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           29-Apr-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Cabo Verde                                               24-Apr-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  No[X]     NA
report?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Page 9 of 10


﻿Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Andres F. Garcia,Julian Casal,Penelope Demetra Fidas
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)             Date: 01-May-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: John F. Speakman (PMGR)              Date: 01-May-2015
Manager:
Page 10 of 10


