                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC20136

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Sep-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Serbia                 Project ID: P162032
                            Project Name:
                            Team Leader(s): Iwona Warzecha,Aleksandar Crnomarkovic
                            Estimated Date 15-Nov-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:                             Lending        IPF
                                                                       Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    1.7513516          Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:         0
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs                                          1.7513516
                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project➢❨ s development objective is to support strengthening public sector accounting and
                           financial reporting with ultimate aim to improve decision making, management of budget resources,
                           effective use of assets, managing liabilities, managing financial performance, transparency for
                           citizens and sovereign debt investors, measurement of financial performance and its comparability
                           with EUcountries, by gradual transition to accrual accounting and financial reporting, by building
                           capacity of the system through trainingand education, instituting appropriate legislative framework
                           and assisting the government in strategizing needed developments of information systems.
                           C. Project Description
                           Concept
                           The project aims to support accounting and financial reporting reform actions presented in the
                           government➢❨ s PFM Reform Program 2016-2020 through a SECO financed and World Bank
                           administered TF. The project is planned to be hybrid including Recipient-Executed Trust Fund to
                           finance project activities; and Bank Executed Trust Fund to appraise and supervise these project and
                           activities, as well as to finance knowledge work for Report on the Enhancement of Public Financial
                           Reporting. The Treasury Administration will act as overall implementing entity in charge of
                           technical aspects of project implementation for Recipient Executed part through a designated team of
                           staff, while fiduciary support in financial management and procurement will be provided by
                         Centralized Fiduciary Unit (CFU) within the Ministry of Finance which will be established by
                         October 2016 with the role of providing fiduciary support to all World Bank supported projects in
                         Serbia. Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established with the role of overall project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         coordination, review of implementation progress and providing advice with regard to project
                         implementation. The ToR for the PSC will be developed prior to start of the project and the PSC
                         members will include representatives of all key stakeholders in financial reporting reform, such as
                         the Treasury, selected representatives of budget users, the MoF, the SAI and Academia. The Project
                         Concept Note has been prepared in collaboration with SECO.

                         The scoping mission meetings with relevant institutions revealed that reform will have to address a
                         number of challenges. This includes a lack of capacity in finance departments across central and
                         general government institutions and a lack of integrated IT system of interface, with different IT
                         solutions applied across public sector entities. Finally the legislative framework suffers from
                         weaknesses which created an ambiguous situation with regard to application of financial reporting
                         standards. The project design and objectives target to address those challenges and support
                         implementation of the reform, while mitigating identified risks in the process.

                         DESCRIPTION
                         The TA project will be built on the work done by IMF consultant and provide support to
                         implementation of the Roadmap through three main components: (i) enhancement of the
                         institutional, legal, regulatory, and methodology framework for public sector accounting and
                         financial reporting, (ii) capacity building, professional education and training in public sector
                         accounting, (iii) technical assistance supporting implementation of IT systems needed for proper
                         implementation of accrual based accounting standards.

                         Component 1. Enhancement of the institutional, legal, regulatory, and methodology framework for
                         public sector accounting and financial reporting.

                         Aligning legislative, regulatory and methodological framework with accrual financial reporting is a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         key pillar of financial reporting reform. This component would require changes in the legislation,
                         potentially starting with making current legislative framework consistent and fully aligned with cash
                         basis standards, and continuing with aligning the framework gradually with accrual based financial
                         reporting requirements. This will involve changes to Law on Budget System and accompanying by-
                         laws; and possibly preparing a separate Law of Budget Accounting. In addition the project will
                         support the development of by-laws to reflect the new Chart of Accounts, financial reporting
                         requirements, as well as methodological guidance and manuals for application of the Standards.

                         Subcomponent 1: Public Sector Accounting Review
                         Work in this area should be initiated with an assessment of the current situation on public accounting
                         in practice. This will be done through a gap analysis comparing national accounting standards
                         against IPSAS using the World Bank➢❨ s standardized toolkit (Report on the Enhancement of Public
                         Financial Reporting REPF). The REPF analysis will rely on findings of the gap analysis conducted
                         by the IMF wherever possible, but will need to extend the scope as for example the IMF➢❨ s
                         analysis compared national standards against cash-basis IPSAS only. Dedicated sections on
                         institutional and IT capacities will also be incorporated into the REPF as additional outputs, in view
                         of the activities foreseen in this area. The results of the REPF analysis will be incorporated into a
                         roadmap implementation for the further development of national accounting legislation and
                         guidance, taking into account Serbia➢❨ s needs and capacity constraints. It will also have impact on
                         determining details of project activities as the ToRs will take into account the REPF findings in
                         determining the exact scope and expected outputs from specific activities. REPF analysis will also
                         provide a general overview in the areas such as professional capacities of accounting staff in public
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sector entities.

                         Subcomponent 2: Development of public accounting legal and regulatory framework
                         Under this component, the project will support the enactment of accrual based accounting standards
                         and the development of key principles driving the promulgation of public sector accounting
                         standards. This component encompasses the following activities: i) development and enactment of
                         national accounting legislation to allow phased implementation and ii) national level accounting
                         policy and implementation guidance. The development of practical guidance materials, i.e. a
                         ➢❨ national guide/ handbook➢❨ has proven to be a key success factor in other countries and
                         contexts and will support gradual Roadmap transition to accrual accounting as defined in the PFM
                         Reform Program and the roadmap developed with support of the IMF.

                         Subcomponent 3: Review and amendment of the national chart of accounts
                         This component includes (i) the review and (ii) if needed the amendment of the national chart of
                         accounts in order to be fully in line with accrual accounting/ budgeting and statistical needs.

                         Subcomponent 4: Gradual implementation of international accepted accounting standards in line with
                         IPSAS
                         The project envisages a gradual implementation of the new accounting standards outlined in the
                         Roadmap to Accrual Accounting. A phased approach will focus firstly on key fiscal priorities,
                         implementation of cash flow, basic presentation elements/ requirements. Basic financial presentation
                         would then be amended by more specific standards for financial assets and liabilities, including
                         leasing contracts and service concession arrangements as well as standards for fixed asset
                         accounting. As new IPSAS emerge during the project the Roadmap should be systematically
                         reviewed and revised if necessary. The recently established Accounting Commission is expected
                         provide advice and proposals to the Minister of Finance relating to the implementation of new or
Public Disclosure Copy




                         amended IPSAS. The Commission was established in late 2015 and includes members of the
                         Treasury, the MoF, the SAI, the NBS and Faculty of Economics. However, the Commission met only
                         on two occasions and it has not yet been fully functional. The project will provide specialist advice
                         to the Commission in order to support it in fulfilling its mandate.
                         The PFM Reform Program and more detailed Roadmap for transition to accrual accounting envisage
                         as the final objective implementation of IPSAS standards in whole of public sector in 2020 (time
                         table could be moved to a later deadline for a year or two). The project will support implementation
                         of IPSAS standards, but will prioritize to target primarily budget beneficiaries which are most
                         significant in size and budget, or in its relative strategic importance. In this sense, the project will
                         target primarily central government level, with the focus being on direct budget beneficiaries (DBBs
                         - around 200), organizations of mandatory social insurance and selected number of largest indirect
                         budget beneficiaries (IBBs). It should be noted that DBBs consolidate financial statements of its
                         IBBs, and in that sense a mechanism of limited review of adequacy of financial statements of IBBs
                         should be instituted through regulation . This would ensure increased use of applied knowledge
                         gained through the project. The implementation of the new accounting standards comprises both, the
                         technical roll-out as well as training in the use of the new standards, including the preparation and
                         interpretation of financial information produced by the new standards. Specific training needs will be
                         identified at the outset of the component 2.
                         The readiness of the IT system to allow full achievement of the project results will be set as a
                         disbursement condition for the part of the allocation amounting to CHF 250 thousand in component
                         1.4: Gradual implementation of international accepted accounting standards in line with IPSAS.

                         Component 2. Capacity building, professional education and training in public sector accounting
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Capacity building and training will be one of the main pre-requisites for successful implementation
                         of reform plans and transition to accrual accounting and financial reporting. This area is therefore
                         identified as one of the vital components of the project. It would include training in IPSAS for
                         accounting practitioners in the Treasury and users of public funds prioritized as indicated in above
                         paragraph, as well as the State Audit Institution and other relevant entities. The component would
                         also target training to raise awareness of decision makers on the purpose and importance of financial
                         reporting. One of the first tasks of this component will be training needs analysis as integral part of
                         the REPF assessment, which will include a stock take of public sector accountants, their
                         qualifications, gender, training needs and the development of a training program to enhance skillsets.
                         There should be an option to formalize education for accounting practitioners through instituting
                         formal certification process leading to Certified Accountants in Public Sector. This option will be
                         confirmed during project preparation and after exploring potential modalities with regard to available
                         programs and implementing institutions. The programs such as Chartered Institute of Public
                         Financial Accountants (CIPFA) will be considered. In-country professional bodies which could be
                         considered to implement the certification program include Chamber of Authorized Auditors,
                         Association of Accountants and Auditors, while HR Management Unit of the government has a role
                         in education and training programs in the public sector.

                         Subcomponent 1: Review of the current status and preparation of the training needs analysis
                         A training needs analysis will make an integral part of the REPF assessment and it is expected to
                         provide description of the current status and qualifications of the accounting professionals in the
                         public sector institutions and in particular in those prioritized by the project as described above.
                         Based on the general findings of the REPF assessment a supplemental closer analysis will be
                         conducted in order to identify training needs based on capacity gaps, define the target audience, and
                         recommendations on the design and implementation of accounting training (e.g. train the trainer
Public Disclosure Copy




                         approach, or more direct training at the early phase, modality face-to-face vs online etc), together
                         with recommendation on curriculum design and a timetable for implementation. Such assessment is
                         expected to involve experts in the area of accounting education, thus adding value to a more general
                         findings of the REPF assessment.

                         Subcomponent 2: Technical capacity building at the Treasury Administration
                         Accounting and financial reporting is in the responsibility of the MoF➢❨ s Treasury Administration .
                         Internal capacity at all units involved needs to be strengthened. The main objective of the
                         subcomponent is development of the sustainable and strong internal capacity including technical and
                         leadership skills amongst selected core staff of the Treasury Administration which would be involved
                         in designing and implementation of the accounting reform and overall public sector accounting
                         framework. The subcomponent is also designed to increase capacity of Serbian policy makers to
                         participate in European and international arenas both to gather international experience and to
                         participate in public consultations or dialogue on public sector accounting matters. The proposed
                         activities will include provision of: (i) tailor made and focused technical assistance on selected expert
                         areas; (ii) support in preparation or review of documents which regulates accounting methodology,
                         monitoring, quality assurance; (iii) advanced and professional level training for policy makers in
                         specific areas including e.g. consolidation, financial instruments (securities, guaranties), valuation of
                         assets; (iv) knowledge sharing events (e.g. in form of community of practice, study visits, regional
                         learning events) to learn from other countries experience in selected areas; (v) on the job training
                         including hand holding assistance in area of public sector accounting in line with the Roadmap.
                         This activity includes two main parts (i) defining institutional responsibilities for the accounting
                         reform including selection of the reform champions, and (ii) setting up a work plan for the involved
Public Disclosure Copy




                         institutions and champions including required support together with its delivery framework. Support
                         will also be provided to the Treasury staff in leading the reform and address change management
                         within the Treasury and other budget institutions.

                         Subcomponent 3: Development of professional accounting skills and a sustainable public sector
                         accounting training mechanism
                         This component aims at the development of professional accounting skills in a sustainable and
                         continuous manner. There is a need to develop the professional accounting skills of finance staff in
                         budget entities, as there is no tradition of modern accounting profession and regular training in the
                         public sector. Certification for public accounting does not exist on regular basis and is not a job
                         requirement.
                         In order to improve the professional accounting skills and develop local training capacities, the
                         following activities are foreseen under this component: i) training of a selected number of financial
                         officers to obtain an internationally recognized professional qualification certificate, ii) training of a
                         sufficient number of trainers through the train of trainers approach (ToT), and iii) institutionalization
                         of a local training and certification program at a local institution to ensure the sustainability of the
                         development of public accounting skills in the long-run. Cooperation with the professional training
                         centres could be envisaged. A dedicated working group, comprising all relevant stakeholders, can be
                         established to define the content of the training and certification program and prepare the relevant
                         legal framework to regulate training for public accountants. Particular attention will be paid to the
                         fact that Center of Excellence in Finance (CEF) from Slovenia is going to implement a public
                         accounting training program. Under this program 25 people, mainly from the Treasury, will be
                         prepared and trained to receive an internationally recognized certificate for public accountants
                         (CIPFA). Discussions with the CEF and Treasury have taken place to ensure exchange of
                         information and coordination throughout the implementation of this program in order to avoid any
                         potential overlaps.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3. Technical assistance supporting implementation of IT systems needed for proper
                         implementation of accrual based accounting standards.

                         IT infrastructure needs to be further upgraded in order to support implementation of accrual
                         accounting and financial reporting. Existing Treasury General Ledger does not support accrual
                         accounting since the present data flow allow only for recording cash transactions. The Treasury
                         Administration is currently introducing certain upgrades to its FMIS in line with the PFM Reform
                         Program 2016-2020, such as to extend the coverage of the FMIS system to including the IBBs in the
                         accounting and reporting framework. It also plans to develop and fund a roll out plan to ensure that
                         IBBs have sufficient ICT hardware, training and oversight arrangements to ensure that they are able
                         to meet the PFM requirements and gather required information into the system. However, further
                         upgrades targeting specifically accounting and financial reporting modules (SAP) will be needed.
                         Recent Functional Review of the MoF conducted by the World Bank identified ICT enhancements
                         within the core MoF and its Administrations as one of the reform priorities. Follow up activity is
                         being prepared by the World Bank in order to initiate ICT reforms, and it is intended to target
                         integration of IT systems of various parts of the MoF, instituting IT solutions for improved flow of
                         information, but also upgrades of IT systems in certain parts of the MoF and its Administrations.
                         That activity will primarily target the core MoF, Tax, Customs, Treasury and Public Debt
                         Administrations. It is not targeting the accounting and financial reporting, but the component 3 will
                           draw on the synergies and cost effectiveness derived from links with that activity and other tasks
                           targeting improvements of IT systems in order to coordinate the efforts, avoid duplication, and
                           promote coherent application of IT strategy at the country level.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The accounting reform will necessarily require existing FMIS in Treasury Administration to be
                           upgraded or new system to be purchased to timely support subsequent and gradual implementation of
                           the Roadmap actions. The targeted FMIS capacity should meet requirements for preparation of
                           financial reporting, budgetary and fiscal reporting in line with the relevant standards including
                           IPSAS, GFS, ESA 2010, and also meet managerial accounting and financial management purposes.
                           Prerequisite feature of the updated FMIS shall also include consolidation functionality with ultimate
                           goal to cover whole Public Sector. Investment in IT will include both software and hardware. Since
                           SECO funds are not intended to finance investment in IT infrastructure, and the amount needed for
                           that could surpass the amount of project funds, only technical assistance as the starting point to IT
                           reform is envisaged to be included in IT component of the project. This would comprise of: (i)
                           preparation of IT master plan including stock taking of the current systems in place, detailing gap
                           analysis and IT investment options needed to support the reform and in line with overall IT strategy
                           for public sector, and (ii) preparing technical specifications for required IT systems. The IT master
                           plan and technical specifications should take into account outputs from the other ICT initiatives at
                           the country or sectoral level and the other project components including inter alia chart of accounts,
                           accounting policies, methodologies, internal control and work flow processes, cross cutting
                           reporting requirements flowing from budgetary and statistical reporting to extent possible. To extend
                           possible IT master plan should make relevant links with other existing of planned systems,
                           assessment of the ICT capabilities of the main entities, and preparation of a roadmap and timeline to
                           address issues or gaps including options for solutions together with costing implications. Since
                           adequacy of IT systems is necessary pre-requisite for success of the financial reporting reform, the
                           government will formally commit to funding the IT investment from other sources and confirm such
                           intention in an official manner detailing a plan how those funds will be secured. The confirmation
                           will be in a form a formal letter from the Minister of Finance or Memorandum of Understanding
                           between the MoF, World Bank and SECO. In either case, presentation of available source of funding
                           and financing plan for the IT reform will make an integral part of such document. The formal
Public Disclosure Copy




                           agreement will be obtained early on, in the next stage of the project preparation and prior to signing
                           Administration Agreement and Grant Agreement. The readiness of the IT system to allow for full
                           achievement of the project results will be set as disbursement condition for the part of the
                           allocation amounting to CHF 250 thousand in component 1.4: Gradual implementation of
                           international accepted accounting standards in line with IPSAS.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/                 No
                           BP 4.01
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                  No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                           No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09                      No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/              No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
                           Projects on International                    No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP             No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Iwona Warzecha,Aleksandar Crnomarkovic
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Nina Chee (SA)                                               Date: 29-Sep-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Soukeyna Kane (PMGR)                                         Date: 12-Oct-2016
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
