                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA20399
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Oct-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 31-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                               Project ID:    P154283
                            Project Name:      Shared Infrastructure for Solar Parks (P154283)
                            Task Team          Surbhi Goyal,Amit Jain,Gevorg Sargsyan
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          14-Oct-2016              Estimated     21-Dec-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEE06                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       200.00           Total Bank Financing:     75.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                                     100.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                         75.00
                              Clean Technology Fund                                                                         25.00
                              Total                                                                                        200.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed development objective is "to increase solar generation capacity through the
                           establishment of large-scale solar parks in the country". This will contribute to achievement of the
                           GoI's target of installing 100 GW solar power by 2022.
                            3. Project Description
                           1. The direct beneficiaries of the project are: (i) the people in the participating states and elsewhere
                           who will benefit from the electricity generated in the solar parks, and, (ii) electricity distribution


                                                                        Page 1 of 12
                         companies (Discoms), which will be able to meet their Renewable Purchase Obligations (RPO) with
                         electricity generated from the solar parks.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. The project is not financing new household connections or last mile connectivity and is not
                         directly contributing to expanding access in the participating states. However, the project is likely to
                         have a significant indirect contribution to expansion of access to electricity, as a result of the
                         increased availability of electricity in all project states, wherein the investments supported under the
                         project are expected to lead to increased availability of supply to existing customers, which may
                         enable utilities to connect and serve new customers. The indirect beneficiaries are the people who
                         will benefit through: (i) avoided local environmental damage costs, and, (ii) additional growth and
                         productivity due to improvements in the state's power supply situation.

                         3.   The following indicators will be used to track progress in achieving the PDO:
                              -- Investment mobilized in solar projects in solar parks under the project (US$ Million)
                              -- Installed solar generation capacity (Megawatts, MW)
                              -- Avoided Green House Gas (GHG) emissions (thousand tons)

                         4. The project will support the implementation of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy's
                         (MNRE) Solar Park Scheme which promotes large-scale grid-connected solar power generation
                         plants in the country. MNRE will receive the funds under the project and will on-lend, at pre-defined
                         terms, the funds to the selected states agencies, which will then deploy these funds to procure shared
                         infrastructure goods and services required for development of the respective solar park. MNRE will
                         be the nodal project implementing agency (PIA) supervising the works of the state PIA's.

                         5. The project is expected to demonstrate important economies of scale in solar generation, push
                         down equipment and transaction costs, and also increase efficiency while further reducing unit costs
                         of solar power. The ability to offer lower user charges (with a blend of International Bank for
                         Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and Clean Technology Fund (CTF) to construct the shared
                         infrastructure facilities in the solar parks) for access to the "plug and play" benefits of the solar park
Public Disclosure Copy




                         business model, is expected to translate into lower power tariffs quoted by the solar generators.

                         6.   The project will have the following two components:

                         Component 1: Shared Infrastructure for Solar Parks (estimated total project cost: US$198 million of
                         which IBRD Loan: US$75 million and CTF Loan: US$23 million):

                         7. This will cover financing for shared infrastructure (or common facilities) such as security,
                         access roads, water supply and drainage, telecommunications, and pooling stations (with 220/66/33
                         kilovolts (kV) or as may be suitable switchyard and respective transformers) inside the solar parks
                         and transmission lines connecting these internal pooling stations to the external 400/220 kV sub-
                         station at the periphery of the park, feeding to the national/state grid. The scope of investments
                         covered under this project will depend on the particular modality and approach adopted by the state
                         for developing the solar parks. While some states intend to provide a full range of infrastructure
                         services to the selected private sector developers, others intend to only provide pooling stations to
                         facilitate internal evacuation. In most solar parks, solar project developers will be responsible for the
                         interconnection of each plot in the solar park with pooling stations through suitable voltage
                         underground or overhead cable.

                         8.      The project will finance a number of solar parks included in the Solar Park Scheme of

                                                                       Page 2 of 12
                         MNRE. The first two solar parks are located in the state of Madhya Pradesh (MP), specifically in
                         Rewa District with the expected installed capacity of 750 MW and in Mandsaur District with the
                         expected installed capacity of 250 MW. The estimated investment cost for shared infrastructure in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         these parks is US$62 million (of which the project is funding US$31 million). The state is in process
                         of securing land for Rewa solar park (90 percent land already purchased) while it's entirely
                         government land for Mandsaur solar park with no encumbrance and no encroachment. Procurement
                         for shared infrastructure for both the solar parks has been initiated and is in advanced stages. In
                         addition, a number of other solar parks have been tentatively identified by MNRE for funding under
                         this project. MNRE will continue to identify more solar parks during the project implementation
                         period. The project follows a framework approach allowing new states to join the project, if they
                         meet the 'Readiness Criteria' that include key milestones and deliverables identified as prerequisites,
                         including techno-economic, site clearance, fiduciary, environmental, and social requirements. This
                         will ensure that the proposed future investments are ready for execution and meet the necessary due
                         diligence requirements of the World Bank. As soon as the funds under this loan are committed, the
                         Bank will be ready to provide additional financing to support the Phase II of the project.

                         Component 2: Technical Assistance (Estimated Cost: US$2 million of which CTF Grant: US$2
                         million):

                         9. This component will provide capacity building support to MNRE and to the state PIA, which
                         will include SNA and/or JV companies, across the participating states. Although the role and
                         mandate of state PIA's is growing rapidly to meet the GoI's ambitious renewable ene rgy targets, they
                         have limited capacity and experience to deliver on these mandates. This support will be
                               -- To build c ore competencies, such as, human resource, business planning, project monitoring,
                         procurement and contract management, financial management, safeguards, information technology
                         (IT), etc.
                               -- To develop a pipeline of solar park projects through supporti ng pre-feasibility studies, site
                         identification and techno-commercial studies, etc.
                               -- To assist MNRE and state PIA's to identify additional areas where assistance may be required
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to implement its responsibilities to successfully achieve solar energy targets by 2022.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         10.      The location of all solar parks to be financed under the project is not known. The first set of
                         solar parks, to be financed under this project, has been identified at Rewa and Mandsaur districts in
                         the state of MP. Rewa Ultra Mega Solar Limited (RUMSL) is the state PIA in MP. Additional parks
                         may also be identified in MP as well as other states during the course of project implementation.
                         Additional salient features of sites with key environmental and social aspects will be added as the
                         locations are finally firmed up.

                         11. Rewa Solar Park. The project is located approximately 30 km east of Rewa town. The affected
                         villages include Badwar, Barsaita Desh, Barsaita Pahad, Etar Pahad and Ramnagar Pahad. The
                         project area comprises of open scrub wastelands with small parcels of land in between the site where
                         agriculture is practised, located at an elevation of 370-400 m above mean sea level (amsl). Species of
                         plants like Acacia nilotica (babul), Albizzia amara (Krishna Siris), Butea monosperma (Tesu),
                         Diospyros melanoxylon (tendu), Holoptelea integrifolia (chilbil) were observed to be speckled on the
                         land identified for the project. Most of the land area in the study area is rock-strewn with limited
                         potential for agriculture due to rain fed irrigation. The project area has an undulating slope with local
                         population owning land parcels at both the slope and plain areas. A seasonal channel of rain fed


                                                                       Page 3 of 12
                         water, which flows for few months, locally termed as 'Aahri Nala', was observed to be present within
                         the site limits, which crosses land parcels in the east to west direction and drains into Ban Sagar
                         Lake, located at a distance of 30 km in the south-west direction from the project site. Areas under the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         slope terrain (falling within the project area) depended solely upon rainfall in order to undertake
                         agricultural activities. During this one crop cycle, the local population sowed mainly rice or wheat.
                         The location of the site favours the development of a solar park, as the site is situated in a rural
                         setting with a suitable topography, it is located near existing grid connections and the area has a high
                         level of solar insolation location. The drainage slopes of the park area shall be protected so as to
                         allow natural drainage for downstream user communities.

                         12. Mandsaur Solar Park: Mandsaur district is part of the Malwa region, and is bounded by
                         Neemuch District to the north, Rajasthan state to the east and west, and Ratlam District to the south.
                         The total land under the project admeasuring about 553 hectares (Ha) fall under the jurisdiction of
                         two revenue villages, namely, Runija (134.19 Ha out of total village land area of 2290 Ha) and
                         uninhabited village Gujarkhedi (419.44 Ha out of total village land area of 626 Ha). Out of the total
                         land under the project, land measuring an area of about 545 Ha was under the ownership and
                         possession of government, which has transferred the land in favor of the state PIA. About 8 Ha of
                         land - 2 Ha in Runija and 6 Ha in Gujarkhedi village - has been allotted to scheduled caste (SC)
                         families (3 families in Runija and 6 families in Gujarkhedi). There is no habilitation in the immediate
                         surroundings within 500 m of the project boundary. The proposed site has relatively flat topography
                         with only minor undulations that would require minimal preparation. The boundary envisaged under
                         the detailed project report (DPR) and the actual demarcation of the sites for the five blocks under
                         implementation has undergone certain changes. This is on account of exclusion of forest area (Block
                         P3) and the demand for exclusion of water bodies falling within the project boundaries by the local
                         villagers. On verification of forest and project boundaries through ground truthing and checking of
                         revenue record, it is found that there is no forest land falling within the project boundary. Four
                         cultural properties have been identified within 10 km of the project site including 2 Jain teerths
                         located outside the village boundaries, one Dwarkadheesh temple in Runija Village which is outside
                         the project boundary. There is one hill top within the project boundary where few stones with saffron
Public Disclosure Copy




                         colour painted over them were found. The proposed site is relatively undulating and acts as a
                         catchment area for the downstream water bodies being used by the local villagers. The state PIA
                         (RUMSL)/ Developer has proposed adequate number of cross drainage structures in its site layout
                         plans ensuring minimal or no adverse impacts on the natural drainage of the area. The preliminary
                         findings of the due diligence study currently being undertaken reveals that the proposed site
                         boundaries have been modified to exclude critical environmental areas like major water bodies and
                         areas with topographic constraints (slope / shadow areas). 33/220 kV pooling substation of the solar
                         park will be connected to 400 kV Mandsaur- Sitamau substation and is anticipated to come under the
                         green corridor by March/April 2018. The alignment for the same is currently being finalized. Prima
                         facie it appears the alignment shall not cross any major critical environmental features except river
                         Chambal. It is assumed that an environment impact assessment (EIA) study will be undertaken
                         separately for the transmission line.

                         13.      The environmental and social impacts will not only be confined to the solar parks area, but
                         also for the transmission line that will evacuate the power to the grid as an associate facility. Some of
                         these transmission lines will be integral to the project and will be financed under the proposed project
                         but not all. It would be made sure that associated infrastructures such as evacuation/transmission
                         lines and others shall adhere to environmental management practices and do not cause any impact.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                                                                      Page 4 of 12
                           Gaurav D. Joshi (GEN06)
                           Parthapriya Ghosh (GSU06)
                           Pyush Dogra (GEN06)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental               Yes        The installation of the shared infrastructure is expected to
                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01                  have some impacts on the environment. Hence, an
                                                                   Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                                   (ESMF) has been prepared to ensure that the requirements
                                                                   of the policy are met.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      Yes        While none of the current candidate locations are known
                            4.04                                   Natural Habitats, the ESMF has the necessary guidance
                                                                   for subsequently identified sub-projects to comply with
                                                                   the policy, if and when required.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          Yes        No large scale deforestation is currently expected, but the
                                                                   policy requirements are built into the guidance in the
                                                                   ESMF in case future sites are identified involving such
                                                                   activities.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No

                            Physical Cultural           Yes        This policy is triggered as there is a possibility that
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                   cultural properties could be affected by project activities.
                                                                   In addition, the construction of the park facilities could
                                                                   also involve chance-finds. The ESMF addresses these
                                                                   issues and has guidance for procedure to be adopted for
                                                                   such situations.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      Yes        Baseline studies shows presence of indigenous
Public Disclosure Copy




                            BP 4.10                                community in both the candidate park areas. Hence OP
                                                                   4.10 on indigenous peoples has been triggered.
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes           OP 4.12 has been triggered as there could be acquisition
                            OP/BP 4.12                             of private land as all sub-projects are not known yet.
                                                                   Private land is being purchased in Rewa through mutual
                                                                   consent (90 percent completed) and in Mandsaur entire
                                                                   land belong to government with no encroachment. This
                                                                   may not be the case in all sub-project sites
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify


                                                                     Page 5 of 12
                         and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                         Social:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         14.   There is no significant adverse social impact in both the identified sub-project sites.

                         15. The proposed Rewa solar park in MP is spread over 1500 Ha in 5 villages of Gurh Tehsil in
                         Rewa District. In Rewa, the private land identified for the project comprises of 164.231 Ha, owned
                         by a total of 309 titleholders. The private land is being purchased through mutual consent. The
                         Consent Land Purchase Policy approved by the State Government of MP on November 12, 2014,
                         has been adopted to procure the private land for the project. So far approximately 90 percent of the
                         private land owners have provided their consent voluntarily for sale of their land for the proposed
                         project. The land parcels under the project area are unirrigated and depend upon rainfall. However,
                         in the last three years, due to the decrease in rainfall, these land parcels have been left barren and
                         unused. Majority of farmers are now engaged as non-agriculture labour. So far, only 22.5 percent
                         of 5467.26 Ha of government land (falling in all five project villages) has been transferred to the
                         project. A part of government land transferred to project was used by livestock owners for
                         seasonal grazing for which an alternate grazing land is available within 500 metres of the proposed
                         project area. As the government land delineated for the project was barren and rocky and not used
                         for any activities (either as an income source or shelter) by the local communities, there would be
                         no impact on non-titleholders. The ESIA which also includes Social Management Plan, has been
                         disclosed locally and in Bank's InfoShop. The 400 kV transmission line to evacuate power from
                         solar park to the nearest substation, which is approximately 60 km away, is being laid by
                         POWERGRID. Since this line is not being funded by the Bank, it will be considered as an
                         associated activity. As POWERGRID's environmental and social policy and procedures (ESPP) is
                         accepted under 'use of borrower's system' by the Bank under the ongoing 'Fifth Power System
                         Development Project', the review of adherence to ESPP, while implementing this line by
                         POWERGRID, will be done by the Bank.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         16. In Mandsaur solar park, the total land under the project admeasuring about 553 Ha fall
                         under the jurisdiction of two revenue villages, namely, Runija (134.19 Ha out of total village land
                         area of 2290 Ha) and Uninhabited Village Gujarkhedi (419.44 Ha out of total village land area of
                         626 Ha ). Out of the total land under the project, land measuring an area of about 545 Ha was
                         under the ownership and possession of government, which has transferred the land in favor of the
                         implementing agency. About 8 Ha of land - 2 Ha in Runija and 6 Ha in Gujarkhedi village has
                         been allotted to SC families (3 families in Runija and 6 families in Gujarkhedi). There is no
                         habilitation in the immediate surroundings within 500 m of the project boundary. RUMSL had
                         already initiated the process of compensation and Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R&R)
                         assistance for land procurement. The land for which compensation and R&R assistance process
                         has been initiated is not being used by the project affected people (PAP) for agricultural use and is
                         lying vacant. Based on the Census Data and also from the consultation with the local people, it is
                         found that there is no tribal population in these villages. However, scheduled caste (SC)
                         population in the Runija Village account for nearly 25 percent of the total population. These have
                         been allotted land in and around villages. In addition to agriculture, the people from this
                         community are also working as construction labour, where they also commute to the construction
                         projects with families. Four cultural properties have been identified within 10 km of the project
                         site including 2 Jain teerths located outside the village boundaries, one Dwarkadheesh temple in
                         Runija Village which is outside the project boundary. There is one hill top within the project
                         boundary where few stones with saffron colour painted over them were found. The issue was


                                                                    Page 6 of 12
                          discussed with the local community and it has been reported that the place is known as
                          Devnarayan where in the old times a Gandharvsen from the surrounding area used to come by
                          horse for worshipping and that's how people call it Ghodarundi, however, very few people go there
Public Disclosure Copy




                          as there is no temple or any idol of God at that location as verified during the field visit. The
                          employment for the local villagers emerged as one of the key issues during consultation with the
                          people and the elected representatives. The project will have positive social impacts with enhanced
                          employment opportunities for the local population during the construction as well as operational
                          phase of the project.

                          Environment:

                          17. On the environmental issues, important issues include land use change and impact of the
                          project activities on areas outside the site boundaries -- due to removal of vegetation and trees,
                          channelization and leveling/grading of land for installation of plant and its ancillary infrastructure,
                          potential hindrance to movement of fauna across the site, impacts on health safety of the workers
                          during installation of the plant infrastructure, safety of nearby community during the period of
                          construction. During the post-commissioning or operation phase, potential impacts will arise when
                          waste material is generated from the plants -- either solar panels that cannot be used in the plant, or
                          chemicals like transformer oil need to be handled and disposed safely.

                          18. Handling of solar panels, especially those that cannot be used either due to damage or end-
                          of-life, is a potential long term issue. Currently, regulation covering this area is evolving and final
                          form will determine the extent of additional effort needed to comply with these.

                           19. Land-use change is a long-term issue associated with the project activities. There are few
                           other significant impacts of the project activities
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           None.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           20. The project while selecting the sites ensured that there is a minimum adverse social and
                           environmental impacts. The land identified for Rewa is majority public land whereas in Mandsaur
                           it is entirely public land. At both the places, land is barren and unproductive. The sites do not
                           include any habitation, thus avoiding involuntary resettlement. For inclusion of new sites under the
                           project, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared for
                           safeguard management that also requires analyzing various alternatives for each sub-project while
                           carrying out respective Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA). As per the agreed
                           policies of ESMF, these ESIAs will be reviewed and cleared by the Bank prior to approving the
                           sub-projects for implementation.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           21. ESIA of Rewa solar park was carried out by an independent consultant. In agreement with
                           the borrower, due diligence of Mandsaur solar park has been carried out and gaps have been
                           identified. An action plan to address the gaps will be prepared and agreed upon with the borrower.

                          22.    Considering the significance of project interventions and since other sub-project locations


                                                                      Page 7 of 12
                          are unknown, the borrower through independent consultants has prepared an Environmental and
                          Social Profile of candidate sites which formed the basis for the preparation of Environmental and
                          Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the project. ESMF was drafted based on Rewa solar
Public Disclosure Copy




                          park's ESIA and has been disclosed locally. The ESMF details out the policies, procedures and
                          institutional responsibilities for assessing and managing the potential environmental and social
                          risks and impacts that may come up throughout the project cycle of various sub-projects, and is
                          intended for use and application by the agencies responsible for the execution of the investment
                          sub-projects to be implemented under this facility.

                          23. The ESMF provides detailed guidance, and sample terms of reference and reporting
                          structures, for compliance. Each sub-project, to be included at a later date under the project, will
                          be screened to identify further risk mitigation measures, including the preparation of a detailed
                          Environmental Management Plans (EMP) and Social Impact Assessment and/or Rehabilitation
                          Action Plan (RAP) as applicable. The ESMF will be applied to all investments under this facility.
                          ESMF further includes the following: (1) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF); (2) an
                          Indigenous Peoples Plan Framework (IPPF); (3) a Gender Development Framework (GDF); (4) an
                          integrated Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM); (5) Specific procedures on public consultation
                          and disclosure; (6) Environmental and Social Monitoring Arrangements covering selection,
                          appraisal and implementation of sub-projects; and (7) a plan to augment institutional capacity of
                          the implementing agencies to manage environmental and social issues in the project. A negative
                          list describing activities / types of locations that will not be supported has been included to avoid
                          significant impacts on sensitive environmental receptors like recognized protected areas for
                          wildlife.

                          24. The project will be implemented by MNRE through Joint Venture (JV) companies to be set
                          up specifically for implementation in each of the sub-project. The mandate and primary function
                          of these agencies will be to generate and transmit solar power through a mix of regulatory,
                          institutional and financial tools. These agencies generally do not employ environmental and social
                          professionals. Hence, generally there is a skill gap and lack of capacity for addressing
Public Disclosure Copy




                          environmental and social safeguard issues and will depend on the relevant state departments to fill
                          up the gap.

                           25. The ESMF has identified areas and opportunities for augmenting the capacity to manage the
                           social and environmental issues. Staffing plan include need to hire environment and social
                           specialist for environmental management and social development at both JV level as well as with
                           the developer. These staffing, training and continuing skill development programs, other resources
                           that will be required for effective management of the environmental and social issues, and the
                           required budget had been recommended and described in the ESMF. All investment specific
                           ESIA, EMP and RAP/IPP will be reviewed and cleared by the Bank before bids are invited
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           26. The ESMF and its specific instruments provide guidelines and procedures for further
                           consultations during implementation, in particular in defining and designing sub-projects and
                           specific works. The consultation frameworks provide systematic guidance to address potential
                           risks and to enhance quality, targeting, and benefits to the communities. Dialogue and disclosure
                           actions during the assessment and execution process of a sub-project are designed to ensure that
                           those stakeholders, irrespective of whether they benefit from or are adversely affected by the
                           project interventions, are well informed and are able participate in the decision-making process.


                                                                    Page 8 of 12
                           The ESMF procedures consider the level of environmental and social risk of each sub-project in
                           allocating time and resources to be dedicated for stakeholder consultation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           27. Local level consultations were carried out in both the candidate sites focusing on specific
                           issues related to the potential sub-projects and environmental and social issues associated with
                           such sub-projects. Over 150 participants from potential project cities participated in these
                           consultations and provided inputs to the preparation of ESMF. ESMF for the project and ESIA of
                           Rewa solar park have been disclosed locally and also on the Bank's Infoshop.

                           28. Consultation being a continuous process, the ESMF's disclosure on the websites of new JVs
                           will continue during project implementation. The EMPs, RAPs and IPPs for individual sub-
                           projects will also be disclosed as per the principles and procedures of described in the ESMF. The
                           draft EMPs and RAPs will be disclosed, followed by discussion with the affected community
                           (including any individual adversely impacted by such intervention); and final EMP and RAP will
                           be prepared and disclosed only after incorporating reasonable and relevant suggestions from the
                           communities in the design of the investments. The copies of the EMPs and RAPs will be placed at
                           the offices of developers, district magistrate and contractors' offices, enabling easy access to any
                           community or individual. The executive summary of EIAs and RAPs for all particular investments
                           will be translated in local language and will be placed in the office of local self-government body
                           (village panchayat) of the village(s) where the sub-project is located. The list of affected persons,
                           if any, will be pasted on the conspicuous place in all the affected towns/villages, usually at the
                           prominent roadside entry to the investment site.

                           29. In Rewa as part of ESIA process, project carried out local level consultations in the project
                           affected villages. The objectives of the local level consultations were to inform the affected
                           persons and indirectly affected population about the project and to understand their perception
                           about the project in terms of both negative and positive impacts. About 70 individuals participated
                           in the consultations. In Mandsaur also, consultations were carried out in the project affected
                           villages during due diligence process. Further consultations will be carried out during ESIA.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           30. Disclosure: In-country disclosure of the ESMF was completed on February 2, 2016 (http://
                           mnre.gov.in/file-manager/UserFiles/Draft-ESMF.pdf). The ESMF was disclosed in Bank's
                           InfoShop on February 11, 2016

                           31. The ESIA of Rewa Solar Park was disclosed in country on August 19, 2016 (http://mpnred.
                           com/Images/pdf/Final_%20ESA%20Rewa%20Solar%20Report_19_08_16_%20WB.pdf) and in
                           the Bank's InfoShop on September 1, 2016
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         05-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      10-Feb-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                               02-Feb-2016
                           Comments:


                                                                     Page 9 of 12
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   11-Feb-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            02-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   11-Feb-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            02-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?

                                                                     Page 10 of 12
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS



                                                                        Page 11 of 12
                         Task Team Leader(s): Name: Surbhi Goyal,Amit Jain,Gevorg Sargsyan
                         Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Practice Manager/    Name: Demetrios Papathanasiou (PMGR)       Date: 23-Oct-2016
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              Page 12 of 12
