                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                         APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA17452
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Nov-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Nov-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Cambodia                           Project ID:   P153591
                            Project Name:      KH - Livelihood Enhancement and Association of the Poor Project (LEAP)
                                               (P153591)
                            Task Team          Mudita Chamroeun,Erik Caldwell Johnson
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       05-Dec-2016                 Estimated     23-Feb-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GFA02                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        20.00           Total Bank Financing:     20.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                20.00
                              Total                                                                                      20.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve access of poor and vulnerable households
                           in selected communities to financial services, opportunities for generating income, and small-scale
                           infrastructure, and to provide immediate and effective response in case of an eligible crisis or
                           emergency.
                            3. Project Description
                           Project Components.


                                                                       Page 1 of 16
                         The project would be implemented in two distinct contextual and institutional environments of the
                         mostly rural Siem Reap Province and the rapidly urbanizing Phnom Penh Capital. The core project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         activities would be separated into rural and urban components, each would have specific
                         geographical scope and implementation arrangements which are customized to each unique setting
                         while maintaining consistency and continuity across the project.

                         Component 1: Improving Livelihoods for Rural Poor and Vulnerable Households (US$14.00
                         million). This component aims to address the needs of the IDPoor and vulnerable households in the
                         47 communes in Siem Reap Province through a demand driven approach. Activities would include:
                         (a) conduct of organizational and capacity building support to SHGs, producers groups and
                         agricultural cooperatives; (b) provision of seed grants for their livelihood sub-projects; (c) conduct of
                         market studies; (d) extension of business support services; and (e) skills development training; (f)
                         employment support services; and (g) provision of productive infrastructure to improve livelihood
                         and increase productivity. As the predominant sources of income for these rural poor households are
                         from agriculture, livestock and fisheries, the project would leverage the technical support of the
                         Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry (MAFF) and other technical service providers.
                         Drawing from the experience of the pilot project, this component would be implemented by the Siem
                         Reap Provincial Government through the following sub-components:

                         Sub-Component 1.1: Building and Strengthening Institutions of the Rural Poor. This would support
                         the formation and strengthening of beneficiaries mainly through SHGs, producers groups or
                         agricultural cooperatives, and enable their members to engage jointly or individually in productive
                         activities. Capacity building assistance would include basic financial literacy (savings, budgeting,
                         etc.), micro-enterprise/business planning, basic accounting and record keeping, good governance
                         practices, and access to financial services. Furthermore, groups and individual farmers would be
                         assisted and strengthened through facilitation of market linkages, technical assistance and capacity
                         building for producers to increase access to assets, skills, technology and markets.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         To supplement the initial savings generated by the SHGs, the project would provide seed grants (US
                         $1,000-1,500 per SHG) for on-lending to members to implement their Micro Investment Plans
                         (MIPs). The grant would be for SHGs that have previous experience in implementing and managing
                         microenterprises/livelihood activities. Where commune-level federations of SHGs, producers groups,
                         agricultural cooperatives, etc. are existing and qualified to be financial intermediaries, the project
                         would provide them with Community Livelihood Investment Fund (CLIF) grant of up to US$30,000
                         per federation. This grant would be for on-lending to member groups that are not qualified to access
                         credit from MFIs and other formal banking institutions. The project would also link the federations
                         with financial institutions to access additional/bigger credit funds and other financial services.

                         MAFF as well as NGOs/other service providers would be tapped to provide technical assistance and
                         market linkage services to the beneficiary groups and where warranted, to individuals. These would
                         focus on improving production efficiency, productivity enhancement, access to technology
                         extension, logistics infrastructure and information services, and building pro-poor market systems for
                         small and marginal producers that would enable them to participate in higher value chains.

                         Sub-Component 1.2: Enhancing Skills and Employment Opportunities for the Rural Poor. Taking
                         advantage of the opportunities offered by enterprises connected to the rapidly growing tourism
                         industry in Siem Reap, this sub-component would provide a complementary livelihood pathway to
                         self-help group, value-chain and market access support under Sub-component 1.1. The Project would

                                                                       Page 2 of 16
                         invest in the development of beneficiary skills (particularly unemployed youth and women from poor
                         households) and the ability to obtain new or improved wage employment. Activities would include:
                         (a) local labor market surveys and training provider certification; (b) beneficiary targeting and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         selection; (c) employability training and career counseling; (d) voucher provision and skills training;
                         (e) job placement and employment support.

                         Sub-Component 1.3: Improving Basic Services and Community Infrastructure. This would support
                         small-scale community infrastructure and services to respond to the priority needs of the
                         beneficiaries and contribute to their productivity and income generating potential. Investments would
                         include storage or small warehouses, water supply and sanitation facilities, small-scale irrigation
                         schemes, community access roads, and better on-farm water management practices, among others.
                         The identification of priority needs would follow the existing annual participatory identification and
                         planning process that provides opportunity for the beneficiaries to advocate their investment
                         priorities and ensure that these are included in the Commune Investment Plan (CIP). The project
                         have borrowed and adopted the relevant safeguard procedures and forms, in the Commune/Sangkat
                         Fund Project Implementation Manual (CSF-PIM) to be used in the preparation and implementation
                         of community sub-projects. The CSF-PIM has been used by Communes for small-scale investments
                         for several years.

                         Component 2: Improving Livelihoods for Urban Poor and Vulnerable Households (US$4.00
                         million). This component aims to address the needs of the IDPoor and vulnerable households in 13
                         Sangkats in Phnom Penh Capital through a demand driven approach. Activities would include: (a)
                         skills development training; (b) employment support services; and (c) provision of productive
                         infrastructure to improve livelihood and increase productivity. Direct financial services support
                         would not be provided but where appropriate, linkages to existing financial institutions and services
                         would be facilitated. This component would be implemented by the Phnom Penh Capital Hall
                         through the following sub-components:

                         Sub-Component 2.1: Enhancing Skills and Employment Opportunities for the Urban Poor. Since
Public Disclosure Copy




                         there are many training and employment programs in Phnom Penh and a wider range of employment
                         opportunities, support would be provided to more secure, satisfying and higher earning jobs. As in
                         the case of the rural component, this sub-component would provide a complementary livelihood
                         pathway to beneficiaries. The Project would invest in the development of beneficiary skills
                         (particularly unemployed youth and women from poor households) and the ability to obtain new or
                         improved wage employment. Activities would include: (a) local labor market surveys and training
                         provider certification; (b) beneficiary targeting and selection; (c) employability training and career
                         counseling; (d) voucher provision and skills training; (e) job placement and employment support.
                         Some of the livelihood priorities identified during project preparation include food preparation and
                         processing, handicraft making, retailing/ buy and sell, off-site garment factory sewing/dressmaking,
                         cosmetology services, tuktuk operation, etc. Beneficiaries, particularly youth, would be encouraged
                         to consider a wider range of career opportunities and skills where there is high demand and potential
                         for career development.

                         Sub-Component 2.2: Improving Basic Services and Community Infrastructure. This would follow
                         the same process as in Sub-Component 1.3, drawing on use of the C/SF-PIM. To ensure that the sub-
                         projects would most benefit the poor and vulnerable households such as the UPCs, the community
                         planning meetings would include both IDPoor households and representatives of the UPCs. The
                         types of infrastructure facilities that would be funded include but not limited to drainage system,
                         community road/footpath, water supply and sanitation system, and street lighting. These community

                                                                      Page 3 of 16
                         infrastructure investments have been identified in the UPC needs assessment survey and are expected
                         to increase the beneficiaries' productivity, resilience and ability to adapt to natural and economic
                         shocks.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Project Management (US$2.00 million). T his component would support the overall
                         implementation, supervision and coordination of the project at the national, provincial, district/Khan,
                         commune/Sangkat, and village/community levels, including: (a) social and environmental safeguard
                         risk management; (b) procurement planning and contracts management; (c) financial management,
                         disbursement and audit; and (d) monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and communication.

                         Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response (US$0.00 million). This component, with an initial
                         allocation of zero dollar, is part of the World Bank (IDA) support to an immediate response
                         mechanism in Cambodia. This would allow the reallocation of a portion of undisbursed balance of
                         the project for recovery and reconstruction support following a formal government request in the
                         event of an eligible emergency.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Siem Reap province is surrounded by five other provinces, in the north is Otdar Meanchey, in the
                         west is Banteay Meanchey, in the east are Preah Vihear and Kampong Thom, and in the south the
                         province borders partly with Battambang and partly with Tonle Sap Lake. In Siem Reap, the project
                         covers 47 communes in 9 districts (Angkor Thom, Chi Kraeng, Kralanh, Prasat Bakong, Puok, Svay
                         Leu, Siem Reap, Srei Snam and Sotr Nikum) that did not receive support from the TSSD Project. 42
                         communes did not receive any TSSD support and will be fully covered by LEAP; 5 communes that
                         did not receive full coverage by TSSD but have above average poverty levels and will have
                         respective villages included in LEAP. From the Environmental Watch-list, 20 targeted communes
                         have some plan to keep some areas as reserved or protected area. Six Communes are covered by
                         natural forest more than 50% of the total area. Twenty-Four targeted communes have natural forest
                         or wet land covered area more than 10% of the total area. The Project will not finance activities for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         protected areas management.

                         The Tonle Sap Lake is the most prominent feature on the map of Cambodia a huge dumbbell-shaped
                         body of water stretching across the northwest of the country. In the wet season, the lake is one of the
                         largest freshwater lakes in Asia, swelling to an expansive 12,000 km2. During the dry season, its
                         shrinks to as small as 2,500 km2. The Tonle Sap Lake drains into the Tonle Sap River, which
                         meanders southeast, eventually merging with the Mekong River at the Chaktomouk confluence at
                         Phnom Penh. During the wet season a unique hydrologic phenomenon causes the Tonle Sap River to
                         reverse direction, filling the lake. During this period, the Mekong River runoff from the monsoon
                         rains backs up into the Tonle Sap at the point where the rivers meet at Chaktomouk, forcing the
                         waters of the Tonle Sap River back into the lake. The inflow from Tonle Sap River and other rivers
                         around Tonle Sap Lake expands the area of the lake more than five-fold, inundating the surrounding
                         forested floodplain and supporting an extraordinarily rich and diverse eco-system.

                         In Phnom Penh, 13 out of 105 Sangkats (the urban equivalent of a commune) will be included in the
                         project. As the project is primarily intended to benefit IDPoor households, IDPoor data was the
                         primary source for selecting target Sangkats. Unfortunately, at the time of project preparation,
                         IDPoor data was only available for 8 out of the 12 Khans (the urban equivalent of a district). For
                         these Khans, the Sangkats with the highest total number of IDPoor households were selected as
                         targets. One Sangkat was selected from each Khan with up to 10 Sangkats; 2 Sangkats were selected


                                                                      Page 4 of 16
                         form the Khans with more than 10 Sangkats. For the remaining 4 Khans, Phnom Penh Capital (PPC)
                         maintains a list of "urban poor communities," communities which largely include informal
                         settlements and are deficient of public services and infrastructure. One of these Khans, Prampi
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Makara, has no urban poor communities. For the remaining 3 Khans, one Sangkat with the highest
                         number of urban poor community households was selected for the project. None of the targeted
                         communes are included in the Environmental Watch-List.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Bunlong Leng (GEN2B)
                         Juan Martinez (GSU02)
                         Waraporn Hirunwatsiri (GEN2B)
                         6. Safeguard Policies     Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental             Yes           LEAP pilot project in Siem Reap, activities included
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                   livestock raising, vegetable farming, rice cultivation,
                                                                 fishery, rice mill, home business including home-made
                                                                 bakery and noodles, and fertilizer shop, etc. The
                                                                 environmental impacts from the pilot activities are
                                                                 summarized as nuisance such as air/odor quality from rice
                                                                 mill and livestock raising, soil erosion, usage of
                                                                 pesticides, fertilizers, and/or chemical substances,
                                                                 pollution of surface water and ground water resulting
                                                                 from the rural livelihoods interventions. These activities
                                                                 will be continued to support under Component 1
                                                                 (implemented in Siem Reap) of this project except the
                                                                 pesticide-based agriculture. Organic farming and non-
                                                                 pesticide based agriculture will be promoted under this
                                                                 LEAP project in line with MAFF policy instead. Each
                                                                 Self Help Group (SHG) will receive sub-loan not more
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 than 1000-1500 USD. In addition, public, small-scale
                                                                 infrastructure will also be financed such as water supply,
                                                                 sewerage system, irrigation system, and road
                                                                 maintenance. No major road construction activities or
                                                                 large-scale infrastructure will be supported.

                                                                 Component 2 (implemented in Phnom Penh), will not
                                                                 include SHG activities, but rather focus on building skills
                                                                 for improved employment and wage earning. Public,
                                                                 small-scale infrastructure such as drainage systems, as
                                                                 well as water supply and sanitation, street lighting and
                                                                 community road/footpath maintenance will be financed
                                                                 under this component.

                                                                 As part of the project preparation, a Social Analysis (SA),
                                                                 including several studies were conducted from 2009 to
                                                                 2015, including extensive community consultations. A
                                                                 Social Assessment as well as a five-chapter, Lead Social
                                                                 Development Specialist Report were conducted in late



                                                                   Page 5 of 16
                                                        2009/early 2010 and August 2010/January 2011,
                                                        respectively. The lessons from a pilot in 6 communes
                                                        were documented in project reporting and an impact
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        evaluation was undertaken in 2012 with a specific focus
                                                        on measuring changes in social capital. As the target
                                                        project area was expanded to include Phnom Penh, an
                                                        Urban Poor Community Needs Assessment was
                                                        conducted in 2015. Finally, as a complement to these
                                                        social analysis instruments, community consultations
                                                        have been reactivated in Siem Reap and expanded to
                                                        include Phnom Penh. Key findings from these studies and
                                                        consultations include: need for special efforts to include
                                                        female-headed HHs, handicapped and elderly; interest in
                                                        job/employment skills; risk of migration when agriculture
                                                        income is constrained; and the difficulty of maintaining
                                                        young, fragile self-help groups.

                                                        Given the small-scale nature of these activities the
                                                        impacts are minor, temporary, site specific and
                                                        manageable through project design and construction
                                                        management techniques are integrated into the ESMF.
                                                        The design and construction management techniques are
                                                        adapted from the relevant procedures and formats of the
                                                        2009 Commune/Sangkat Fund Project Implementation
                                                        Manual (PIM). No significant or irreversible impacts are
                                                        foreseen as a result of Project activities.

                                                        These separate, Environment Assessment and social
                                                        Analysis report prepared in 2010 for the pilot phase was
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        used to prepare this ESMF. The ESMF has included
                                                        technical environmental guidelines, ECOP or /Good
                                                        construction management Techniques or Good
                                                        engineering practices and simple mitigation measures for
                                                        small-scale infrastructure and RPF to ensure that the
                                                        environmental and social impacts are appropriately
                                                        addressed and in compliance with the national
                                                        environmental regulations and the World Bank Safeguard
                                                        Policies prior to project appraisal.

                                                        The poorest and most vulnerable households in selected
                                                        communes/Sangkats in Siem Reap and Phnom Penh, in
                                                        particular, those identified as IDPoor 1 and 2 will be
                                                        supported through Self-Help Groups, producer groups,
                                                        and agricultural cooperatives, as well as through skills-
                                                        building and job placement support. They could also
                                                        benefit from infrastructure improvements (i.e. water
                                                        supply or community road repair.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   The Project as well as proposed sub-projects in Siem


                                                         Page 6 of 16
                         4.04                         Reap will finance SHGs and producer groups to invest in
                                                      agriculture, livestock and fisheries activities as well as
                                                      small-scale productive infrastructure (e.g. post-harvest
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                      processing equipment, storage facilities and poultry shed,
                                                      etc.). These activities may affect natural habitats, wet
                                                      land, protected areas and their biodiversity in the project
                                                      area in particular Tonle Sap Lake from wastewater
                                                      discharge from livestock raising activity and utilization of
                                                      illegal fishing gears and methods, etc. These impacts are
                                                      minor and site specific and it can be mitigated through the
                                                      application of Technical Environmental Guidelines
                                                      included in the ESMF. The Technical Environmental
                                                      Guidelines require or prefer local or endemic species over
                                                      exotic/introduced species for aquaculture as a
                                                      management measure.

                                                      An environmental screening checklist and guidelines for
                                                      the animal raising and fish farming sub-project as part of
                                                      the ESMF was prepared to prevent project activities from
                                                      impacting Tonle Sap Lake, any known natural habitats,
                                                      wet land and protected area. The ESMF also includes a
                                                      screening procedure to (i) determine whether the proposed
                                                      facilities are in a critical or non-critical natural habitat and
                                                      (ii) avoid any significant conversion or degradation of any
                                                      critical natural habitat.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36     No    From the Environment Watch-List, there are six target
                                                      communes with 50% of the area covered by natural forest.
                                                      There are 24 communes that have 10% of natural forest or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                      wet land coverage area. However, it is unlikely that poor
                                                      communes in Siem Reap will propose forest plantation
                                                      sub-projects due to limitation of land. An environmental
                                                      screening checklist was prepared as part of the ESMF and
                                                      will be used during project implementation to prevent
                                                      project activities from negatively impacting any known
                                                      forest in the targeted area, therefore, it is anticipated that
                                                      there will be no significant impact on the forest from
                                                      project activities.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No   The livelihood investment activities will not involve
                                                      either utilization or production of any pesticides. Thus,
                                                      OP.4.09 policy on pest management is not triggered.
                                                      Based on LEAP Pilot experience in Cambodia, it is
                                                      unlikely that farmers will use chemical fertilizer and
                                                      prohibited insecticide/herbicide due to its high cost. In
                                                      addition, organic farming and non-pesticide based
                                                      agriculture will be promoted under this project in line
                                                      with MAFF policies aiming to supply organic
                                                      commodities and pesticide-free products to five stars hotel
                                                      and restaurant in Siem Reap. This will increase value of


                                                       Page 7 of 16
                                                        agricultural products to the high end market. Therefore, it
                                                        is unlikely that this policy will be triggered.
                         Physical Cultural        Yes   The Project will finance infrastructure investments in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           Siem Reap, a province of major cultural heritage. These
                                                        small civil works may impact on unknown, physical
                                                        cultural resources as defined by OP/BP 4.11. Any
                                                        potential impacts on cultural and religious sites will be
                                                        identified and avoided during sub-project design. A
                                                        chance find procedure, of physical cultural resources is
                                                        also included as part of the ESMF. All civil work
                                                        contracts will be included the following chance find
                                                        procedure clause:

                                                        If the Contractor discovers archeological sites, historical
                                                        sites, remains and objects, including graveyards and/or
                                                        individual graves during the civil work, the Contractor
                                                        shall:

                                                        - Stop the construction activities in the area of the chance
                                                        find;
                                                        - Delineate the discovered site or area;
                                                        - Secure the site to prevent any damage or loss of
                                                        removable objects; and
                                                        - Notify "any cultural heritage" found to the government
                                                        implementing agency or the relevant provincial Culture
                                                        Department as early as possible.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No    The 2009 National Policy on Indigenous Peoples' Rights
                         BP 4.10                        recognizes 24 ethnic, indigenous groups in Cambodia.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        These groups are primarily located in the six northeastern
                                                        upland provinces of Rattanakiri, Mondulkiri, Stung Treng,
                                                        Kratie, Preah Vihear, and Kampong Thom.

                                                        As part of project preparation, a screening exercise was
                                                        conducted in the proposed target area in Siem Reap where
                                                        the project will be implemented to determine the presence
                                                        of Indigenous Peoples. There are only two communes in
                                                        Siem Reap identified as having indigenous people, the
                                                        Kuoy indigenous group, located in Srae Noy and Khun
                                                        Ream communes. However, this is not one of the project
                                                        target communes. Recent information provided by
                                                        indigenous peoples organization shows that there are
                                                        individual indigenous families present only in one village
                                                        in Phnom Penh identified as having indigenous people,
                                                        the Pors indigenous group, located in Kean Klaing
                                                        village, Preak Leap Sangkat, and Chrouy Changvar Khan,
                                                        Phnom Penh Capital specifically in the project area;
                                                        however these families are mixed with other Khmer
                                                        families and they do not practice any collective


                                                         Page 8 of 16
                                                           attachment to the project area and they do not have any
                                                           customary cultural, economic, social, or political
                                                           institutions. For this reasons the Bank's policy on
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           indigenous peoples (OP 4.10) is not triggered, however
                                                           the Project will use participatory community informed
                                                           consultation to ensure access of poor and vulnerable
                                                           households located in the project area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes      The Project is embedded in a community driven
                         OP/BP 4.12                        development model whereby local communities/groups of
                                                           households make decisions regarding the types of
                                                           interventions they seek. For example, small pieces of land
                                                           may need to be acquired for the benefit of communities
                                                           for income generating purposes such as small grain
                                                           storage, cattle sheds, as well as basic public infrastructure
                                                           such as the upgrading of roads, water supply, irrigation
                                                           and drainage systems. Based on previous experience with
                                                           small-scale infrastructure investments through the
                                                           Commune/Sangkat Fund, it is highly unlikely, but not
                                                           impossible that compensation for land may be required.
                                                           Landowners usually contribute their land via voluntary
                                                           donation. The RPF includes a protocol for voluntary land
                                                           donations. While there are several natural protected areas
                                                           in Siem Reap, impacts are expected to be minor and site
                                                           specific, and can be mitigated through the application of
                                                           Technical Environmental Guidelines included in the
                                                           ESMF. Activities for protected areas management and
                                                           access restrictions will not be supported under the project.
                                                           For these reasons OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           policy has been triggered.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP        No    The Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 is not triggered as the
                         4.37                              project will finance the construction of only small or
                                                           medium-sized water gates (not more than 1.5 m. in
                                                           height) or sub- irrigation systems that connect to the main
                                                           irrigation system and will regulate the flow of small
                                                           creaks. The small water gate size that is permitted under
                                                           the Commune Sangkat Fund in Siem Reap and Phnom
                                                           Penh, or their connections with the main irrigation system
                                                           and water diversion/intake structures, are not categorized
                                                           as dams. They are largely box culverts with a water gate
                                                           that is 1.5 m in height and 2 m in width. The diameter of
                                                           pipe culverts is about 0.6-1.2 m.
                         Projects on International   Yes   International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 is triggered as
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50              project activities may extract water that links to the
                                                           tributaries of the Mekong. However, based on experience
                                                           with previous and existing small-scale irrigation and
                                                           water supply projects in the two target provinces of Siem
                                                           Reap and in Phnom Penh, and their relationship to the
                                                           Mekong River, it is not expected that the small works to


                                                            Page 9 of 16
                         be proposed by target communities will appreciably affect
                         the quantity or quality of water flows in the Mekong
                         River and/or its tributaries.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In Siem Reap, the activities to be implemented will
                         involve minor rehabilitation or alterations of existing
                         irrigation infrastructure. While subproject investments
                         will be demand-driven, rehabilitation of third tier on-farm
                         distribution canals in the 47 target communes, is
                         estimated to cover approximately 2,000 hectares, allowing
                         more efficient on-farm water distribution from the
                         existing primary and secondary irrigation canals.
                         According to the Provincial Irrigation Department, this
                         coverage may entail use of an indicative mean annual
                         water volume of approximately 23 million cubic meters
                         from the existing primary irrigation system. This would
                         be equivalent to 0.038 percent of the mean annual reverse
                         flow volume in Tonle Sap Lake of more than 60 billion
                         cubic meters.

                         There is very little agricultural activity taking place in
                         Phnom Penh, so irrigation rehabilitation is not planned
                         under the project. There may, however, be demand for
                         extension of the existing piped water system to connect
                         communities that are not currently connected. Two such
                         communities have been identified through the project's
                         needs assessment within the 13 target Sangkats. These
                         two communities are relying on wells, which are either
                         not of good quality (Svay Chek Thmey) or volume (Toul
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sambo). Both communities mostly buy drinking water
                         from trucks which extract water from the Mekong River
                         or its tributaries. Toul Sambo (Prey Veng Sangkat) has
                         about 400 households. Svay Chek Thmey (Kok Roka
                         Sangkat) has about 100 households. Estimating water
                         consumption per household at 1 m3/household/day
                         (average consumption per household with 5 family
                         members and 200 l/capita/day) for 500 households comes
                         to approximately 500 m3 per day. There are two water
                         treatment plants that would likely be the source of water
                         supply for the two identified communities and their
                         combined average daily production is 190,000 m3 per
                         day. As such, the additional supply from the two
                         identified communities would amount to around 0.003%
                         of the production of these water treatment plants (Phum
                         Preak and Chamkar Mon). Total water treatment capacity
                         across Phnom Penh currently totals 590 190,000 m3 per
                         day, of which the additional two communities would
                         comprise 0.0008%.


                         Page 10 of 16
                                                                      As the project activities both in Phnom Penh (urban poor)
                                                                      and Siem Reap (Rural poor) will not adversely change the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      quality or quantity of water flows of Mekong River, the
                                                                      project is exempted from the requirement of riparian
                                                                      notification.
                            Projects in Disputed       No             No project activities are planned in disputed areas.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environmental Safeguards. The project's development activities such as livelihood improvement
                              and small-scale infrastructure services would have minimal environmental and social impacts
                              during implementation. Their typical environmental and social impacts would be temporary,
                              reversible, and manageable through the Technical Environmental Guidelines (TEGs), and
                              Environmental code of practice (ECOP) or construction management techniques described in the
                              ESMF. The Environmental code of practice (ECOP) or construction management techniques are
                              adapted from the Commune/Sangkat Fund Project Implementation Manual, which is currently
                              utilized by the Commune/Sangkat Councilors for small-scale infrastructure investments
                              throughout the country. This Manual has been applied and improved under previous projects
                              funded by multilateral donors including the World Bank (for example, the Rural Infrastructure and
                              Local Government Project), ADB and UNCDF. No significant and/or irreversible impacts are
                              foreseen.

                             Social Safeguards. As a part of project preparation, a social analysis was conducted comprising
                             several studies in Siem Reap and Phnom Penh, and including participatory consultations at
Public Disclosure Copy




                             different levels in both urban and rural areas where the project will be implemented. This analysis
                             also incorporated lessons learned from the pilot intervention, including the findings of an impact
                             evaluation. An Urban Poor Community Needs Assessment was conducted in 2015 to better
                             understand the unique context and challenges faced in poor communities in Phnom Penh. This
                             Assessment has also provided valuable information for the project design and specifically for the
                             preparation of the RPF by understanding the infrastructure and livelihood needs of target
                             communities.

                             The social analysis has focused on social context, diversity and gender; an analysis of formal as
                             well as informal institutions in the project areas, including stakeholder analysis; a structured
                             consultation and participation framework and process; and a comprehensive analysis of social risk,
                             both risks potentially emanating from the project and risks to the project from the social context.
                             The Project will primarily benefit the poorest and most vulnerable households in selected
                             communes/Sangkats in Siem Reap and Phnom Penh, in particular, those identified as IDPoor 1
                             and 2. Support will be provided as and where appropriate through Self-Help Groups, producer
                             groups, and agricultural cooperatives, as well as through skills-building and job placement
                             support, as well as through the demand-driven provision of small-scale economic infrastructure.

                             Potentially all commune/Sangkat or village households could benefit from infrastructure
                             improvements (i.e. water supply or community road repair), but preference will be given to


                                                                      Page 11 of 16
                          priorities expressed by poor households, so these households should benefit most.

                          Social risk/impacts. The social analysis identified the following key benefits and risks for target
Public Disclosure Copy




                          communities:

                          - Positive benefits to urban and rural people including poor people, women, and marginalized
                          groups, in the form of improved livelihoods, access to critical infrastructure and services, as well
                          as income generation activities;
                          - Small pieces of land may need to be acquired for the benefit of communities for income
                          generating purposes such as small grain storage, cattle sheds, as well as basic public infrastructure
                          such as the upgrading of roads, water supply, irrigation and drainage systems; mainly in the form
                          of voluntary land donation. Physical displacement will be prohibited under the project. However,
                          sub-projects may result in economic displacement. The numbers would be small if indeed it will
                          occur;
                          - Inadequate consultations with vulnerable groups including women and other marginalized
                          groups; and
                          - Ineffective mechanisms for benefit targeting and information dissemination leading to exclusion
                          of marginalized groups from project benefits.

                          A number of institutional risks have also been identified, including:

                          - Lack of resources both human and financial;
                          - Weak planning, implementation and monitoring;
                          - Different capacities among different agencies (urban and rural);
                          - Difficulties in applying environmental and social frameworks;
                          - Communication problems.

                          The social analysis also identified that there are five protected areas located in Siem Reap
                          Province, and two of them are located in the project area (Angkor Protected Landscape area and
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Phnom Kulen National Park). The Project, as well as proposed sub-projects in Siem Reap, will
                          finance SHGs and producer groups to invest in agriculture, livestock and fisheries activities as
                          well as small-scale productive infrastructure (e.g. post-harvest processing equipment, storage
                          facilities and poultry shed, etc.). These activities may affect natural habitats, wet land, protected
                          areas and their biodiversity in the project area in particular Tonle Sap Lake from wastewater
                          discharge from livestock raising activity and utilization of illegal fishing gears and methods, etc.
                          However, these impacts are minor and site specific and it can be mitigated through the application
                          of Technical Environmental Guidelines included in the ESMF. No support and facilitation for
                          access restriction will be financed by the project.

                          For Social Safeguards implementation, since the project is following a community driven
                          approach, and is focusing on small-scale infrastructure services, the Commune/Sangkat Fund
                          Implementation Manual will be used.

                           Overall, risks and opportunities have been very well identified as part of project design and
                           measures to mitigate risks are already included in project components, specifically in Sub-
                           Components 1.1, Building and Strengthening Institutions of the Poor; and Component 1.3 and 2.2,
                           Improving Basic Services and Community Infrastructure
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities


                                                                    Page 12 of 16
                           in the project area:
                           No indirect or cumulative or long-term adverse environmental impacts are foreseen.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impacts.
                           No project alternatives are required.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Environmental safeguards. The clients prepared an ESMF and RPF which include an
                           Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP) or construction management techniques for small-scale
                           infrastructure at commune/Sangkat level and an environmental screening checklist to avoid
                           adverse impacts to any known natural habitats and forests. The ESMF largely adapts the relevant
                           procedures and formats in the Commune/Sangkat Fund Project Implementation Manual, which has
                           been used by other projects funded by the World Bank and ADB. The Manual is also aligned with
                           the requirements of the Bank Environmental Assessment Policy (O.P.4.01).

                          The organizational structure of the project would involve Government oversight by a Project
                          Coordination Office (PCO) located in the Ministry of Interior (MOI) under the General Secretariat
                          of the MOI. The PCO will facilitate reporting and ensure effective internal and external
                          communications. Two Sub-Management Teams (SMTs) located at Siem Reap Province and at
                          Phnom Penh Capital Hall will be responsible for all operations within each province/municipality
                          with the support of local government, district/Khan and commune/Sangkat level professionals,
                          including social and environmental safeguards specialists and facilitators. Due to the
                          predominance of agriculture and fishery-based livelihoods in rural areas, the Ministry of
                          Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF) will have a specified role as a project implementation
                          agency, providing technical assistance to specified SHG, producer groups and ACs, at the request
                          of the SMTs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          The Ministry of Interior, in particular the National Committee for Subnational Democratic
                          Decentralization Secretariat (NCDDS), which it hosts, has experience in safeguards
                          implementation. However, the MOI staff need further support in the procedures for monitoring
                          and recording environment and social safeguard activities. Staff of other implementing agencies
                          also need continued support, specifically during the first year of implementation.

                          The Safeguards Working Group of the National Committee on Decentralized Development
                          (NCDD), Ministry of Interior (MOI), maintains a list of communes/Sangkats on an Environment
                          Watch-List: communes/Sangkats that are located in wetland areas and other protected areas which
                          are sensitive to impacts on the environment. For sub-projects proposed in these communes/
                          Sangkats, the Safeguards Working Group will review the screening done at the commune and
                          provincial level to confirm the potential for environmental impacts and the requirement to conduct
                          an Environmental Analysis.

                          NGOs will play an important role to facilitate sub-project proposal preparation and consultation
                          process. Capacity building and safeguard training will be provided to NGOs to ensure that
                          environmental and social impact are taken into account at the sub-project screening and proposal
                          preparation.

                          Social Safeguards. The RPF establishes principles and procedures to be followed in the case of


                                                                   Page 13 of 16
                           voluntary land donation, and in the unlikely case of land acquisition through compensation. In
                           such instances, the RPF requires the preparation of a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) by the
                           Government for World Bank review and approval. The RAP ensures that any such potential
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impacts are minimized, and that any persons affected by such impacts are provided mutual (ample)
                           opportunity, through provision of compensation or other forms of assistance, to improve or at least
                           restore their incomes and living standards.

                           As in the case of ESMF implementation, actions identified for implementation in the RPF will fall
                           within the overall responsibility of the Ministry of Interior (MoI), which is the executing agency
                           for the project. Activities identified for Component 1 will be implemented by the Siem Reap Sub-
                           Management Team 1 (SMT1 SRP), and Component 2 activities will be implemented by the
                           Phnom Penh Capital Sub-Management Team 2 (SMT2 PPC).

                           Additionally, In Cambodia, the mandate for carrying out land acquisition for public investments
                           has been delegated to the Inter-Ministerial Resettlement Committee (IRC) of MEF. The
                           Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) under the project (if any) will need to be approved by the IRC
                           before submission to the World Bank for review and approval. To achieve the objectives of this
                           Framework and RAP (if any), the operational manual for the project reflects the policy on land
                           acquisition and the roles and responsibilities of the IRC, MoI, Siem Reap and Phnom Penh
                           respective teams. The IRC is a collective entity chaired by the representative of the MEF and
                           composed of representatives from different line ministries such as the MoI (Project Executing
                           Agency), including Siem Reap Province and Phnom Penh Capital (PPC), MAFF (Project Imp
                           lementing Agencies), and Ministry of Land Management, Urban Planning and Construction
                           (MLMUPC). The IRC is the decision making body on resettlement issues involved in government
                           infrastructure projects. The MEF is the permanent Chair of the IRC and represents it for all
                           development projects. The IRC assumes the function of a quasi-regulatory body, ensuring that
                           funds for resettlement are spent properly and that the RP is carried out as intended.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Community residents, Commune Council members and civil society groups in the targeted
                           communes/Sangkats were consulted during implementation of the pilot, and in the period between
                           the close of the pilot and preparation of the current phase, and intensively and comprehensively as
                           part of and during LEAP preparation. Government has assigned safeguard focal points who have
                           received basic environmental and social safeguard training during the project preparation
                           missions. These safeguard focal points will continue receiving support on the disclosure and
                           implementation of safeguard instruments. On 29 September 2016, the Ministry of Interior notified
                           the task team that the safeguard instruments, namely the draft ESMF and the draft RPF, in both
                           Khmer and English, were disclosed on its website at www.interior.gov.kh.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         29-Sep-2016
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      29-Sep-2016
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                    Page 14 of 16
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Cambodia                                                         29-Sep-2016
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      29-Sep-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   29-Sep-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Cambodia                                                         29-Sep-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected



                                                                     Page 15 of 16
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [    ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             livelihoods)

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Mudita Chamroeun,Erik Caldwell Johnson
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                   Date: 11-Nov-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Nathan M. Belete (PMGR)             Date: 13-Nov-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 16 of 16
