INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC14874
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Sep-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Sep-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Kazakhstan                 Project ID:   P153673
Project Name:    Forestry Development Project (P153673)
Task Team        Angela G. Armstrong
Leader(s):
Estimated        12-Apr-2016                Estimated     21-Sep-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEN03                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Forestry (90%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (10%)
Theme(s):        Other environment and natural resources management (80%), Climate change
(20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      50.00             Total Bank Financing:    30.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                         20.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development            30.00
Total                                                            50.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        Yes
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to enhance sustainable environmental rehabilitation and
management of forest lands and associated rangelands in ways that improve livelihoods and secure
global public goods.
C. Project Description
The project has four main components:


﻿Component 1: Improving sustainable forest management (SFM). This component has four sub-
components:
O
i)     Improved Fire Management: This sub-component will further develop and scale up support
for the Forest Fire Control Information System (FFCIS), developed under the FPRP. This state-of-
the-art fire control system, has enhanced the fire-fighting capacity in Semey Ormany improving
detection and reducing response times. Under the Forestry Development Project, this system would
be scaled up in East Kazakhstan and Pavlodar regions, as well as the Akmola Region, supporting
forest fire prevention and suppression on 800,000 hectares of forest. The component would provide
(i) improved facilities for fire prevention and detection, including lookout towers and
communications equipment, and (ii) improved facilities for fire suppression including road
rehabilitation (allowing better access enabling both preventative actions, i.e. cleaning of fire breaks,
and suppression once the fires have started), fire stations equipment, and firefighting vehicles.
ii)    Support for afforestation: This sub-component will mainly scale-up seedling plantings and
expand vegetative cover in the Kyzlorda region, including the amelioration of 40,000 ha in the Dry
Aral Seabed. The component will support the establishment of new forest plantations and will
provide benefits for prevention of erosion and the creation of new habitats for biodiversity.
iii)   Additional SFM interventions: This sub-component will also provide other sustainable forest
management support including a program of thinning and cleaning, as well as the rehabilitation of
gallery forests along the Irtysh River.
iv)    Institutional development: The project will support the evolving institutional needs of the
sector through the provision of specific technical studies and proposals to help create the enabling
environment to support the establishment of a new protected area (State Forest Nature Reserve,
"Aral") covering 472,000 ha in the Dry Aral Seabed, the new PFM approach and also the creation of
the public private partnerships for the fast growing plantations.
o
Component 2: Developing Participatory Forest Management. This component will scale up support
for Participatory Forest Management (PFM). In particular, it will engage communities in forestry
management (e.g., through tenders and forestry social contracts, mainly for planting and maintenance
a       works); and begin the process of creating the enabling political and legal environment for further
PFM development. Through PFM, local people can may be able obtain rights to a share of forest
products in exchange for undertaking specific protection and/or management responsibilities. Forest
resources are especially important for vulnerable households (women-led, poor households), because
these households tend to engage more in subsistence agriculture, including gathering of forest
products for domestic consumption. To improve the quality of the forest, the project may help create
the enabling environment to allow for small scale silvicultural thinning through PFM. Any
production arising would be for local consumption and would be undertaken as part of sustainable
forest management and in accordance with an approved management plan. PFM activities will ensure
adequate participation of women and vulnerable groups, and if inequitable arrangements are found,
opportunities will be sought to address the inequities, e.g., targeting a proportion of PFM contracts to
vulnerable groups and ensuring women's participation in PFM councils.
Component 3: Supporting the establishment of fast growing plantations and shelterbelts. This
component will support:


﻿i)     the establishment of fast growing plantations that would be the basis for developing public-
private partnerships, with an emphasis on increasing job and the potential for further economic
growth. These plantations of poplar and other hardwoods would be established on State Forest Fund
lands, administered by the Forest and Wildlife Committee. It is expected that these established
U       plantations could be an eventual source of raw material to support SMEs in timber processing and/or
wood energy (e.g., fuelwood and chips and pellets for heating in municipal buildings); and
ii)    the creation of shelterbelts along selected roads in Kyzylorda region, to help protect the
roads from the harsh climate, while reducing road maintenance costs, reducing the effects of erosion
from wind, rain and snow. The shelterbelts will additionally create green corridors and havens for
wildlife, and at the same time sequestering carbon and providing shelter, wood and non-wood
products for local communities.
Component 4: Project Management and Coordination
This component will finance the operating costs of a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) within the
FWC to carry out project management functions for Component 1, 2, and 3. Support will be
provided for procurement, financial management, coordination, reporting, and monitoring and
evaluation.
Throughout the project planning and implementation, there is commitment to social inclusion, citizen
engagement and gender equity. Mechanisms will be used to ensure women's participation in the
PFM sub-component.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project areas will be located:
(a) Along the Irtysh river banks in two northern oblasts, i.e., Pavlodar and East Kazakhstan as well as
in Akmola region. The areas are dominated by pine forests, interspaced with grassland, and
occasional salt pan and salt lake. They are inhabited by (state paid) forest workers, some other forest
workers and farmers.
(b) In the southern oblast of Kyzyl Orda with saxaul and tamarix woodlands on the north and south
side of the Syr Dara river irrigation system and adjacent dry Aral Sea coast. The project areas are
rural and are seasonally populated with mainly Kazakh or Uzbek livestock herders; some parts were
abandoned during the transition due to the lack of employment. There are also villages with former
fishermen, railway workers, and rice farmers.
(c) While the project areas for supporting the establishment of fast growing plantations and for
developing participatory forest management are to be decided during the project design, it is likely
these activities would be implemented countrywide in semiarid and mountainous areas.
The project includes the eastern Irtysh pine forest which is under state protection and included in two
national forest reserves (Semey and Irtysh Ormanies) where timber harvesting can still take place as
sanitary felling or for thinning immature stands
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The project implementing agency will be the Forestry and Wildlife Committee within the Ministry of
Agriculture. The day to day project implementation will be the main responsibility of the Project
Implementation Unit (PIU) which has experience in applying national and WB safeguards policies,
gained during the implementation of the previous WB Forest Protection and Reforestation Project.


﻿The WB supervision missions conducted in 2012 and 2014 concluded that project environmental
management was satisfactory: all project activities followed environmental requirements specified in
the framework Environmental Management Plan (EMP); for all major investments (creating new
nurseries, construction of forest road and of forest fire stations and installation of look towers) the
O
U       specialized companies which have relevant licenses, have conducted EIA studies and/or prepared
simple EMPs which were approved by the State Ecological Expertise (SEE). The EIA documents
were disclosed and consulted with interested parties, including local population; planting activities
have been carried out based on approved Forestry and Hunting Committee Forest Management
Plans, which also were preliminarily cleared by the Ministry of Environmental Protection; the
conducted site visits to the forest fire stations, look-out towers, road construction, as well as to the
planting sites in Semey Ormany Forest Nature Reserve show the environmental requirements
specified in the framework project EMP and in the subprojects EMPs overall have been well
implemented and there were no outstanding project environmental issues.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Arcadii Capcelea (GENDR)
Ekaterina Romanova (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment     Yes         This OP is triggered as the project is expected to
OP/BP 4.01                               generate some environmental impacts which will not
be of large scale and irreversible. These impacts will
be associated with the construction of lookout
towers, civil works for rehabilitation of fire station
facilities, rehabilitation of forest roads, forestry
activities including thinning, cleaning and planting
and are, in particular, the following: minor soil loss
and biodiversity degradation; damage of trees and
vegetation; dust; noise; construction wastes; water
pollution; labor safety issues. All of these would be
temporary and site specific. At the same time, the
project would generate a series of environmental
benefits that would include reduced desertification,
salt and dust control, and reforestation of degraded
lands, improved conservation and sustainable use of
biodiversity in selected ecosystems.
Since at this stage of project design not all
subprojects and activities and their location are
known, it is proposed to prepare a framework EMP
(which is similar to an Environmental and Social
Management Framework) which would guide
conducting site specific EIAs and preparing concrete
EMPs. This will be done in accordance with Bank
procedures and Kazakh EA regulations. The
framework EMP will identify possible environmental


﻿impacts of the types of activities and subproject that
would be financed under the project and propose
necessary mitigation, monitoring measures as well as
implementing arrangements. In terms of reforestation
activities the EMP will emphasize the need to use
native species of pine, saxaul, tamarix, poplar,
willow, aspen and other, and thus providing
significant biodiversity benefits. Also the EA
document will require that all forest planning and
management activities (including fire management
strategies, thinning, cleaning and planting activities)
will address natural habitat considerations in both the
site-specific and landscape context.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes          Natural habitats is triggered. While the project is not
expected to convert or degrade critical natural
habitats, the project does include the establishment of
a protected area (State Forest Nature Reserve) in the
Dry Aral Seabed. The process of site selection will
include a field visit by a qualified biologist to further
confirm that the project will not adversely affect
endangered species or habitats, as well as special
approval from the environmental protection
authorities.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           Yes          The Forests OP is triggered because the project is
intended to be implemented mainly in forested areas.
In particular, the project will support investment in
rehabilitation degraded forests and woodlands, to
restore protective cover and to make these and other
forests more productive. The project will not finance
plantations that involve the conversion or
degradation of critical natural habitats, and this will
be ensured during the decision on land allocation for
afforestation activities which will involve approvals
from the environmental protection authorities. The
project will not finance industrial-scale commercial
harvesting operations. Any silvicultural thinning and
or cleaning activities will be done in a sustainable
manner and on a small scale for local needs -- the
main requirements in this regard will be clearly
specified in the EMP.
Pest Management OP 4.09      Yes          Pest management is triggered because indirectly the
project will stimulate more use of pesticides in
existing forest nurseries. To address potential project
impacts, the Pest Management Plan that was
designed for the previous WB Forest Protection and
Reforestation Project will be updated and applied,
specifically for these purposes. This will help the


﻿nurseries to develop and implement more
environmentally acceptable pest control strategies.
Physical Cultural Resources   No
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes           While it is not expected that there will be any
BP 4.12                                     encroachment of human settlements in the project
area forests and the project itself will not cause
involuntary physical displacement of people, this OP
may be triggered, since the project may limit access
to forest resources which could potentially curtail
existing legal or illegal incomes of vulnerable
people, at least on a temporary basis. A Social
Assessment will be carried out to estimate the
number of affected people and the number of
beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender, level of
wealth, age, and other social indicators. Also, taking
these considerations into account, a Resettlement
Process Framework will be prepared, disclosed and
consulted in the country for project areas designated
as protected areas, and a Resettlement Policy
Framework will be prepared for these areas not
designated as protected areas. These frameworks
will provide guidelines for designing site specific
mitigation measures on the potential adverse impacts
of access restrictions on vulnerable people and for
developing an institutional arrangement for the
implementation of mitigation measures.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     No
a
Projects on International     No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 04-Apr-2016
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
It is expected the draft framework EMP will be drafted during September 2015 - February 2016.
In early March, the draft document will be disclosed at the Forestry and Wildlife Committee and
then consulted with all key stakeholders: representatives from environmental and forestry
authorities; academia; environmental NGOs; specialized research and design institutes; local
communities; private sector involved in forestry operations. Based on the public consultation, the
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿document will be finalized and disclosed on the Committee's website before Appraisal which is
scheduled for April 2016.
In addition, before Appraisal the Resettlement Process Framework will be consulted with all key
parties. For these consultations, the client will disclose the draft document on its website,
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Angela G. Armstrong
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                     Date: 11-Sep-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Kulsum Ahmed (PMGR)                    Date: 11-Sep-2015
Manager:


