INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC8646
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        India                      Project ID:   P150308
Project Name:   IN:Citizen-Centric Service Delivery Reform Assam (P150308)
Task Team       Vikram K. Chand,Mohan Nagarajan
Leader(s):
Estimated          08-Feb-2016             Estimated     18-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GG18                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Public administration- Information and communications (50%), Sub-national
govemment administration (50%)
Theme(s):       Other public sector goveance (50%), e-Govemment (50%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      49.00            Total Bank Financing:   39.20
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
SBORROWER/RECIPIENT 9.80
Intemnational Development Association (IDA)                     39.20
Total                                        49.009.0
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
Contribute to improving Efficiency, Accountability, and Access for Targeted Services in
Underserved Areas.
C. Project Description
Project Background


﻿The Citizen Centered Service Delivery Reform Project aims to serve the citizens of Assam,
especially the poor, through effective Right To Public Services (RTPS) Act implementation in the
State. Its Project Development Objective is "to improve access in the delivery of select public
services in Assam." With a financial outlay of US$ 49 million (out of which US$ 39.2 IDA funding
and US$ 9.8 Government funding), the Project takes an integrated approach to improve citizens'
access to public services and strengthen accountability, addressing both the supply-side and demand-
side aspects of service delivery.
The Government of Assam, recognizing the need to strengthen service delivery access, had enacted
the Assam Right to Public Services (ARTPS) Act 2012 to ensure citizens' access to public services
in a timely, efficient, and accountable manner. The Act enables the citizens of Assam to get notified
public services within a stipulated time frame and also fixes responsibilities on public servants to
provide these services in a time-bound manner. A formal appellate process under the Act has
provisions penalizing designated government officials for his/her failure to give the services as
sought by the citizens within a stipulated time. 55 services related to 14 departments have so far been
notified by the State government under the RTPS Act.
Government to Citizens (G2C) services in Assam are being provided by approximately 31
departments. Most of the 31 G2C Departments maintain their own individual offices at the District
level, and have direct contact with citizens with respect to the services they deliver. The District
Office, headed by the Deputy Commissioner, plays the lead role in service provision - managing
sub-divisional, circle and block operations. Service delivery capacity is nevertheless weak at many
offices at district and sub-district levels.
On a request from the Government of Assam, the World Bank has committed contributing IDA
credit funding of US$ 39.2 million under the Citizen-Centered Service Delivery (CCSD) Reform
Project to support and enhance the state initiatives for improving citizens' access to public services
and strengthen accountability under the ARTPS Act 2012. Earlier, through a Non-Lending Technical
Assistance (NLTA), the World Bank had supported analysis of public administration constraints to
service delivery for enabling a clear understanding of bottlenecks and challenges to service delivery
access in the state. Simplification and streamlining of administrative procedures, reduction in levels
for processing service delivery requests, and preparation of a comprehensive ICT plan and associated
back end process re-engineering for efficient G2C service delivery emerged as certain key
a       recommendations of this analytical work. The recommendations have been incorporated in the
design of the Project activities.
Project Components
The Project consists of two components. Component One: Technical Assistance (US$ 31.7 million)
will finance activities designed to strengthen RTPS implementation; support process reforms/e-
enablement in targeted services; establish one-stop-centers; and create citizen feedback mechanisms.
This component will disburse against eligible expenditures upon submission of IFRs. Component
Two: Results-based Financing (US$ 7.5 million) provides incentives for achieving results with
respect to improving the access and accountability of RTPS services. This component will disburse
against agreed eligible expenditure programs (EEPs) upon achievement of Disbursement Linked
Indicators (DLIs).
Component One: Technical Assistance (US$ 31.7 million IDA; US$ 7.925 million GoA)


﻿This component will provide specialized technical assistance to support implementation of the
government program and the achievement of the PDO. Eligible expenditures under this component
are consulting and non-consulting services, acquisition of goods and operating costs. This component
will provide funding for the following 4 sub-components:
* Sub-component 1. Strengthening RTPS implementation. Activities under this sub-component
will include the creation of (i) a comprehensive RTPS ICT platform for automated tracking of
individual service requests and appeals, actions taken by the designated officer and staff, and rule-
based escalation in case of time overruns beyond the stipulated period; (ii) a Management
Information System (MIS), along with institutional mechanisms, to ensure that data from the MIS is
used for calibrating the implementation of RTPS, and (iii) an online portal to promote proactive
disclosure related to citizens' entitlements under the Act and procedures for accessing RTPS
services, as well as allow citizens to apply for services online. In addition, this sub-component will
finance two other activities, including (iv) capacity-building to support adaptation to electronic
processing, and (v) the design and implementation of a change management strategy. Finally, the
Project will support the creation of a high-level delivery unit with adequate authority and capacity to
drive RTPS implementation across the state.
*      Sub-component 2. Supporting Process Re-engineering in Targeted Services. Activities under
this sub-component will include: (i) integration of electronic approaches to G2C service delivery
with 15 targeted RTPS services initially within three Departments (Revenue and Welfare of Plain
Tribes and Backward Classes, and Transport as well as, the Guwahati Municipal Corporation; (ii)
process simplification, such as delegating responsibilities to lower levels of government, reducing the
number of supporting documents required to access services; (iii) improving the field verification
system for delivery of selected services, and streamlining the issuance of digitally signed
certificates ; (iv) the development of a quality management system within departmental delivery
processes; and (v) the creation of an integrated electronic repository of government-issued
certificates available online.
*      Sub-component 3. Setting up One-Stop Service Centers. Activities under this sub-component
will include (i) creating 400 One-Stop-Service Centers in blocks/circles and other designated offices;
(ii) equipping them with critical ICT infrastructure and reliable broadband connectivity to handle
RTPS requests and deliver e-enabled targeted services; (iii) hiring contracted staff to operate centers
(two per center), and (iv) supporting other incidental costs (e.g., maintenance). Beyond these, the
Project would explore alternative methods such as the use of Online to Offline (020) mechanisms,
in view of the limited ICT connectivity in the state. Given that the connectivity solutions under this
subcomponent focus primarily on the block and circle levels, such 020 mechanisms could play a
vital role in bringing services even closer to local communities.
* Sub-component 4. Promoting Citizen Engagement. Activities supported will include (i) a
state-wide Information and Education Campaign (IEC) to publicize the provision of RTPS Act and
the procedures related to accessing RTPS services; (ii) the development of a mobile and web-based
citizen feedback system based on individual transactions; (iii) the establishment of a toll-free call
center to provide assistance to citizens and register grievances for redress. These apart, Citizen
Engagement will be accentuated by custom made location specific social accountability measures
such as Social Audit and Citizen Score Cards. These will be designed as a part of the overall
monitoring and evaluation arrangements.
Component Two: Results-Based Financing (US$ 7.5 million IDA; US$ 1.875 million GoA)
This component aims to support the Government of Assam to implement critical public management
reforms related to delivery of public services. Specifically, this component supports the
Government's Program which aims to broaden access to RTPS services particularly with regard to


﻿scheduled areas, increase the number of notified services and incentivize the establishment of one-
stop service centers across the state.
A result-based financing approach will be used to provide incentives for achieving key results. It will
O
U       disburse upon achievement of key results as measured by the Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs)
and against the execution of agreed-to Eligible Expenditures Programs (EEPs).
Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs): Four DLIs have been selected for providing incentives to
expand the coverage of RTPS to tribal districts; increase the number of services notified under the
law; promote the setting-up of one-stop centers; and encourage the use of RTPS services by an
increasing number of citizens.
*      DLI 1: Citizen Access to RTPS services expanded in underserved areas of Assam (US$2.5
million). The Project will also incentivize citizens' increased access to services under RTPS, given
that citizens are mostly unaware of the Act and how to access services under its provisions; and
number of citizens accessing RTPS services is meager.
*      DLI 2: Steady increase in the volume of electronically submitted applications for selected
RTPS services (US$2.5 million). The RTPS Act has not been implemented in the six districts
administered under the Sixth Schedule; formal endorsements of the Autonomous Councils are
required before an Act of the State Legislature is enforced within their jurisdiction. Government of
Assam has initiated dialogue with the Autonomous Councils to extend the coverage of RTPS Act to
all these six districts.
*      DLI 3: Increased number of services notified under ARTPS Act (US$ 1.5 million). The
result based financing approach would also incentivize expansion of the number of services from the
present 55 se rvices to at least 80 services over the next five years. Some key services such as the
issuance of ST and income certificates and income certificates would be notified as RTPS services
over time.
*      DLI 4: One-stop-shop service access centers fully operational to receive RTPS service
requests on-line; and electronic delivery of targeted services (US$1 million). The fully equipped and
adequately staffed centers would be required to function at least six hours on all working days to
receive RTPS service requests and be able to electronically deliver the targeted set of RTPS services.
Additional details on the Project activities, DLIs, and Eligible Expenditure Programs are provided in
the Project Appraisal Document.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project activities will be executed across Assam, the largest state in the North East region of
India. Assam is one of the seven north-eastern states (together called as 'seven sisters'), which is
situated just below the eastern Himalayan foothills. The State of Assam spreads over an area of
78,438 sq km and is surrounded by six of the other Seven Sister States: Arunachal Pradesh,
Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram, Tripura, and Meghalaya. Geographically, Assam and these States are
connected to the rest of India via a strip of land in West Bengal called the Siliguri Corridor or
"Chicken's Neck". Assam shares international borders with Bhutan and Bangladesh. A significant
geographical aspect of Assam is that it contains three of six physiographic divisions of India - The
Northern Himalayas (Eastern Hills), The Northern Plains (Brahmaputra plain) and Deccan Plateau
(Karbi Anglong). The River Brahmaputra, the life-line of Assam becomes a braided river (at times
10-16 km wide) and with tributaries, creates a flood plain. The hills of Karbi Anglong, North Cachar
and those in and close to Guwahati (also Khasi-Garo Hills) are originally parts of the South Indian
Plateau system. In the south, the River Barak originates in the Barail Range (Assam-Nagaland


﻿border) flows through the Cachar district with a 40-50 km wide valley and enters Bangladesh with
the name Surma River. The Brahmaputra and the Barak rivers are part of the two of the major
National Waterways and together cover almost 1000 km across the State.
O
U       The Population of Assam according to the 2011 census stands at around 31 million, making it the
14th most populated State in India. 86% of the population lives in rural areas. Assam is an agrarian
state with only limited industrialization. The only Project activities that are expected to beset with
potential of pollution relate to the installation and operation of electric generators which are expected
to be housed in the existing (government) buildings.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Government of Assam and the Implementing Agency have experience in implementing the
Bank-supported projects in transport, agriculture, rural development, and ICT sectors, thus, they are
exposed to the Bank safeguards requirements.
The Project will be implemented through the Assam Rural Infrastructure and Agriculture Services
(ARIAS) Society, which manages Bank-financed projects in Assam. The State Project Director of
ARIAS will serve as Project Director of this Project. This existing institutional arrangement will be
beneficial for coordination among GoA departments and streamlining fiduciary arrangements. The
existing procurement and financial management specialists of ARIAS will facilitate all fiduciary
activities related to the Project. A Project Management Unit (PMU) within ARIAS will coordinate
with all participating agencies and liaise with the Bank. The PMU will oversee technical inputs,
consolidate required documentation, and conduct financial management and procurement activities.
The Project Director and the PMU will be responsible for ensuring compliance with the Bank's
financial management, procurement regulations and safeguard requirements, and will report to the
Bank on a regular basis. For additional details on the implementation arrangements, please refer to
the Project Appraisal Document.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Gaurav D. Joshi (GEN06)
Suryanarayan Satish (GSU06)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project will not finance any civil works or TA
OP/BP 4.01                               for civil works, under any circumstances whatsoever.
Therefore, the environmental risk of the proposed
project is therefore very low. However, it is possible,
though unlikely in most cases, that minor civil works
involving small renovations to existing buildings
where ICT infrastructure will be housed may be
required, Also, the installation of ICT equipment
may produce waste material that needs to be
disposed of in an acceptable way. To allow for this
possibility and further, to ensure that these minor
civil works, if and when they required, are
acceptably managed, the project will prepare a very


﻿simple Environmental Management Plan (EMP) to
provide guidance on how issues such as disposal of
removed material including cables, batteries,
trenches for laying of cables, etc., are to be managed.
In locations where generators are required to be
installed for the availability of power supply, these
would need to be operated in an environmentally
sound and safe manner. Guidance about this would
also be included in the EMP.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
Pest Management OP 4.09     No
Physical Cultural Resources  No
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     Yes         The tribal population is 3,884,371, which is 12.4% of
4.10                                     the total population of the state. The tribal in Assam
constitute 3.72% of total tribal population of the
country. The State has registered 17.4% decadal
growth of tribal population in 2001-2011 which is
slightly higher than the overall decadal growth for
the state. The overall sex ratio among tribal people
is 984, which is marginally less than the national
average of 990. The tribal population in Assam is
predominantly rural with 94.4% residing in rural
areas.
Assam is an ethnically diverse state with different
languages, traditions and cultural practices; it is the
melting pot of a large number of ethnic tribes and
races, which have infused richness in the cultural
tapestry of Assam. Major tribes of Assam are: Bodo
(35.1%), Mishing (17.52%), Karbi (11.1%), Rabha
(7.6%), Sonowal Kachari (6.5%), Lalung (5.2%),
Garo (4.2%), and Dimasa tribes (3.2%). They
constitute ninety per cent ST population of the state.
The other tribal people in Assam are Deori, Hajong,
Thengal Kachari, Khasi, Jaintia, Mech, Chakma,
Mizo, Hmar, Kuki tribes, Naga tribes, Barmans (in
Cachar), Man (Tai speaking), Khampti and Singhpho
tribes. In order to protect the interests of the tribal
population, provision of Sixth Schedule is enshrined
in the Constitution under Articles 244(2) and 275(1)
to enable autonomous administration of the tribal


﻿areas of Assam. Six tribal districts of Assam: Karbi
Anglong, Dima Hasao, Kokrajhar, Chirang, Baksa &
Udalguri have been declared as the Scheduled Areas.
There are tribal people living in the state and are
likely to be impacted by the Project. The Project
activities will not result in any adverse or negative
impact on tribals. However, to ensure that the Project
does reach tribals viz., inclusion and equity, the
policy is triggered. Accordingly, a Tribal Prople/
Development Plan has been prepared.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  No          The only activity requiring lands relate to the
BP 4.12                                   establishment of one stop centers. These will be
housed in the existing government buildings. So,
private land acquisition is not warranted. Hence, this
policy is not triggered.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No
Projects on International    No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 22-Jan-2016
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Project will conduct a Social Assessment enquiry which would include: (i) beneficiary
assessment; (ii) stakeholder analysis; (iii) impact assessments; (iv) institutional assessments; and
(v) enlisting issues of significance. Subsequently, in accordance with OP 4.10, a Tribal
Development Plan (TDP) will be prepared to ensure that project effectively reaches the tribal
*          people. Environmental management measures for common activities will be included in the
Environmental Management Plan.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Vikram K. Chand,Mohan Nagarajan
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                  Date: 27-Jan-2016
Practice Manager/      Name: Alexandre Arrobbio (PMGR)                 Date: 27-Jan-2016
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


