INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12220
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Dec-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Feb-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Ethiopia                   Project ID:  P150922
Project Name: Ethiopia PFM Project (P 150922)
Task Team       Eric Brintet,Yoko Kagawa
Leader(s):
Estimated       23-Feb-2015                Estimated    26-Feb-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GG025                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Central government administration (50%), Sub-national government
administration (50%)
Theme(s):       Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      33.00            Total Bank Financing:   33.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                33.00
Total                                                                      33.00
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
1.    The PDO is to improve efficiency, transparency and accountability of public expenditure at
the federal and regional levels.
3. Project Description
The project would consist of three components--the implementation of which would be managed by
Page 1 of4


﻿the Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation (MoFEC) and the Office of the Federal Auditor
General (OFAG).
The project components are:
U
Component 1: Expenditure Management and Information Systems Support: - The objective of this
component is to support the government to improve fiduciary controls and financial management
through the introduction of modem technology and procedures. The focus will be in improving the
entire public financial management cycle. This component will help support improvements in budget
preparation, budget execution, accounting, internal audit and internal controls and reporting. The sub
components will include:
a) Support for moving to the next generation of automation in PFM through rolling out the Integrated
financial Management System (IFMIS);
b)Upgrading and providing ongoing support for the Integrated Budget and Expenditure Management
(IBEX); and
c)Support for ongoing system strengthening and capacity building initiatives for improving
expenditure management across Ethiopia
Component 2: Strengthening Accountability Institutions. This component aims at supporting
accountability institutions in the performance of their tasks. The sub-components include:
a) Strengthening Procurement Management;
b) Capacity building to oversight function; and
c) Support for establishing public sector institutions that will support the development of a
professional accountancy profession in Ethiopia
Component 3: Program management, Monitoring and Evaluation and Capacity Building - To ensure
project implementation, the effective monitoring and evaluation of results and a consistent and
effective approach to capacity development, the project would support: two sub components:
a) program management and co-ordination; and
b) monitoring and evaluation.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Asferachew Abate Abebe (GENO 1)
Chukwudi H. Okafor (GSU07)
6. Safeguard Policies  Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental          No
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Page 2 of 4


﻿Forests OP/BP 4.36     No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
0
Physical Cultural      No
O
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP   No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed   No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
None
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
None
U         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
o          None
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
*           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
C           The borrower capacity in implementing safeguards was not assessed, as the project is Category C
and does not need safeguard implementation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
None
B. Disclosure Requirements
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Page 3 of 4


﻿C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ No       NA   X
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ No      NA   X
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ No        NA   X
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Eric Brintet,Yoko Kagawa
Approved By
Regional Safeguards   Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)            Date: 18-Feb-2016
Advisor:
Practice Manager/     Name: Renaud Seligmann (PMGR)              Date: 19-Feb-2016
Manager:
Page 4 of 4


