                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC15572

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Dec-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Liberia                       Project ID:      P157797
                            Project Name:        Liberia MSME & Rural Finance post Ebola Reconstruction
                            Team Leader(s):      Christopher Juan Costain
                            Estimated Date       04-Mar-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GFM01                         Lending          Lending Instrument
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           Banking (20%), Payments, settlements, and remittance systems (20%), SME
                                                 Finance (20%), Microfinance (20%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade
                                                 (20%)
                            Theme(s):            Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (100%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 4.8                          Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              State and Peace Building Fund                                                             4.8
                            Environment        F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support the development of a framework to provide
                           MSMEs finance on sustainable terms, enhance the capacity of local private sector financial
                           institutions to lend profitably to MSMEs and objectively measure outcomes.
                           C. Project Description
                           Project background.

                           While there have been a number of government led financing schemes targeting SMEs, the unmet
                           demand for finance remains significant. To date, none of the financing schemes have sought to
                           address the weaknesses which have held back the development of sustainable financing, particularly
                           with regards to the supply side of credit, making banks better lenders to MSMEs. As there has been
                           no monitoring or evaluation of the past schemes, it is not possible to determine exactly what
                           objectives have been achieved. These lending activities have been spread across the MFDP, Central
                           Bank, Ministry of Commerce and Industry and the Ministry of Agriculture without coordination.
                         This activity will serve to improve the supply of finance available in the local economy through
                         providing a demonstration to both Government and local banks of best practice in MSME lending. In
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the first instance, the project will seek to draw together all SME financing schemes into one facility,
                         under the auspices of the MFDP but with advice from the Central Bank and implemented through
                         local financial institutions. Rather than the directed approach followed to date, whereby parallel
                         schemes have been directed to disperse to distinct sectors (commerce, agriculture etc.) the project
                         will be agnostic as to sector but will focus on supporting MSME enterprises which have credible
                         financing proposals and allow participating financial institutions greater freedom in terms of
                         economic sector. Furthermore, the project will work with participating financial institutions to
                         address the fundamental issues which have led to poor loan performance to date: high transactions
                         costs, poor Contract Enforcement, a high level of Volatility in business outcomes (related to
                         commodity prices, weather conditions etc.), poor Information as to both the willingness and ability of
                         the client to repay loans, and reliance on collateral rather than ensuring business Cash Flows are well
                         aligned to the terms of loans.

                         There starting point will be that financing will be on sustainable terms, however, the facility will
                         support participating financial institutions to provide terms which are not currently available in the
                         market. In particular, the project will support the provision of loans beyond the 18 months tenor
                         currently available (the exact term to be determined at appraisal, but probably to 5 years), and will
                         allow for deferral of payments relating to objectively identifiable disruptions (such as poor harvests,
                         commodity price variation etc) and will focus on cash flow rather than collateral. Through the
                         innovation component, the project will also seek to take advantage of ongoing initiatives to extend
                         the use of mobile money in Liberia to lower transactions costs and improve the information held on
                         borrowers (e.g. a record of payments made and received through mobile money can substitute for a
                         lack of financial accounts and the use of biometric ID and/or the direct intercept of payments can be
                         used to enhance loan recovery). If and only if there are identified public goods associated with
                         providing finance to MSMEs (such as sustaining employment in the Post Ebola period in response to
                         the systemic shock of the Ebola crisis), subsidized finance may be provided on an exceptional basis,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         but this will be explicit, transparent, targeted and limited both in amount and time of availability. The
                         project will seek to ensure that populist demands for cheap money do not lead to the creation of new
                         ad hoc schemes (and also that such funds, if necessary, are allocated on objective terms rather than as
                         a product of clientelism).

                         The higher order objective of the project is to assist viable MSMEs to rebuild their businesses and
                         maintain employment, particularly for the poorest, through enhancing their access to finance. The
                         proposed assistance is to be catalytic in emphasizing activities which are complementary to those of
                         the IFC, other Global Practices and other development partners. The desired immediate outcome will
                         be to establish a development financing vehicle which will use private financial institutions and
                         establish best practice in terms of evaluation and monitoring to replace government sponsored
                         initiatives which have focused on disbursement and have been questioned for political motivation. In
                         particular the activity will seek to guide the expertise of the Central Bank away from direct lending
                         in the development finance sector.

                         A further objective will be to coordinate and provide monitoring for various directed lending
                         activities of the WBG and other development partners to ensure consistency and adherence to best
                         practices. Various sectors in the WBG, including energy and agriculture, are exploring credit lines to
                         SMEs in light of the unavailability of finance at this level. These activities run through the respective
                         ministries and are not centrally coordinated or monitored in terms of their design. The project would
                         seek to facilitate these activities and ensure balance between availability of finance between sectors.
                         The project will focus on the finance aspects of SME lending and would coordinate with parallel
                         WBG, AfDB and other development partner activities which provide technical assistance, mostly to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         borrowers.

                         The project would comprise three components:

                         1      SME Financing Facility Funding and technical assistance to FIs (USD 4.0 million). This
                         would comprise three subcomponents to support on-lending to micro and small entrepreneurs.

                         a.       Line of Credit for viable MSMEs. Provide term finance in local currency (and US$ where
                         appropriate) to financial institutions for onlending to MSMEs. Identification of MSMEs and credit
                         risk to be the responsibility of participating financial institutions (although sector support provided
                         by relevant WBG units for agriculture, energy, education, trade etc.). Financing terms to be
                         established so as to support rather than undermine market forces

                         b.      Risk-sharing Instruments. Establishment of partial credit guaranty scheme; default risk to be
                         shared 50/50 with participating banks for loans to MSMEs falling within agreed criteria.

                         c.      WB/Consultant Technical Assistance assistance to participating financial institutions to
                         improve the quality of lending by providing expertise in design and operation of credit and risk-
                         sharing operations, loan supervision, credit screening, cash-flow modeling etc.

                         2        Innovations in MSME Finance. Technical Assistance to develop use of digital financial
                         services and new lending instruments. Link with new initiatives such as Partnership for a Digital
                         West Africa and the ERRTF funded payments systems project to make use of mobile money,
                         biometric ID and other innovations to lower transactions costs and improve credit information. This
                         activity would also explore increasing use of techniques proven elsewhere but not utilized in Liberia
                         such as leasing, factoring and warehouse receivables.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3       Establishment of Monitoring & Evaluation Framework. Establish a process for tracking
                         disbursements of funds from this project and other financial intermediation activities to determine
                         objectives and monitor achievements (employment, poverty and gender targeting, as well as financial
                         performance).

                         A key objective of the project is to provide Government sufficient incentive to revisit the way that it
                         addresses MSME finance, and also present a sustainable solution to the populist initiatives seen in
                         recent years.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The exact location of the project is not defined at this stage, but the sub-projects financing will be
                         targeted towards sustaining employment in small enterprises that have been indirectly affected by the
                         Ebola crisis. Most small enterprises will be largely involved in commerce with minimal safeguards
                         issues. Support for agricultural activities however may present environmental and social safeguards
                         issues. But this will most likely be in the same areas as already covered by the existing Smallholder
                         Tree Crop Revitalization Support Project.
                         E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The borrower has received support for the development of safeguards in connection with the
                           Smallholder Tree Crop Revitalization Support Project and if it is the case that safeguards are
                           triggered under the activity now proposed, these will be minor relative to those of the Smallholder
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Tree Crop project and should be manageable within the framework established for that project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Gloria Malia Mahama (GSURR)
                           Sekou Abou Kamara (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The project will be of financial intermediation
                           BP 4.01                                              and as such the ultimate activities have not yet
                                                                                been identified. Further study as to likely areas
                                                                                of activity will be conducted at appraisal. As a
                                                                                MSME initiative, individual activities are likely
                                                                                to be modest in scale, but it remains to be
                                                                                determined if in aggregate they may be material.
                                                                                However appropriate safeguards instruments
                                                                                will be developed at appraisal and at sub-project
                                                                                level if and when required.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               The project will be not finance activities which
                                                                                are greenfield in nature and in all cases if
                                                                                agricultural development is to be supported,
                                                                                detailed procedures will be developed and will
                                                                                be applied to ensure that vegetation to be
                                                                                replaced by new plantings is not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                environmentally significant and implications of
                                                                                a possible
                                                                                cumulative effect will not be environmentally
                                                                                significant.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No               The project will be of financial intermediation
                                                                                and as such the ultimate activities have not yet
                                                                                been identified. Further study as to likely areas
                                                                                of activity will be conducted at appraisal. As a
                                                                                MSME initiative, individual activities are likely
                                                                                to be modest in scale, but it remains to be
                                                                                determined if in aggregate they may be material.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             TBD              The project will be of financial intermediation
                                                                                and some activities in the agro-industry may be
                                                                                financed; however, the ultimate activities have
                                                                                not yet been identified. Further study as to likely
                                                                                areas of activity will be conducted at appraisal
                                                                                and the required safeguard instrument will be
                                                                                developed if required. As a MSME initiative,
                                                                                individual activities are likely to be modest in
                                                                                 scale, but it remains to be determined if in
                                                                                 aggregate they may be material.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No               The project will not support activities in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           BP 4.11                                               recognized cultural sites, and the activities to be
                                                                                 supported do not entail those that would
                                                                                 normally result in chance finds.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No               Indigenous People are not expected to be
                                                                                 present in the project area.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No               This project will extend credit to already
                           4.12                                                  existing MSMEs who are largely involved in
                                                                                 commerce and services (catering, education,
                                                                                 transport etc.) with no need for land acquisition.
                                                                                 Any agricultural activity will focus on
                                                                                 complementing the Smallholder Tree Crop
                                                                                 Revitalization Support Project (P113273) which
                                                                                 is already guided by established safeguards
                                                                                 procedures. Further, Sub-project screening for
                                                                                 environmental and social risk will be
                                                                                 undertaken to assess and exclude activities that
                                                                                 may result in resettlement impact or business
                                                                                 with adverse shortcoming in social compliance
                                                                                 in their ongoing activities with legacy issues.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No               The project will not support the construction or
                                                                                 rehabilitation of dams, nor would it support
                                                                                 activities which rely on the services of existing
                                                                                 dams.
                           Projects on International        No                   Project activities have no impacts on
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                  international waterways.
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   Project activities will not be carried out in
                           7.60                                                  disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                           A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?: Yes
                               i. Explanation
                                  At appraisal the likely nature of activities to be financed under the project will be determined an
                               ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
                                  16-Feb-2016
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.
                              At appraisal it will be determined if substantive safeguard related activities would be triggered by
                              any prospective agriculture (or other) financing activities contemplated. If it is likely that the
                              nature of such activities would be disproportionate to the MSME nature of the project, and cannot
                              be supported within the framework established for the existing Smallholder Tree Crop
                              Revitalization Support Project eligible areas of financing activity will be curtailed to preclude the
                              need for such safeguard activities.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Christopher Juan Costain
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                                     Date: 04-Dec-2015
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Irina Astrakhan (PMGR)                                       Date: 04-Dec-2015
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
