                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSR19404
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Jul-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Jul-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Congo, Democratic Republic                    P145554
                                                                              Project ID:
                                               of
                            Project Name:      DRC:Financial Infrastructure and Markets (P145554)
                            Task Team       Philippe Marie Aguera
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       04-Feb-2014                 Estimated     18-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GFM01                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                      No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        30.00           Total Bank Financing:      30.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                 Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                    0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                            30.00
                              Total                                                                                                30.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives


                            3. Project Description
                           The financial system of DRC has been expanding from a very low base since 2004 and continues to
                           improve and modernize. The Project finances activities already begun under the Private Sector
                           Development and Competitiveness Project, supplements them with additionalresources to strengthen


                                                                                 Page 1 of 7
                         financial inclusion and institutional capacity, and provides a line of credit facility for medium to long
                         term finance to MSMEs. If successful, the Project can be scaled up by IDA as well as other partners.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         PROJECT COMPONENTS

                         The project consists of three components that are outlined in detail in the Project Appraisal
                         Document (PAD).

                         Component 1: Modernization of Payments Infrastructure for Inclusive Finance (US$ 7 million)

                         Sub-component 1.1: Physical Infrastructure (ATS/CSD, Telecommunications Network
                         Infrastructure, and National Payments Card Retail Switch) (US$ 5 million)

                         Sub-component 1.2: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building (US$ 2 million)

                         Component 2: Technical Support to Financial Market Development (US$ 7 Million)

                         Sub-component 2.1: Strengthening Microfinance Regulation and Supervision at the BCC (US$ 1
                         million)

                         Sub-component 2.2: Technical Support to Microfinance Expansion and Inclusion (US$ 3.5 million)

                         Sub-component 2.3: Capacity Building for Sustainable Medium and Long Term Finance (US$ 2.5
                         million)

                         Component 3: Line of Credit for Medium to Long Term Finance (US$ 15 million)

                         Since Project approval, the third component has been further developed. As this is the lending
                         component, the environmental and social due diligence under the project has largely focused on this
Public Disclosure Copy




                         component:

                         As stated in the PAD, the Project will make available a Line of Credit (LOC) to eligible participating
                         financial institutions (PFIs), for on-lending of medium to long term finance to viable projects of
                         creditworthy private MSMEs operating in DRC, including their capital investment and capacity
                         expansion needs. The IDA line of credit will be administered by qualified wholesale intermediary
                         entities, compliant with the eligibility criteria enshrined in OP10.00 as a condition of disbursement.

                         The first identified institution that currently meets the stated eligibility criteria is FPM SA. It became
                         operational in early 2015. FPM SA was access as having a solid governance structure of recognized
                         international investors and an experienced management team. This suggests that FPM SA will
                         preserve compliance with OP10.00 and apply OP4.03 (World Bank Environmental Performance
                         Standards). The environmental and social norms for the on-lending component of the project are set
                         out in the General Policy of FPM SA and are incorporated in the firm➢❨ s overall risk management
                         process. Additional potential intermediary financial institutions are evaluated under this component.

                         The Line of Credit is implemented following a phased approach. During a first phase (years 2-3 of
                         the Project) financial intermediation is provided on a pilot basis, relying on the experience of 2-3
                         competitively-selected commercial banks and/or MFIs as PFIs, who are assisted with appropriate
                         market information, specialized technical capacity through FPM ASBL, and access to long term

                                                                        Page 2 of 7
                         competitively-priced financing for their potential pipeline of bankable propositions, including for
                         capital investments, along the job-creating value-chains. The second phase (years 3-5 of the Project)
                         will scale up and expand the financial intermediation support based on experience and lessons from
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the pilot phase.


                         Eligible Banks and MFIs will have to demonstrate their commitment to medium and long term
                         financing to MSMEs, including a clear strategy, a dedicated unit to serve MSMEs, satisfactory
                         MSME loan approval processes and risk management procedures in place.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The first financial intermediary targeted to receive funding under this component, FPM SA, started in
                         July 2015 to provide loans to several banks and microfinance institutions (MFIs) that provide sub-
                         loans to MSMEs. A desk review of the current FPM SA portfolio in June 2016 demonstrated that PFI
                         lending targets predominantly small enterprises through banks and microenterprises through MFIs.
                         Sectors of PFI lending are agriculture, production/ manufacturing (currently a minor portion of the
                         portfolio), services, commerce, and consumptive activities. The majority of lending is currently
                         concentrated in the latter two sectors.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Abdoulaye Gadiere (GEN07)
                         Antoine V. Lema (GSU01)
                         Ekaterina Grigoryeva (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              No             OP/BP 4.03 (World Bank Performance Standards for
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     Private Sector Activities) is applied to this project in lieu
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    of OP4.01.

                                                                    Applicable Requirements under OP4.03 (World Bank
                                                                    Performance Standards for Private Sector Activities)
                                                                    The Applicable Performance Requirements for this
                                                                    project are the IFC Exclusion List (Even though OP 4.03
                                                                    does not include an explicit requirement for the use of an
                                                                    Exclusion List as a policy instrument, there are precedents
                                                                    of successfully using IFC Exclusion List by the World
                                                                    Bank for Financial Intermediary projects. IFC Exclusion
                                                                    List can be found at: http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/
                                                                    connect/corp_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/ifc
                                                                    +projects+database/projects/aips+added+value/ifc_
                                                                    project_exclusion_list) and the applicable National Laws
                                                                    and Regulations of DRC for all on-lending activities, and,
                                                                    for higher-risk transactions, the relevant requirements of
                                                                    the WB Performance Standards. As part of their due
                                                                    diligence, eligible wholesale intermediary entities will
                                                                    make sure that PFIs apply relevant requirements stated
                                                                    above, including application of the WB Performance


                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                                                                        Standards to higher-risk transactions, taking into account
                                                                        the transaction size, tenor, type, and sectors. In addition,
                                                                        eligible wholesale intermediary entities and PFIs will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        manage the working conditions of their workforce in
                                                                        accordance with relevant aspects of Performance Standard
                                                                        2 on Labor and Working Conditions.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
                            Pest Management OP 4.09     No
                            Physical Cultural           No
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    No
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                For Category FI projects types of activities or sectors likely to be supported by the FI with Bank
                              financing or other financial support, and rationale for classification as Category FI-1, FI-2, or FI-3:
                              Component 3 of the Project aims to provide, through a line of credit facility, medium to long term
                              finance to viable projects of creditworthy private MSMEs operating in DRC, including their
                              capital investment and capacity expansion needs. Sub-loans extended to eligible MSMEs will
                              include both investment in subprojects and working capital loans for increased production of
                              goods and services, excluding consumption and housing loans. Financing under this component is
                              not restricted to any particular sector. However, it is not expected that lending under the Project
                              will have substantial, if any, exposure to higher risk sectors such as mining, infrastructure, or
                              construction business.

                              The project will support relatively small loans with low to medium potential environmental and
                              social risks and impacts. However, it is recognized that there may be some business activities in
                              which the environment and social risk and impacts may potentially be more significant and may
                              require commensurate assessment and management. Business activities of MSMEs can potentially
                              generate impacts on the environment, present a hazard to human health or negatively affect local
                              communities as a result of improper planning or management. Environmental and social (E&S)
                              concerns for MSMEs are typically associated with production processes or other activities that


                                                                          Page 4 of 7
                           generate emissions and byproducts that are potentially harmful to the environment, employees and
                           communities (e.g. issues around labor standards, inappropriate disposal of waste, or unhealthy or
                           hazardous working conditions). In rare cases, on-lending activities to MSMEs may also involve
Public Disclosure Copy




                           land acquisition, however associated risks and impacts would be relatively minor.

                           The project is a Financial Intermediary (FI) project and is categorized as FI-2 in accordance with
                           OP4.03 (World Bank Performance Standards for Private Sector Activities). This categorization is
                           based on the reasonable expectation that the portfolio would be comprised of sub-projects that
                           have potentially limited environmental or social risks or impacts that are few in number, generally
                           site-specific, largely reversible, and readily addressed through mitigation measures; or that it may
                           include a very limited number of sub-projects with potential significant adverse environmental or
                           social risks or impacts that are diverse, irreversible, or unprecedented.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            N/A
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            With regard to the on-lending activities under Component 3, one of the prerequisites of the
                           support for eligible wholesale intermediary entities is that they, as well as the PFIs, integrate into
                           their lending operations adequate systems that support environmentally and socially sound
                           sustainable development. To that extent, eligible wholesale intermediary entities develop,
                           implement, and maintain an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) and shall
                           cause the PFIs to develop and maintain an ESMS commensurate with the risks and impacts of
                           their Bank-supported MSME portfolios.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Each ESMS should incorporate relevant principles of Performance Standard 1 on Assessment and
                           Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts. More specifically, each ESMS must
                           include a policy statement endorsed by senior management; organizational capacity and
                           responsibilities for E&S management; procedures for screening and assessing risks and impacts of
                           sub-projects or individual loan transactions; and provisions for periodic progress reports to senior
                           management and lenders/ investors, as appropriate.

                           To facilitate development and/ or enhancement of ESMS by eligible wholesale intermediary
                           entities and PFIs, the borrower has produced an Environmental and Social Risk Management
                           Operational Manual (ESOM), which provides general guidance on WB requirements, as well as on
                           preparation of a typical ESMS. The wholesale intermediary entities must require that PFIs
                           integrate an adequate ESMS and commensurate with the risks and impacts into their MSME
                           lending operations.

                           The Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) has a legislative and regulatory framework which is
                           conducive to good environmental management. Environmental policies and their compliance are
                           governed by the MinistÃ¨re de l➢❨ Environnement, de la Conservation de la Nature et du
                           Tourisme (MECNT) ➢❨ Ministry of Environment, Conservation and Tourism. Implementation
                           capacity of government entities at all levels remains weak.


                                                                       Page 5 of 7
                           With regard to Component 3 of the project, the main E&S risks relate to the eligible wholesale
                           intermediary entities and PFIs➢❨ capacity to identify and manage the risks associated with the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           activities of the MSMEs they finance in line with WB requirements. The first identified wholesale
                           entity, FPM SA, has in place basic elements of environmental and social management, which are
                           embedded in the overall risk management processes and procedures, including application of the
                           IFC Exclusion List. However, FPM SA does not have clearly designated staff responsible for E&S
                           risk management, which is essential to its capacity to evaluate E&S risk management
                           arrangements within PFIs, adequately supervise implementation, and prepare regular reporting.

                           In order to adequately manage these risks, the Environmental and Social Management Systems
                           (ESMSs) developed by the wholesale intermediary entities and PFIs will be subject to review and
                           approval by the WB. The WB will review and approve each ESMS in a written memorandum and
                           specify, where necessary, an action plan for enhancing the ESMS.

                           The capacity of wholesale intermediary entities and the PFIs to assess and mitigate environmental
                           and social risks will also be developed through technical assistance and training.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Each wholesale intermediary entity will publicly disclose, and shall cause PFIs to disclose,
                           elements of the ESMS. Each wholesale intermediary entity will report annually to the Bank on
                           environmental and social performance. In addition, each PFI will, after Bank review, disclose the
                           summary of the environmental assessment that is required for any subproject considered high risk
                           in accordance with the ESMS.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?




                                                                    Page 6 of 7
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Philippe Marie Aguera
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)                         Date: 13-Jul-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Smita Wagh (PMGR)                           Date: 29-Jul-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
