                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                                        Report No.:ISDSA20981
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated:                 13-Apr-2017
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed               13-Apr-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                         Cote d'Ivoire                  Project ID:           P151324
    Project Name:                    CI-Infrastructure for Urban Development and Competitiveness of second
                                     cities (P151324)
    Task Team Leader(s):             Maiko Miyake,Hatem Chahbani,Mahine Diop
    Estimated Appraisal              27-Mar-2017                    Estimated Board       30-May-2017
    Date:                                                           Date:
    Managing Unit:                   GTC07                          Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                                                                        Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00(Rapid No
    Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                              Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           125.00                        Total Bank Financing: 100.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                    Amount
    BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                         25.00
    International Development Association (IDA)                                                               100.00
    Total                                                                                                     125.00
    Environmental Category:          B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?      No

    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The proposed PDO is to create conditions for improved competitiveness in the targeted secondary cities.
    3. Project Description
    The proposed project has the following components: 1) enhancing the performance of economic infrastructure;
    2) supporting private sector development; 3) improving institutions, regulations and urban management; and 4)
    project management.

    Component 1: Enhancing the performance of economic infrastructure

    Sub-component 1.1: Bouake


                                                     Page 1 of 11
The project supports the improvement of the Marche de Gros de Bouake. The project will finance the
elaboration of a strategy to reposition the MGB, identifying new opportunities to add value to the economic
activities of Bouake and taking advantage of its central location in Cote d’Ivoire. The strategy should propose
institutional reforms, capacity building, and investment needs required to achieve the vision laid out in the new
strategy. Depending on the outcome of the strategy, the project is prepared to invest in the rehabilitation of the
existing market facilities, as well as additional basic infrastructure. A study conducted by the government
indicates that the success of the MGB will depend on its ability to help producers in the surrounding areas
access the market. In light of this, the necessary investments should focus not only on the actual market but also
on a logistics network around the market.

The project finances rehabilitation and construction of infrastructure to improve traffic flow, accessibility, and
road safety. The project will finance the development of relevant sections of the main access road into Bouake
to improve traffic conditions and road safety. The development will aim to facilitate access to the wholesale
market of Bouake and provide trucks with parking and rest facilities north of the city. In addition to enhancing
access to and from the city, the project will improve mobility within the city, to serve both firms and residential
areas.

Sub-component 1.2: San Pedro

The project finances rehabilitation and construction of infrastructure to improve traffic flow, accessibility, and
road safety in San Pedro. Today, San Pedro’s main activities are agro-industry, such as cocoa and palm oil, and
exports through their port. According to studies by the World Bank, San Pedro could greatly increase its
dynamism through the development of a Greater West mining project and the rehabilitation of tourism. To
strengthen the city’s competitiveness, the project aims to decongest the city’s main arteries and improve road
safety.

Component 2: Supporting private sector development

The project will finance entrepreneurship and soft skills training. This will be achieved through a two-pronged
approach: a) programmatic support to inclusive private sector development to overcome barriers to
formalization and growth; while b) strengthening local business service providers to ensure local ownership and
sustainability of funded activities. In order to tackle critical challenges identified, the project will utilize
different instruments: capacity building, competitive finance, and monitoring and evaluation. The project will
focus on private sector development (including formalization and cooperatives) particularly in the agriculture,
logistics and trade sectors. This approach resonates with a prior World Bank Group (WBG) jobs assessment,
assessing the potential for job creation and income generation in both cities as well as the extensive feedback
and response from public and private sector actors.

The project will also fund an acceleration program for more mature firms. The acceleration program will be
dedicated to businesses with high growth potential in need of expert advice to enhance their performance and
growth, as well as access to required capital. The program will provide longer-term technical, management, and
general business support (6–18 months) for a select number of businesses.

Sub-component 2.1: Programmatic Approach to Inclusive Private Sector Development

The project will finance a program to provide targeted support to entrepreneurs who choose to be formalized.
Given that most entrepreneurs operate in the informal sector, which may limit their access to markets and
finance, the project will finance direct support to informal entrepreneurs who are willing to go through the
process of formalization. Additional support for creating a bank account and accessing tax mediation services
may also be considered, depending on the motivation for formalization expressed by stakeholders.


                                                 Page 2 of 11
The project sets aside a special window to support cooperatives. The window is dedicated to providing training
to professionalize cooperatives. The program will build on the work the International Finance Corporation (IFC)
is already doing with some of its investees in Cote d’Ivoire to improve their linkages with cooperatives and
smallholders, through leasing programs for new trucks, business training for managers, and training and
extension services for farmers. The project will finance a series of dialogues with businesses across Cote
d’Ivoire to identify business match-making opportunities and inform micro, small, and medium enterprises
about the criteria they would have to meet to supply to larger companies (standards and certifications, for
example).

The project will conduct rigorous monitoring and evaluation to keep track and examine the effectiveness of the
proposed entrepreneurship program in Bouake and San Pedro. The project hopes to inform the design and
implementation of future policies for the development of secondary cities in Cote d’Ivoire, as well as the
development and design of similar projects in fragile and lower-income environments for the World Bank
Group. The project will also explore a partnership with universities and research institutions for the design and
implementation of the impact assessment.

Sub-component 2.2: Institutional Support and Capacity Building

The project also invests in creating and strengthening the innovation and entrepreneurship ecosystem. This will
help nurture local organizations that support the entrepreneurship ecosystem (incubators, accelerators,
technology centers) by providing shared equipment and facilities in each city (with reliable energy, water,
internet, and technical equipment), and technical support and training for these organizations, based on
international best practices. This support will leverage existing infrastructure and support services in the two
cities and consolidate linkages with organizations in Abidjan that support the entrepreneurship ecosystem.

Component 3: Improving institutions, regulations, and urban management

The overarching objective of this component is to strengthen the service delivery capacity of the municipalities.
The project provides tools to help the cities improve their capacity to manage urban development and provide
administrative services.

Sub-component 3.1: Operationalization of urban master plans in Bouake and San Pedro

It is proposed that the project finances the operationalization of the urban master plans of Bouake and San
Pedro. The project will finance the preparation of detailed urban plans to guide land use in these cities, as well
as the implementation of activities. Within the framework of the urban master plans, the detailed urban plans
will help the local authorities in Bouake and San Pedro to have a clear vision for their cities. Once the detailed
urban plans are in place, the project will finance activities to implement the plans, such as street addressing,
landscaping, and basic infrastructure that falls under the purview of local government.

The investments in each city will be determined by development plans prepared by each municipality and
reviewed by the World Bank Group. During the process of preparing these investment plans, the municipalities
will have public hearings, rigorous consultations with communities, as well as other citizen engagement to
ensure transparency. To be eligible, a sub-project must reasonably fulfill a number of criteria. The full list of
detailed eligibility criteria will be included in the project implementation manual.

The project also supports the updating of a simplified cadastre. The project supports the government’s ongoing
efforts to update information on the surveyed land within the cities of Bouake and San Pedro. While the
activities are led by the Tax Office, the project will help ensure that proper records are kept and that the


                                                 Page 3 of 11
information is readily available to the public in order to improve transparency and land market liquidity.

Sub-component 3.2: Improving the provision of administrative services in Bouake and San Pedro

The project supports the provision of better administrative services for businesses in Bouake and San Pedro.
This includes business registration services for potential investors to qualify for specific fiscal incentives. To
support the micro entrepreneurs who want to join the formalization program, the project will help the city
administration adjust the regulatory and institutional framework, inspired by the experience of the World Bank
Group in Benin.

The project supports the collection and dissemination of information for businesses and residents. It will gather
information frequently requested by investors so that the investors are left with a more positive impression of
the cities. In addition, the cities can improve the dissemination of information related to economic activities
through existing websites, which will be revamped in both cities. In addition, to support the increased citizen
engagement, the project supports public consultation on the information related to the implementation of the
master plans. The project will help the municipalities to set up a feedback channel desk to treat all the inquiries.

The project finances the rehabilitation of the City Hall so that it can host all the business-oriented services
mentioned above. To improve the functioning of the city government, it is proposed that the project finances the
rehabilitation of the City Hall in Bouake. In addition to gathering the key city services in one place, the space
could cater for the needs of businesses to inform and guide investors and visitors, and provide civil society with
information related to the management of the city.

The project finances training and capacity building for the staff of municipalities in Bouake and San Pedro to
gain skills to manage competitive cities. The urban audits of the two cities carried out during the preparation of
Emergency Infrastructure Renewal Project in Cote d'Ivoire (PRICI) will serve to better target the capacity-
building needs. The project will coordinate with the PRICI to maximize the synergy between the two projects.

Component 4: Project management

This component will include project management support. The activities identified under this component
include support to procurement, financial management, monitoring, and evaluation, as well as offering a
platform for collaboration and cooperation among government agencies and the private sector.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The project locations are Bouake and San Pedro.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Abdoul Wahabi Seini( GSU01 )
 Abdoulaye Gadiere( GEN07 )
6. Safeguard Policies That Might Apply
Safeguard Policies                             Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01            Yes            The proposed project will fund the development
                                                              and rehabilitation of urban infrastructure, such as
                                                              roads and buildings in Bouaké and San Pedro,
                                                              which may have potential adverse effects on the
                                                              environment, such as dust, noise, pollution, and


                                                 Page 4 of 11
                                                     general disruption of usual business activities.
                                                     Some construction site locations are known, some
                                                     are not. As for the activities for which the exact
                                                     geographic locations are not yet determined with
                                                     certainty, the Government has prepared an
                                                     Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                     (ESMF), in compliance with the core requirements
                                                     of the triggered safeguards policies: OP/BP 4.01
                                                     (Environmental Assessment) which has been
                                                     reviewed, consulted upon and disclosed both within
                                                     Cote d’Ivoire and at the World Bank’s Website on
                                                     April 5, 2017.For those investments whose
                                                     locations were known, Environmental and Social
                                                     Impact Assessment (ESIA) have been developed.
                                                     There are the rehabilitation of the urban section of
                                                     the A3 road including the construction of truck
                                                     parking and rest areas; and the upgrading the urban
                                                     access road of Tollakouadiokro in Bouake, and the
                                                     rehabilitation of the main access to the Port of San
                                                     Pedro, the Route des Grumiers including
                                                     construction of truck parking and rest areas. As the
                                                     ESMF the three ESIA have been reviewed,
                                                     consulted upon and disclosed in Bouake and San-
                                                     Pedro on April 13, 2017 and at the World Bank’s
                                                     Website on April 13, 2017.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              No          The project will not undertake any investments that
                                                     may impact natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No          It is not anticipated that forests will be impacted by
                                                     the project.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  Yes         The project supports entrepreneurship development
                                                     in the agribusiness sector, which may have an
                                                     impact on the use of pesticide. Therefore, a Pest
                                                     Management Plan was prepared, reviewed,
                                                     consulted upon and published in Cote d’Ivoire on
                                                     March 29, 2017 and at the World Bank’s Website
                                                     on April 4, 2017.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes         This policy is triggered because activities related to
                                                     the construction of roads and the undertaking of
                                                     other civil works will induce excavations with
                                                     potential discoveries of physical cultural resources.
                                                     In order to anticipate and to be sure that all the
                                                     precautions have been taken to protect and
                                                     safeguard physical cultural resources, the ESMF
                                                     prepared in line with the OP4.01 includes a section
                                                     on how to handle chance finds of cultural assets
                                                     within the project area.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No          There are no indigenous people as defined by the
                                                     policy in the project area.

                                          Page 5 of 11
    Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12            Yes            Planned interventions are potentially expected to
                                                                  lead to land acquisition or restriction of access to
                                                                  sources of livelihood. Therefore, a Resettlement
                                                                  Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared for the
                                                                  activities triggering OP 4.12 as a due diligence
                                                                  given that the specific sites or impacts of
                                                                  envisioned physical investments are not all known.
                                                                  The RPF consistent with OP 4.12 was prepared by
                                                                  the Borrower and disclosed in-country and at the
                                                                  Bank website. The RPF will be used as a guide to
                                                                  conduct specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)
                                                                  as needed, as they relate to land acquisition and loss
                                                                  of economic activities issues, as well as
                                                                  compensation measures to minimize negative
                                                                  impacts on Project Affected People (PAPs). The
                                                                  RAPs will be submitted to the Bank for approval
                                                                  prior to the commencement of the civil works.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      No             The project will not finance dams nor rely on dams.
    Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No                  The project is not expected to affect international
    7.50                                                          waterways.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No             The project will not be located in a Disputed Area.
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
    any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    • The proposed project will fund the development and rehabilitation of urban infrastructure, such as roads and
    buildings in Bouake and San Pedro. All these activities may induce potential adverse impacts on environmental
    components. For those which exact locations are known such as A3 and a truck parking area at the north
    entrance of the city of Bouake, tarring of the urban road of Tollakouadiokro, potential deterioration of
    environment in terms of noise, pollution, and dust are possible. The same goes to the investments in San-Pedro,
    which are the strengthening of the road dedicated for the use of trucks, the upgrading and asphalting of the
    access road to the airport, including the access road to the Port of San Pedro and the access road to the
    commercial zone along the coast.
    • The project aims to strengthen the competitiveness of the targeted economic agglomeration, including the
    development of high potential agri value chains. To achieve this, activities under this component may lead to the
    use of chemical products such as pesticides by beneficiaries.
    • Some of the planned interventions are potentially expected to lead to land acquisition, restriction of access to
    sources of livelihood and or loss of assets. It is particularly true for the areas where specific investments are
    known: A3 (Bouake); a truck parking area at the north entrance of Bouake; the urban road of Tollakouadiokro
    (Bouake); the road dedicated for the use of trucks in San Pedro (rue des grumiers), the access road to the airport,
    the access road to the Port of San Pedro, the access road to the commercial zone along the coast.
    • Activities related to the construction of roads and the undertaking of other civil works will induce excavations
    with potential discoveries of physical cultural resources.
    2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
    project area:
    • The environmental degradation due to the construction and rehabilitation of urban infrastructure in Bouake and

                                                    Page 6 of 11
San Pedro is likely to be short-lived, limited to the duration of the works, however, in the event the works are
not handled properly a potential long term adverse effect is possible. The project is likely to have positive
environmental impact as well, by reducing congestion and accidents in the investment areas, as well as by
planned greening of the cities.
• If an enterprise supported by the project misuses pesticides, it may have a long lasting adverse effect on the
population, depending on the consumption pattern of the product produced by the enterprise and the nature of
the pesticides.
• Some of the potentially negative impact on the restriction of access to sources of livelihood and or loss of
assets caused by the proposed investments could be long lasting, depending on the level of dependency on the
specific location. The objective of the project is to create more economic opportunities in the cities of Bouake
and San Pedro in general. Potentially, the project creates more sources of livelihood and income generation for
the population.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
The objective of the project is to improve the enabling environment to encourage more economic activities in
Bouake and San Pedro. As such, the selection of infrastructure investments was made based on its economic
impact. However, the decision also took into account the magnitude of potential environmental upside, such as
the benefit of less congestion and accidents. The project also incorporates greening activities in order to
minimize adverse environmental impact.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The proposed project is classified as category B – partial assessment, and safeguard policies OP4.01
(Environmental Assessment), OP4.09 (Pest Management), OP4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources) and OP4.12
(Involuntary Resettlement) are triggered. The proposed project will fund the development and rehabilitation of
urban infrastructure,such as roads and buildings in Bouake and San Pedro, which may have potential adverse
effects on the environment. Some construction site locations are known, some are not. As for the activities for
which the exact geographic locations are not yet determined with certainty, the Government has prepared an
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), in compliance with the core requirements of the
triggered safeguards policies: OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment). The ESMF lays out procedures for
screening and mitigating impacts from construction and rehabilitation of various investments, and includes the
following: (a) checklists of potential environmental and social impacts and their sources; (b) procedures for
participatory screening of proposed sites and activities and the environmental and social considerations; (c)
procedures for assessing potential environmental and social impacts of the planned project activities; (d)
institutional arrangements for mitigating, preventing, and managing the identified impacts; (e) typical
environmental management planning process for addressing negative externalities in the course of project
implementation; (f) a system for monitoring the implementation of mitigation measures; and (g) recommended
capacity building measures for environmental planning and monitoring of project activities. Finally, the
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) in ESMF includes a budget of each mitigation measure
proposed. The ESMF was commented on and approved by the National Agency of Environment (ANDE,
Agence Nationale de l'Environnement) and by the World bank, and published in-country on April 5, 2017 and
on the World Bank website on April 5, 2017.

There are seven investments for which the location is known: (i) the highway A3 in Bouake, (ii) a truck parking
area at the north entrance to the city of Bouake, (iii) the urban road of Tollakouadiokro in Bouake, (iv) the road
dedicated for the use of trucks (rue des grumiers) in San Pedro, (v) the access road to the airport of San Pedro;
(vi) the access road to the Port of San Pedro; and (vii) the access road to the commercial zone along the coast.
ESIAs have been prepared by the Borrower, commented on and approved by the National Agency of
Environment (ANDE, Agence Nationale de l'Environnement) and by the World Bank, and disclosed as follows:

(i) Combined ESIA for Bouake A3 and the truck parking area: on April 13, 2017 in-country, and on April 13,

                                                Page 7 of 11
2017 on the World Bank website
(ii) Tollakouadiokro road in Bouake: on April 13, 2017 in-country, and on April 13, 2017 on the World Bank
website
(iii) Rue des grumiers in San Pedro: on April 13, 2017 in-country, and on April 13, 2017 on the World Bank
website
(iv) Access road to the airport of San Pedro: covered under PRICI, on March 21, 2016 in-country, and on April
1, 2016 on the World Bank website
(v) Access road to the Port of San Pedro: covered under PRICI, on March 21, 2016 in-country, and on April 1,
2016 on the World Bank website
(vi) Access road to the tourist zone: covered under PRICI, on March 21, 2016 in-country, and on April 1, 2016
on the World Bank website

The entrepreneurship program may support entrepreneurs in the agribusiness sector, which may have an effect
on the use of pesticide. Consequently, an Integrated Pest Management Plan was prepared, reviewed, and
disclosed in country on March 29, 2017 and on the World Bank website on April 4, 2017.

Further specific ESIAs will be prepared for relevant activities before project implementation along with ESMPs
as the specific investment are identified.

The project will also have a positive environmental impact in Bouake and San Pedro, by reducing accidents as a
result of improved main roads, incorporating greening plans into the proposed construction works for economic
and social infrastructure, and improving the waste management system.

In order to anticipate and to be sure that all the precautions have been taken to protect and safeguard physical
cultural resources, the ESMF prepared in line with the OP4.01 includes a section on how to handle chance finds
of cultural assets within the project area.

The planned interventions are expected to lead to land acquisition or restriction of access to sources of
livelihood. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared for the activities for which the specific
sites or impacts of e nvisioned physical investments are not yet known. The RPF outlines the principles and
procedures for resettlement and/or compensation of people affected by the project, and establishes standards for
identifying, assessing and mitigating negative impacts of the activities supported by the project. The RPF was
commented on and approved by the World bank, and published in-country on April 5, 2017 and on the World
Bank website on April 5, 2017. The RPF will be used as a guide to conduct specific Resettlement Action Plans
(RAPs) as needed, as they relate to land acquisition and loss of economic activities, as well as compensation
measures to minimize negative impacts on Project Affected People (PAPs). The RAPs will be submitted to the
Bank for approval prior to the commencement of the civil works.

For the three investments which the location is known RAPs have been prepared. RAPs have been prepared by
the Borrower, reviewed and cleared by the WBG and disclosed as follows:

(i) Bouake A3: on April 18, 2017 in-country, and on April 18, 2017 on the World Bank website
(ii) Truck parking area in Bouake: on April 18, 2017 in-country, and on April 18, 2017 on the World Bank
website
(iii) Rue des grumiers in San Pedro: on April 18, 2017 in-country, and on April 18, 2017 on the World Bank
website

The project expects to bring many social benefits to Bouake and San Pedro. The improved access to basic
services, both infrastructure and administrative, will benefit these two cities. In addition, the entrepreneurship
program will directly benefit entrepreneurs, with particular emphasis on women.


                                                 Page 8 of 11
   The project will support citizen engagement through public consultation on the information related to the
   implementation of the urban master plans. During the process of the preparation of the plans, the municipalities
   will have extensive stakeholder consultations. The project will help the municipalities to set up a feedback
   channel to treat all the inquiries.
   5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
   safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
   The preparation of ESIA, the ESMF and the RPF have necessitated extensive consultations with relevant
   stakeholders such as the municipalities in which the investments are located, such as businesses, transporters,
   customers, populations living in and around the locations where the investments take place, NGO, etc. Their
   viewpoints, comments and recommendations have been reflected in the final versions of the safeguard
   instruments.
   .




B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                             16-Mar-2017
Date of submission to InfoShop                                          05-Apr-2017
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




    Cote d'Ivoire                                                                  05-Apr-2017
 Comments:
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05-Apr-2017
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                   05-Apr-2017
 "In country" Disclosure
PHRESCTRY




 Cote d'Ivoire                                                              05-Mar-2017
 Comments:
 Pest Management Plan
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   A
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                      04-Apr-2017
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                   04-Apr-2017
 "In country" Disclosure
PHPESTCTRY




 Cote d'Ivoire                                                              29-Mar-2017
 Comments:
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X]                No []         NA           []
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [X]                No []         NA           []
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?

                                                   Page 9 of 11
          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP               Yes [X]   No []     NA    []
          incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




          OP 4.09 - Pest Management
          Does the EA adequately address the pest management              Yes [X]   No []     NA    []
          issues?
          Is a separate PMP required?                                     Yes [X]   No []     NA    []
          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a             Yes [X]   No []     NA    []
          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements
          included in project design?If yes, does the project team
          include a Pest Management Specialist?
PHCompliance




          OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural       Yes [X]   No []     NA    []
          property?
          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the     Yes [X]   No []     NA    []
          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
PHCompliance




          OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                 Yes [X]   No []     NA    []
          framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
          prepared?
          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards   Yes [X]   No []     NA    []
          or Practice Manager review the plan?
          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                   Yes []    No []     TBD   [X]
          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access    Yes []    No []     TBD   [X]
          to assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means
          of livelihoods)
PHCompliance




          The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [X]   No []     NA    []
          World Bank's Infoshop?
          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a          Yes [X]   No []     NA    []
          public place in a form and language that are understandable
          and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




          All Safeguard Policies
          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [X]   No []     NA    []
          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
          measures related to safeguard policies?
          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been            Yes [X]   No []     NA    []
          included in the project cost?
          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [X]   No []     NA    []
          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
          related to safeguard policies?
          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [X]   No []     NA    []
          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
          the project legal documents?


         III. Approval
         Task Team Leader(s):                  Name:Maiko Miyake,Hatem Chahbani,Mahine Diop
         Approved By:

                                                        Page 10 of 11
Safeguards Advisor:         Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)    Date: 13-Apr-2017
Practice Manager/Manager:   Name: Rashmi Shankar (PMGR)   Date: 13-Apr-2017




                                   Page 11 of 11
