INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA16223
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Feb-2016
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Feb-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Benin                       Project ID:  P149117
Project Name: Benin Cross Border Tourism and Competitiveness Project (P149117)
Task Team       Magueye Dia
Leader(s):
Estimated        18-Jan-2016                Estimated    25-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTCO7                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Central government administration (20%), SME Finance (15%), Agro-industry,
marketing, and trade (15%), Other domestic and internatio nal trade (15%),
General industry and trade sector (35%)
Theme(s):       Other Private Sector Development (80%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise
support (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
O
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      50.00             Total Bank Financing:    50.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                  50.00
Total                                                                        50.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project development objective is to contribute to increased cross-border tourism and private
sector investment in selected destinations and value chains
Page 1 of 18


﻿3. Project Description
Component 1: Improving Benin's Tourism Development Framework (US$8m).
This component aims at making critical improvements to the Investment Climate for private sector
development in the tourism sector in Benin, in relation to the objectives of the project. The critical
bottlenecks identified are:
*      An outdated regulatory environment, especially for licensing, certification and enforcement -
it can take up to 3 years for lodging establishments to formalize, and often they do not meet the
a        quality levels or needs of international tourists
*      Gaps in the skills programs available to entrepreneurs and workers alike, and mismatch with
actual needs of the private sector
*      Quasi-absence and inadequacy of promotion and marketing tools and linkages for the
industry to promote itself outside of Benin, especially towards tourists from Nigeria
*      Inefficient institutions and systems tasked with development, measurement and regulation of
tourism
To tackle these bottlenecks, activities will be designed and implemented with a demand-driven
approach, and in close coordination with the private sector.
Subcomponent 1.1: Strengthening the enabling environment for tourism development and enterprise
creation and growth (US$ 4m)
The Project will support the identification and implementation of a reform agenda through broad-
based consultation. A series of informal and formal discussions between the government and the
private sector actors operating in the tourism sector will be organized. These discussions may turn
into formal or informal sector-specific Task Forces or Working Groups that would serve as a
platform for Public-Private Dialogue (PPD). The Project will support the functioning of Working
Groups or Task Forces to arrive at an agreement on the priorities of the policy agenda, to draft an
action plan, and to ensure implementation by conducting monitoring and evaluation.
The Project will also set aside resources to support the implementation of proposed reforms that have
been deemed high priority by a broad group of stakeholders. Some of the reforms worthy of
consideration, as raised by the stakeholders, are revamping the construction permits for tourism-
related establishments, tourism licensing and inspection processes, hotel classification and standards
compliance, travel facilitation for tourists at the Benin-Nigeria border crossing, and the setup of a
national marketing entity with sustained funding sources. The Project will also support an awareness
building and communication campaign towards MSMEs on the processes and tools to meet tourism
related regulations.
This sub-component will also provide support and technical assistance (US$2m) to the "Route Des
P6ches" Tourism Development Agency in order to increase its effectiveness as the flagship entity for
coastal tourism development in Benin. The project will commission a technical and institutional audit
and fund a program for the upgrading of the Agency into an agile and effective entity. This includes
helping the ADTRP streamline the "Route des P6ches" program by completing critical feasibility
studies and elaborating key regulations, and support the elaboration and roll out of a pilot Tourism
Investment Strategy. The investment strategy will include the design and implementation of a
comprehensive lodging investment strategy for project target areas, with buy in from all
stakeholders, including collection of supply-demand marketing intelligence, to develop a tourism
investment mobilization plan, development and documentation of the tourism value proposition,
preparation of hotel and resort investor list, the development of an outreach plan, preparation of pre-
Page 2 of 18


﻿packaged investment-ready opportunities and stakeholder engagement events.
Subcomponent 1.2: Upgrading the institutions and programs for skills development in tourism (US$
1.5m)
Benin has 25 vocational learning institutions providing curricula involving hotels and tourism, out of
which 20 are private institutes. Seven of these establishments specialize excursively in hotel and
tourism, the majority of which focus on line-level skills of kitchen, restaurant service and hotel
operations. Despite having well-defined policies and governance frameworks on paper, the reality is
that the majority of these establishments offer poor-quality training and education. They do not
provide consistent courses, operating with reduced staff, without practical equipment and not
respecting curricula. There is also a significant mismatch with private sector needs, as only 7% of the
tourism workforce has had formal training in tourism and hospitality, and students emerging from
such institutions have trouble integrating into the labor force. This subcomponent will improve the
frameworks and mechanisms to provide demand-driven capacity building and skills development
activities to relevant private sector stakeholders.
a)     Improving the regulatory and institutional framework for skill upgrading: iv) PPD to create
demand-driven skill development programs, by facilitating consultations among ministries, private
sector and training institutions to enhance the link between training and job placements; v)
Updating curricula and teaching manuals for diplomas in tourism & hospitality, including piloting of
programs in key establishments; vi) Setting up and piloting a training of trainers program in order to
train 70 persons, targeting instructors in tourism institutes, training centers and the MCAAT.
b)      Strengthen the mechanisms to provide training and capacity building to sector stakeholders.
This program will be piloted with a group of learning institutions which commit to skills upgrading
of existing workers, and will be rolled out on a cost-sharing basis with beneficiaries. This includes
upgrading and expanding the MCAAT's modules on continuing education for tourism professionals,
including Tourism English modules. Programs will be anchored at existing institutions to ensure their
sustainability, post-project.
Subcomponent 1.3: Improving processes and tools for destination marketing (US$ 2.5m)
A key roadblock to increasing tourism demand is the lack of awareness of Benin's tourism products
by key source markets, particularly Nigerians. Demand survey results have shown a significant gap
between the positive assessment of Nigerians that have traveled to Benin, and those who have not,
for both leisure and business tourists. In order to increase demand and raise Benin's tourist market
a         share, the country needs to develop a cohesive image to improve its visibility as a tourist destination,
to position its key assets and undertake substantial promotion. To ensure the continued application of
effective marketing approaches, this component also aims to improve the financing mechanisms for
tourism promotion, as well as support the creation of a private-sector led destination marketing
entity.
Marketing activities will upgrade general tools and systems to target international and regional
visitors, with a specific focus on the Nigerian market. This sub-component will finance the following
activities, at both national and regional levels:
A) Destination Marketing: The sub-component proposes to finance the implementation of the initial
activities under the marketing and promotion action plan, which was produced during project
preparation. This action plan includes i) developing a brand and visual identify for Benin,
redesigning the official website as well as marketing and promotion collateral, ii) developing tools
for travel trade promotion (B2B) such as sales manuals, familiarization trips, trade shows and tour
operator trainings; and iii) targeted marketing and promotional activities towards three specific
Page 3 of 18


﻿Nigerian market segments: a) the Meetings, Incentives, Conventions and Events segment, b) the
shopping and beach leisure segment, and c) cultural tourism.
B) Supporting the creation of a destination marketing entity and the structuring of continuous
O
funding sources: The sub-component will support the design and implementation of a framework for
private sector driven and financially sustainable tourism promotion entity. To do so, a three phased
approach is considered. During phase 1, a business plan and structure will be elaborated with the
view to make the entity financially independent by the fifth year. Based on the validation of the plan
by broad-based stakeholder dialogue, the Project will support the establishment of the legal and
institutional framework for such an initiative during the second phase, including potential
restructuring of the FNDPT to serve as a sustained source of partial funding. With the full
endorsement by the stakeholders and successful completion of phase 2, the third phase will be to
operationalize the institution. Recruitment of technical specialists, capacity building, development of
procedure manual, provision of equipment and furniture are all possible support under this
component.
Component 2: Tourism Destination and Product Development (US$23.5 million)
The objective of this component is to support the critical elements of tourism products, destinations
and services to break the vicious cycle of perpetuating under-performance of the tourism sector in
Benin. The component will target the destination of Ouidah as the strategic starting points of a
sequenced development approach. Ouidah is strategically located on the coast, with favorable
transport access and linkages to potential demand (proximity to Cotonou, Nigeria and Togo) in
Benin's priority area for tourism development. Most importantly, it contains a well-diversified mix
of tourism products and sites that are unique to the region, thus setting the groundwork for its
sustained competitiveness. As such, it is a natural starting point to catalyze tourism development in
the area as a cultural, leisure and ecotourism hub.
The historic city of Ouidah will be supported and enhanced as the cultural hub, located strategically
along key touristic routes (Coastal route, slave route, Voudou cradle). Investing in developing
cultural tourism products is an important strategic fit to create a sustainable, inclusive and diversified
product base early-on, as well as respond to increasing demand from key source markets - European,
American and Diaspora - and especially Nigerians, who view cultural activities as key components
in their destination choices . This market has above-average spending and a high proportion of which
a         reaches the local economy. In particular, redeveloping thematic circuits of tangible and intangible
heritage was rated as highly attractive for that market, in Benin as well as in other destinations they
tend to favor (Ghana, Kenya, Senegal, and South Africa). Cultural tourism is where infrastructure
and product development actions have the greatest potential for impact, as the undeveloped nature of
sites is the key roadblock to tapping this segment. Upgrading tourism sites and roads were ranked in
the top 3 improvements required to draw Nigerians to Benin.
The project will carry out an integrated approach to providing support to developing this destination,
with investments along three main categories: (i) the upgrading of urban and transport infrastructure
and services in its historic core, with the goals of improving livability and accessibility for residents
and visitors alike (ii) the creation of flagship cultural and heritage products to position the
destination, attract, retain and satisfy visitors; and (iii) structuring the tourism offer to improve the
competitiveness and revenue-generation potential of the destination all along the year.
Activities were selected through careful analysis and deep consultations with local stakeholders, in
particular local civil society and local authorities, to ensure that they articulate with local priorities
Page 4 of 18


﻿and respect local customs. They were designed as meaningful "packages", both to improve the local
urban environment, especially for the most disadvantaged communities, and to attract tourists. To
encourage innovative, sustainable and inclusive approaches, some of the activities related to local
services and tourism offerings within these categories will be executed through calls for proposals
O
that would encourage participation from NGOs, foundations, research centers and the private sector.
This would be structured as a Challenge Fund that would offer matching grants (with high
percentage of participation in total costs) for around 5 sub-projects, receiving each between US
$100-500K, for a total of up to US$2m. This Challenge Fund would be implemented by the same
firm selected competitively to manage the SME grant component (see Sub-Component 3.1).
Specific investments would include:
2.1. Upgrading of urban infrastructure and services in Ouidah's historic core
a. Upgrading urban infrastructure in the historic core, including creating a pedestrian zone. This
includes the paving and rehabilitation strategic portions of roads for tourism circuits as well
improving in-city road traffic, improving drainage, providing street lighting, landscaping, creation of
a pedestrian zone, and installing benches, trash cans and signage.
b. Improving solid waste management. Ouidah produced about 5240 tons of solid waste in 2014,
with a very low corresponding collection rate. An activity for the improvement of waste collection
with specific requirements for inclusiveness and sustainability would be selected and partially funded
through the Challenge Fund, and implemented along with the Municipality of Ouidah. In particular
local NGOs may help scale up a program already piloted by Oxfam Quebec.
c. Upgrading urban infrastructure and service provision in the Zoungbodji area. This is a poor
community, lacking access to water and sanitation which surrounds some of the most important
slave route monuments. Proposed investments in this area include upgrading of roads and drainage,
improving access to safe water and sanitation for 200 households, upgrading public spaces, social
infrastructure and parking zones.The upgrading of this zone will serve as a demonstration project for
the integration of communities to tourism sites in Benin.
2.2. The creation of flagship cultural and heritage products
d.     Creating a flagship interpretation product: rehabilitating the Portuguese Fort as the Ouidah
museum and cultural center. This activity includes the rehabilitation of the museum building,
scenography and exhibition spaces, concessions, and the rehabilitation of the plaza and park facing
a        the fort as the gateway to the historic core, which includes parking, landscaping, paving, and street
lighting. Parts of it, such as the rehabilitation of collections, could be funded and executed through
the Challenge Fund. A scientific committee will serve as advisory council to the museum's
rehabilitation, while its operations and maintenance (O&M) will be undertaken by the MCAAT,
funded in part by concessions and ticket sales.
f.     Creating a flagship heritage product-upgrading the slave route. This activity will support
the rehabilitation of memorials and public spaces at the four main stations along the Slave Route that
cuts through Ouidah and leads to the coast - this could be executed through the Challenge Fund. It
includes also financing signage, lighting, and parking spaces. The Door of No Return area will be
restored, landscaped, and its buffer area expanded. This will be done in a way that improves the
connection between the coast and Ouidah and creates the conditions for private sector development,
especially lodging. The goal is to assist in the route's inscription as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
A scientific committee will serve as advisory council to the route's rehabilitation, and its O&M will
be undertaken by the MCAAT and other resources as needed, utilizing resources and competencies
from the management of the Portuguese Fort.
g.     Creating a flagship coastal tourism product-a compound integrating a crafts village, Slave
Page 5 of 18


﻿Route interpretation center and tourist information center. This area will integrate a number of
products and services offered in the proximity of the Door of No Return in order to add value to and
diversify the tourism offer, allowing visitors to stay longer, spend more and increase their
satisfaction. This integrated development will house interpretative spaces, concessions and crafts
O
sales and production spaces, as well as function (event) rooms and information points. O&M will be
undertaken by the MCAAT with contributions from the Municipality, partly funded by revenue from
concessions, the crafts village and ticket sales. The crafts village will be developed in cooperation
with Collective Groups and Associations of Artisans of Ouidah (CAGAO). This activity would also
draw on the Challenge Fund.
h.     Improving historic and heritage circuits in the historic core. This proposed activity will
leverage the urban infrastructure investments to upgrade and operationalize four key tourism circuits
in Ouidah's historic core. Proposed are (i) essential sites, (ii) memories of slavery, (iii) architecture
tour; and (iv) art and design in an open air museum. Each of these circuits will be upgraded with
signage, interpretation, lighting, benches, landscaping of public spaces, solid waste & drainage works
and an improved layout of the main tourism office.
2.3. Structuring the tourism offer to improve the competitiveness of the destination
i.     Improving the tourism events offer. Events, such as the annual Voudou festival, are a key
visitor draw and a proved important element of attracting the Nigerian market. This activity will
include upgrading the Verdure Theater and the adjacent esplanade at the French Fort to better host
events. TA to professionalize the organization of events could be executed by NGOs or foundations
through the Challenge Fund. The Municipality will be charged with O&M of the area, funded partly
by events revenues.
j.      Developing a beachfront leisure area in Djegbadji to serve as an anchor for leisure tourism
on the western point of the "Route des P6ches". This may include infrastructure such as solid waste &
drainage, water supply and electricity connection, as well as tourism infrastructure such as a
boardwalk, benches, landscaping, concession spaces, beach sports facilities, parking and a
playground. The development of an integrated ecotourism product offering in Djegbadji is also being
explored, and could include the upgrading of key ecotourism circuits, including lagoon canoe tours
and interpretation walks (lagoon, coast, lakes, forest, salt collection), with facilitation for their
operationalization by the private sector and training for guides.
A second, and important zone to bolster the MICE and shopping markets and to establish a good
a         practice foothold in the expansion of the coastal tourism product is developing the Fidjirosse
beachfront, starting from Cotonou to the west. Pending the successful implementation of the Ouidah
investments, and resolution of potential safeguards and inclusive development issues, the project will
evaluate the possibility of undertaking light investments in a small portion of the Fidjirosse
beachfront area as a second phase during Mid Term Review.
If deemed favorable at MTR, a small pilot area of Fidjirosse will be developed with the aim of
transforming it into a quality leisure and entertainment zone close to Cotonou. This will be carried
out by upgrading its public spaces and creating opportunities for the upgrading and expansion of
regulated, quality private sector establishments. Such investments could include i) public space
upgrading: notably drainage, water supply and electricity connection, sanitation facilities, street
lighting and landscaping, and ii) tourism infrastructure: boardwalk, benches, landscaping, concession
spaces for stalls, stores, restaurants and activities, beach sports facilities, a playground and parking.
The component will support the integration of stakeholders and communities to each of the proposed
investments, in order to create ownership over the management and maintenance of the sites. Each
Page 6 of 18


﻿infrastructure project will include funds for technical assistance in the structuring and establishments
of sustainable O&M processes. To encourage innovative, sustainable and inclusive approaches, some
of the activities related to local services and tourism offerings within these categories will be
executed through calls for proposals that would encourage participation from NGOs, foundations,
O
Q)        research centers and the private sector. This would be structured as a Challenge Fund that would
offer-grants (with high percentage of participation in total costs) for around 5 sub-projects, receiving
each between $100-500K, for a total of up to $2m. This Challenge Fund would be implemented by
the same firm selected competitively to manage the SME grant component (see Sub-Component
3.1.2).
Further, and in addition to capacity building support, the project include specific activities aiming at
strengthening the sustainability of the tourism development in the country: (i) finalization of a
comprehensive master plan for the whole Fishing Road Tourism Development Area (ADTRP) taking
into consideration the specific objectives of sustainable ecotourism development as clearly expressed
by the Government, and which will reinforce the delineation of Community Biodiversity
Conservation Areas (CBCAs) and existing Protected Marine Areas (MPAs) and will also include
updated environmental baseline studies to delineate areas of critical natural habitat within the
project's area of influence; (ii) development of urban planning regulations including construction and
planning codes and standards specific to the area; (iii) implementation of management plans for
Community Biodiversity Conservation Areas (CBCAs) and existing Protected Marine Areas (MPAs)
which include capacity building of management bodies and stakeholders; (iv) preparation and
internalization of a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) toward tourism
development of the Fishing Road Program (ADTRP) and the preparation of specific regulations to
protect the related biodiversity; (v) adoption of standards guide for the opening and inspection of
infrastructures, hotel complex and associates, including efficiency criteria for resources management
(water, energy, etc.). The project implementing unit will include two seasoned specialists: (i) an
environmental specialist and (ii) a social safeguard specialist.  A total amount of one million eight
hundred and fifty thousands (1,850,000) dollars US is earmarked in the project cost, financed by the
Bank, to cover the aforementioned environmental and social measures. This cost amount does not
include the resettlement compensation cost which will be estimated during implementation through
the resettlement action plans.
Component 3: Support to MSME upgrading, linkages and expansion (US$10m)
o        The relatively low level of product and service quality offered by Benin's tourism oriented firms
constrain the attractiveness of the tourism sector. Similarly, limited exploitation of backward
linkages opportunities from tourism to other sectors means that the sector's contribution to broader
economy significantly undershoots its potential. The key drivers of firm under-performance include
high levels of informality, low levels of managerial and technological capabilities among MSMEs,
and difficulties in accessing finance. Broader African experience suggests both demand -side and
supply-side financing constraints apply: while only around one-in-five African MSMEs has ever
obtained financing from a formal financial institution, only 23% of those who have not received a
loan actually applied for one. Bank penetration in Benin is estimated at 5%, and SMEs only make up
ab out 10-15% of the typical Bank portfolio. Loans in the tourism sector are generally oriented
towards large enterprises and represents less than 2% of the total bank's portfolio. It is estimated that
about 500 SMEs operate directly in tourism sector activities (hotels, restaurants, supermarkets and
distribution), and about 300 of them (60%) would have long term (annual) supply contracts with
large enterprises. These SMEs typically require short terms financing equivalent to $7.5m, or about
25% of their turn-over. The objectives of this component are:
i)     Support tourism or tourism related MSMEs to improve product quality and linkages
Page 7 of 18


﻿ii)    Foster growth of tourism or tourism related MSMEs by extended access to credit constraint
Component objectives will be realized through the following key activities:
i)     An MSME Facility will support BDS services and Business Plan preparation and
O
implementation through Business Plan Competitions.
ii)    A Risk Sharing Facility (RSF) with leading commercial banks and financial institutions to
ease the financing constraint by SME financing in general and those in the tourism sector in
particular.
The component will also apply the geographic filter to maximize impact: within the target
destinations in southern Benin (i.e. Ouidah and Fidjross6) all MSMEs will be eligible for direct
support. Beyond this region only MSMEs with supply links to the tourism sector will be eligible.
Linkages support will focus primarily on the agribusiness, crafts, and souvenir industries given their
strategic importance to Benin's tourism industry, high demand for those local products, and
unrealized potential for value addition and job creation (including for women).
Subcomponent 3.1: MSME Facility for Improved Quality and Linkages (US$5m).
This subcomponent will establish a grant facility with two windows that will (i) finance BDS to
improve firm capabilities; and (ii) provide funding to support business plans and linkage
opportunities identified by the geographic and thematic project filters. SME funds through the BDS
window will be available for a range of purposes, including the development of business plans
(including via business plan competitions), support for basic accounting, management support, to
open bank accounts, provision of mediation services in disputes with tax authorities, assistance to
prepare loan application identification of new market opportunities, efficiency and environmental
studies, training programs (including those linked to activities developed under the project),
implement technology solutions, etc. Funding disbursed under the window will support acquisition of
critical infrastructure (including equipment) and activities directly related to strengthening target
value chains on a selective basis . While firm selection will be via business plan competition with
wide scope for innovation around improving Benin's tourist offerings, some specific project
priorities will also be clearly flagged to participants. For example, an important outcome for this
window will be to have generated and funded innovative ideas aimed at strengthening linkages with
the agricultural sector. A combination of instruments will be used to work with approximately 40
o        MSMEs, a lead firm and smallholders to develop a food distribution platform (warehousing with
services) that will serve hotels in particular. The MSME grant program will be outsourced to a single
private management firm under the supervision of the PIU . The operating manual will be developed
(as part of the Project implementation manual) to highlight the operating principles and procedures of
the fund, as well as the governance and internal control mechanisms. The SME facility is expected to
target approximately 1000 firms and lead to the creation of about 5000 jobs over the course of the
project.
Subcomponent 3.2: Risk-Sharing Facility to finance MSME growth (US$5m)
This component will seek to expand access to finance for tourism and tourism-related SMEs through
mechanisms aimed at providing financial institutions with sufficient comfort to lend to and support
SMEs while improving their own value chain lending capabilities. An IFC Risk Sharing Facility
(RSF) embedding a pooled first loss cover and fee rebates from IDA will be created under the Global
SME Facility . The facility would partially mitigate creditor risks and enable financial institutions to
increase lending to established SMEs as well as expand their reach to a new cohort of SME clients. It
would leverage IFC's existing network of private sector partners in Benin, including top tier hotels as
Page 8 of 18


﻿anchor names and systemically important banks as lenders, to bridge the SME financing gap in the
country. In line with the project's objectives, the RSF will have a particular focus on agribusiness and
crafts value-chains.
O
Q)        The RSF will be extended to a preselected pair of two private commercial banks on the basis of the
banks' willingness to expand their SME financing, as demonstrated by their existing in-house
capabilities, a clearly articulated SME strategy and IFC's experience partnering with them. It is
presumed that the two banks would be selected from a pool of subsidiaries of international and pan-
African banking groups. The programmatic approach to the RSF reflects the lessons being learnt by
IFC in a similar WB-IFC value-chain project in Cameroon (the Cameroon Agri Project) where
partnering with several banks has created a sense of competition among FIs to provide superior
service to eligible SMEs while taking adequately compensated credit risks. The RSF will incentivize
banks to extend longer-term loans in addition to their more traditional working capital facilities. The
activity will also provide to the selected banks technical assistance (e.g., specific value chain credit
know-how, implementation of targeted instruments, ICT support) to enable them to better assess and
manage SME relationships and to channel some critical TA to their SME clients.
The RSF will be implemented through competitively selected commercial banks (as DCA) under the
overall coordination of the PIU and technical leadership of the appropriate ministries. Based on field
assessment and discussions to date with candidate banks and potential anchor firms, the relevant
SMEs' financing needs are estimated in the region of $45m, which, assuming a 50/50 risk sharing
agreement, means a RSF in the size of $22.5m (See Figure 1, below). The component's IDA pooled
first-loss contribution of $4m would represent 17.8% of the $22.5 million exposure. Of Component
3.2's $5m total amount, the remaining $1m will be ear-marked for funding TA to banks and their
SME clients. It is estimated that 300 to 500 eligible SMEs operating in or linked to the tourism sector
would benefit from RSF-supported financing.
In addition to IFC's specific reporting requirements for RSFs, the banks' effectiveness in deploying
the RSF will be periodically reviewed by the DCA. In order to continue to qualify under the
program, the banks will have to quickly ramp-up their respective covered portfolios and demonstrate
high rates of utilization (>50%). A re-allocation mechanism would also be used to ensure optimal
utilization of the facility.
o        Component 4: Project Management (US$4.5m)
This component aims to provide the necessary technical, advisory and financial support for the
adequate implementation, management and coordination of the Project; ensure that M&E systems for
project and sector-wide analysis systems are upgraded and sustained; and implement a robust citizen
engagement and communications program for project and sector inclusiveness.
Subcomponent 4.1: Establishment of and support to a Project Implementation Unit (US$ 4m)
Activities will support the establishment and operations of a project implementing unit (see details in
institutional arrangement section) through the financing of equipment, consultant compensation,
operating costs, organizational budgets, monitoring and evaluation, systems development, training
and communication, capacity building, and technical assistance. More specifically, this includes:
a)     The establishment and operation of a Project Implementing Unit (PIU). The PIU staff will
include the following functional capacity (i) PIU Management; (ii) Senior tourism specialist
(responsible for Comp 1); (iii) Senior municipal Engineer/Architect/Project Manager (responsible for
Comp 2); (iv) Private sector development and local economic linkages specialist (responsible for
Comp 3); (v) Fiduciary specialists (procurement, accounting), (vi) Communications and citizen
Page 9 of 18


﻿engagement specialist; (vii) environmental specialist; (viii) social safeguard specialist; and (ix) M&E
and tourism statistics specialist.
b)     Construction supervision could be supported by a DCA
c)     Communications, citizen engagement and stakeholder coordination activities. This includes
O
)         (i) the development of a comprehensive communication strategy for each Project target area as well
as the preparation of all communication materials and, where appropriate, the organization of
awareness raising events; (ii) the coordination of stakeholder involvement and in project activities;
and (iii) the implementation of a citizen engagement plan and looping back feedback to the project
implementation.
d)     Set up a monitoring mechanism, building on the sub-component strengthening official
statistics recoding capacity of all government agencies involved in the project implementation. The
agencies should report statistics to the PIU regularly.
e)     Secretariat services for the technical project steering committee.
Subcomponent 4.2: Upgrading Benin's Tourism Statistics for Sustained M&E (US$ 0.5m)
This sub-component will support the upgrading of Benin's Tourism Statistics and Information
Management System (TIMS) to set the groundwork for the implementation of Tourism Satellite
Accounts (TSA), in order to better measure and evaluate impacts and target markets. The project will
finance i) the elaboration of a program for upgrading its TIMS, to set the groundwork for TSAs
based on the 2014 diagnostic; and subsequently ii) finance priority actions for its TIMS upgrading,
including the provision of database systems, IT software and hardware, training and capacity
building and process mapping.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The technical assistance activities (components 1.1, 1.3, 2.3, 3.1 and 3.2) will be nation-wide and do
not raise any specific safeguard concerns. In contrary, the catalytic investments under component 2
will occur in an area structured by a coastal lagoon (Ouidah and "Route des P6ches") with
associated mangrove vegetation (Racemosa sp.; Avicennia sp.) and planted palm oil trees; because of
this ecosystem contribution to fisheries, tourism development and biological conservation (Habitat of
stopover of Afrotropical and Palearctic migratory birds, habitat of Sitatunga and African manatee)
the country had designated it a Ramsar site (Ramsar no. 1017). Named "Lower valley of the Couffo,
Aho channel, coastal lagoon and Lake Aheme", Ramsar site no. 1017 is a 47,000 hectares
"continental 0" category of wetland consisting in a complex of coastal lagoon, lake and ria located
in the southern region of Benin nearby the Atlantic ocean in the eastern part of the gulf of guinea.
The area is among the country's most densely populated region (Cotonou, the country's biggest
economic metropolis is located in and other medium and small cities are in the same watershed)
suggesting why primary rainforests have been replaced with manmade landscapes and megafauna'
species have almost disappeared. The high population growth rate in the region will induce
increasing pressure on natural resources even in a "no project" situation. Tons of fish, crab, shrimp
and oyster are produced by these ecosystems that support tens of thousands of community jobs.
Therefore the safeguard analysis had to inform on what threats the mangrove ecosystems and the
watercourses would sustain due to the project investments and further activities though the
development objective suggest clearly a wise use of biodiversity resources for ecotourism
development.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Abdoul Wahabi Seini (GSU01)
Maman-Sani Issa (GEN07)
Page 10 of 18


﻿6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          Though the activities aim at supporting tourism
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                development including ecotourism, thereby helping to
protect biodiversity conservation in a densely populated
area, the project is expected to have moderate to
significant and irreversible environmental and social
adverse indirect and cumulative impacts if poorly
managed. These are loss of natural habitats, degradation
of gazetted wetlands, potential increase/prevalence of
communicable diseases, safety at work, etc. It has
therefore been classified as a Category A project in
compliance with OP/BP 4.01.
Though the concept stage had identified that specific
instruments (ESIA, RAP) would be prepared and
disclosed 120 days before appraisal, the pre-appraisal
mission findings and recommendations induced changes
in the project design as envisioned at concept stage and
also uncertainties about the specific investment activities
sites. Therefore, only the following frameworks have been
prepared and disclosed in-country and at the Bank
InfoShop at this time: (i) an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF); (ii) a Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF); and (iii) a Pest Management
Plan (PMP). In addition, as a technical support to the
development of the tourism area Master Plan, a Strategic
Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) will be
financed under component 2. The ToR for the SESAs
have been prepared and disclosed before appraisal. ESIAs
Q)                                             for specific investments will be prepared during
implementation as set out in the ESMF.
 Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes        Though the project aims at supporting the valorization of
4.04                                 the biological hotspots of the coastal area through
ecotourism and sustainable tourism development, specific
attention should be paid to the footprint this activity
would induce on the conservation of species due to likely
high influx of tourists. The ESMF (i) set forth guidelines
to enhance the sustainability of the ecotourism activities
to develop, and (ii) recommended support to existing
conservation initiatives at national and community levels.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           The project will not finance activity in forest degradation,
forestry of forest products commercialization.
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes          Supporting agricultural activities will undoubtedly induce
indirect increase the use of pesticides, fertilizer and others
chemical inputs namely in horticulture, food storage and
conservation. But as indicated in the project description,
and regarding the existing conditions, only horticulture
Page 11 of 18


﻿and vegetable production in support to tourism activities
will be developed. A Pest management plan has been
prepared and disclosed in-country and at the Bank
InfoShop prior appraisal. The PMP suggests among others
natural vector control and agrobiology techniques to
avoid/lower use of chemicals thereby minimizing indirect
long term pollution risk.
 Physical Cultural     Yes         The investments area was part of the ancient kingdom of
Resources OP/BP 4.11                Danxome famous by its contribution to slave trade. For
instance, Ouidah city was the principal port of departure
to the Americas through the Gore/Senegal stopover. A
specific cultural management plan will be prepared in the
course of implementation to address the project's
rehabilitation of cultural heritage monuments associated
with the slave route. In addition, some sacred areas
punctuate the mangrove vegetation and some portions of
the coastal lagoon. Civil works may uncover and destroy
archaeological artifacts or sacred habitats if appropriate
measures were not in place during implementation. The
ESMF provided clear guidelines and measures for
handling chance find underground resources. Further,
specific cultural management plan would be prepared in
the course of implementation whether the project supports
rehabilitation of cultural monument of heritage..
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          There are no indigenous people in the project intervention
BP 4.10                             area.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes        The project influence area is located in a landscape
OP/BP 4.12                          composed of public, private and community lands, and
the investment sites are expected to host private
individual and community activities. Therefore, the
project is likely to induce land expropriation, physical
resettlement or temporary loss of revenues. Since the
exact nature and location of the investments in Djegbadji
are not known before the project implementation phase
start, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been
prepared, consulted upon and disclosed prior appraisal. It
provides guidance and procedures for the preparation of
Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) whenever people
displacement cases arise during project implementation.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No          The project will not finance dam construction or activity
4.37                                associated with existing dam.
Projects on International  No       The project will not finance activity located on
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                international waterways or that will directly affect such
waterways.
Projects in Disputed    No          The project areas are not under dispute.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
Page 12 of 18


﻿II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
)           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is classified category A due to the potential indirect and cumulative negative impact
O
on biodiversity and natural habitat and the resettlement challenges. Based on the nature of the
potential direct/indirect impacts and risks, the following Bank safeguard policies are triggered:
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01); Natural Habitats (OP 4.04); Pest management (OP 4.09);
Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11); Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12). The project will
support tourism infrastructure around Ouidah and the coastal area of Djegabadji. However, the
specific investments have not yet been determined. Based on progress on the ground, additional
investments may eventually be made at Fidjrosse, another coastal area. The project plan at
concept stage envisioned that specific investments would be known and ESIA's and RAPs would
be prepared accordingly. As a result of the pre-appraisal mission, the project design changed.
Because specific investments are yet to be determined, the borrower has prepared the following
Safeguard Frameworks that have been disclosed in-country and at the Bank InfoShop: (i) an
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF); (ii) a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF); and (iii) a Pest Management Plan (PMP). No specific investment site will be
known before the implementation though Djegbadji and Fidjrosse (eventually) localities in the
coastal region are yet identified to host the tourism catalytic investments. In fact, after concept
review meeting where it has been initially agreed that specific instruments (ESIA, RAP) would be
prepared and disclosed 120 days before appraisal, the pre-appraisal mission findings and
recommendations induced changes in the project design as envisioned at concept stage and also
uncertainties about the investment sites. Therefore, only the following framework have been
prepared and disclosed in-country and at the Bank InfoShop: (i) an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF); (ii) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF); and (iii) a Pest
Management Plan (PMP).
O
)           Further, at appraisal stage the project design has been adjusted and finalized as follows: i)
Infrastructure investments will focus on product development in Ouidah and Subject to progress
realized on the ground, it could be extended to Fidjrosse in another project or with additional
financing., ii) direct financial support to MSMEs under Component 3 is streamlined and is no
more focusing on agriculture. It will support provision of Business Development Services and
funding to improve firms capabilities and support business plans and linkage opportunities in the
tourism value chain. This confirmed the consistency of having prepared only frameworks (ESMF,
RPF) instead of specific instruments which will come later in the course of implementation when
investment sites are definitely identified and approved.
Overall, the project negative impacts would show up in the medium to long terms with the
expected high influx of tourists. The impacts would relate to the following categories: (i) long
term depletion of the natural habitats and associated aquatic fauna, including the migratory birds,
in the coastal zone; (ii) loss of mangrove vegetation and its associated economic utilities/uses; (iii)
temporary disruption of communities' income generating activities; (iv) Involuntary displacement
of cultural wealth (worship relics, buried archaeological remains, traditional worship places/
shrines or churches); (v) Expropriation and loss of land within the surroundings of Djegbadji
village.
Page 13 of 18


﻿Conversely, the positive impacts are expected to materialize in the short term in the following
forms: (i) valorizing ecotourism resources thereby enhancing protection and conservation of
associated biological wealth and natural habitats; (ii) better valorization and conservation of
cultural assets as part of sightseeing activities; (iii) increase of market value of land and social
O
services within the project's zone; (iv) creation of fulltime employment opportunities and
improvement of livelihoods to the benefit of local communities; (v) creation of temporary job
along with improvement of employees' income.
No direct potential large scale, irreversible and/or significant adverse impacts are expected to
occur due to the project investments.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The coastal area of Benin, which will host the catalytic investments for tourism development, is
part of the Ramsar site no. 1017 because of its mangrove vegetation and the lagoon that hosts
indigenous birds and receives seasonally Afrotropical and Palearctic migratory waterfowl. If the
project succeed in fostering tourism blooming in the area, the ongoing population growth will be
supplemented by high influx of tourists, which even seasonal will induce increased pressure on the
natural environment. Depletion of biodiversity, threat to natural habitat and unknown critical
natural habitat, pollution of water bodies due to deficient waste management, social changes and
health and safety risks (insecurity, sexual communicable diseases, etc.) are likely to occur if
appropriate sustainable management tools, land use rules and pollution prevention efforts were not
permanently implemented and follow through.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not applicable.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Government of Benin (GoB) has prepared, consulted upon, approved, disclosed in-country
and authorized the Bank to disclose the required safeguard documents: (i) an Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF); (ii) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF); and (iii) a
Pest Management Plan (PMP).
o
Regarding the borrower's capacity in managing the expected environmental challenges, risks and
impacts, the institutional and regulatory frameworks was assessed as strong enough and
operational to sustain. The national environmental assessment Agency ("Agence B6ninoise pour
l'Environnement" -ABE) has had a good track record in implementing and/or overseeing
environmental and social management plans/measures of Bank-funded operations. On the other
hand, the project implementation entity (Ministry of Tourism) has no experience of Bank
environmental and social safeguard policies. The project implementing unit will recruit and
maintain throughout the project lifecycle two seasoned specialists: (i) an environmental specialist
and (ii) social safeguard specialist.
Further, and in addition to capacity building support, the project include specific activities aiming
at strengthening the sustainability of the tourism development in the country: (i) finalization of a
comprehensive master plan for the whole Fishing Road Tourism Development Area (ADTRP)
taking into consideration the specific objectives of sustainable ecotourism development as clearly
expressed by the Government, and which will reinforce the delineation of Community
Biodiversity Conservation Areas (CBCAs) and existing Protected Marine Areas (MPAs) and will
Page 14 of 18


﻿also include updated environmental baseline studies to delineate areas of critical natural habitat
within the project's area of influence; (ii) development of urban planning regulations including
construction and planning codes and standards specific to the area; (iii) implementation of
management plans for Community Biodiversity Conservation Areas (CBCAs) and existing
O
Protected Marine Areas (MPAs) which include capacity building of management bodies and
stakeholders; (iv) preparation and internalization of a Strategic Environmental and Social
Assessment (SESA) toward tourism development of the Fishing Road Program (ADTRP) and the
preparation of specific regulations to protect the related biodiversity; (v) adoption of standards
guide for the opening and inspection of infrastructures, hotel complex and associates, including
efficiency criteria for resources management (water, energy, etc.).
A total amount of one million eight hundred and fifty thousands (1,850,000) dollars US is
earmarked in the project cost, financed by the Bank, to cover the aforementioned environmental
and social measures. This cost amount does not include the resettlement compensation cost which
will be estimated during implementation through the resettlement action plans.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders consulted during the preparation and that will be consulted during the
implementation of the project include, but not limited to: (i) the directly affected people namely
farmers, tenants farmers and agricultural land owners; (ii) the sharecroppers; (iii) the fishermen;
(iv) the local authorities and communities of the affected communes (Djegbadji, Fidjrosse); (v)
national environment NGOs; (vi) national Ramsar Administrative Authority; (vii) national
hydrological and fishery department; (viii) national forest and wildlife department. They have
been variously consulted during the preparation of the safeguard documents, and will participate in
the validation processes in both the two countries prior the issuance of the environmental permits
by the relevant authorities.
There was a preparatory meeting for Fidjrosse potential site held on July 28, 2015 at Fiyegnon 1.
The meeting attendants were 34 in number and include persons from Locally Elected
Representatives, grassroots population (fishermen, masons, mechanics, etc.), tourism service
providers, ADTRP and Ministry of Tourism/MCAAT officials and consultants. Two public
consultation sessions were held on: July 29, 2015 at Fiyegnon 1 with 403 persons as attendants;
and July 30, 2015 at Fiyegnon 2 gathering 268 persons made up of Locally Elected
Representatives, communities (fishermen, masons, mechanics, etc.), tourism service providers,
*           ADTRP and MCAAT officials and consultants.
On Djegbadji potential site, two preparatory meeting sessions were held including: the very first
one in the District of Djegbadji on July 31, 2015 with twenty-two (22) attendants including village
heads, tour guides, grassroots population, ADTRP and MCAAT officials and consultants. The
second one was held on August 10, 2015 at the compound of "CEG La Colombe" (a secondary
school) in Cotonou. This meeting gathered together 27 persons including village-level
development associations (ADEDO, ARDD and ARA), village heads, tour guides, grassroots
communities, ADTRP and MCAAT officials and consultants. Two public consultations were held
in Djegbadji District on respectively on August 3, 2015 and August 17, 2015. The first was
attended by 178 persons whereas 206 were present during the second one, including both
potentially affected people and other stakeholders.
In General, the formal processes of consultation and public hearing mechanisms as set through the
national regulations will apply, and the implementing entity will pursue the communication efforts
Page 15 of 18


﻿to: (i) ensure a good flow of information and facilitate a dialogue with the affected populations, the
key stakeholders and the public; (ii) offer avenues for the affected populations' concerns to be
appropriately expressed and discussed; (iii) support the implementation of the project's major
activities; and (iv) promote a good visibility of the project's results and impacts. More specifically
O
the program will help promote an open discussion and dialogue around the project's rationale,
activities and benefits, as well as its risks and complexity, so as to gain stakeholders' positive
engagement and ownership and also to manage reputational risks. The development of a grievance
redress and conflict resolution mechanism will also be supported.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              10-Nov-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           25-Nov-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  04-Mar-2016
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Benin                                                    18-Nov-2015
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              18-Dec-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           04-Feb-2016
"In country" Disclosure
Benin                                                    20-Jan-2016
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                              10-Nov-2015
SDate of submission to InfoShop 25-Nov-2015
O
"In country" Disclosure
a          Benin                                                    18-Nov-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[X] No[   ]   NA [   ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Page 16 of 18


﻿Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X ] No[  ]  NA[  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [ X] No [  ]   NA [   ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Is a separate PMP required?                             Yes[X] No[       ]   NA [   ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a     Yes [ X] No [    ]   NA [   ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes[X]  No[  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?           Yes[      No[X]     TBD
0
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [  ] No [X]  TBD [  ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Page 17 of 18


﻿Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
a          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Magueye Dia
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)             Date: 12-Feb-2016
Practice Manager/     Name: Jean Michel Noel Marchat (PMGR)      Date: 12-Feb-2016
Manager:
Page 18 of 18


