                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                        Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSR17000
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Feb-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 31-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Ghana                                        Project ID:           P074191
                            Project Name:     Ghana: Energy Development and Access Project (P074191)
                            Task Team         Shinya Nishimura
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         12-Mar-2007                                  Estimated   26-Jul-2007
                            Appraisal Date:                                                Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEE07                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                           Instrument:
                            Sector:           Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (86%), Other Renewable Energy
                                              (7%), Central government administration (7%)
                            Theme:            Infrastructure services for private sector development (29%), Rural services and
                                              infrastructure (29%), Climate change (14%), Regulat ion and competition policy
                                              (14%), Other public sector governance (14%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                       No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)




                                                                                Page 1 of 7
                         Total Project Cost:           120.55                   Total Bank Financing:       90.00
                         Financing Gap:               -205.05
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Source                                                                Amount
                           BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                               43.60
                           International Development Association (IDA)                                      90.00
                           Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                 5.50
                           Africa Catalytic Growth Fund (ACGF)                                             100.00
                           African Development Bank                                                         36.50
                           The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis & Malaria                             6.25
                           Borrowing Country's Fin. Intermediary/ies                                        15.50
                           SWITZERLAND Swiss Agency for Dev. & Coop. (SDC)                                  22.00
                           Global Partnership on Output-based Aid                                            6.25
                           Financing Gap                                                                  -205.05
                           Total                                                                           325.60
                         Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                         Category:
                         Is this a           No
                         Repeater
                         project?

                         2. Current Project Development Objectives


                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Proposed Project Development Objectives - The PDO of the project will remain the same as those of
                         the original GEDAP.

                         The proposed restructuring will reallocate funds from underspent categories to categories which
                         continue to have funding needs under the original project and first additional financing (details
                         provided below), to ensure the full utilization of the project funds and to address the funding needs
                         for the implementation of the project. Specifically, there are funds available under Categories 1(c)
                         Works, Goods and Services by $0.04m, 5 Solar PV Loans by $0.13m, and 6 Grants by $0.75m.
                         These funds are proposed to be reallocated to Categories 2(a) Goods for Training by $0.05m, 3(a)
                         Consultants Services including audits by $0.75m, and 7 Operating Costs by $0.12m. The investments
                         planned under original project and first additional financing are not curtailed under this reallocation,
                         and categories which will receive funds do not involve physical investments but rather on training,
                         consultants' services, and other operating expenses. Maintenance of the PIU with this reallocation is
                         necessary to ensure continued compliance of Bank policies when the second additional financing
                         component will be implemented.

                         ORIGINAL PROJECT AND FIRST ADDITIONAL FINANCING:

                         The original project has three components: (A) Sector and institutional development; (B) electricity
                         distribution improvement; and (C) electricity access and renewable energy. It is almost fully

                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         disbursed and virtually all activities have been completed.

                         In June 2010 IDA approved a first additional financing of US$ 70 million to concentrate efforts on
Public Disclosure Copy




                         improving ECG’s operational performance in high loss regions (Ashanti East & West) through the
                         following new components that were added to the original project and which were concentrated on:
                         (i) Distribution upgrade and (ii) commercial and technical capacity upgrade that included a program
                         for replacement of faulty meters and implementation of a loss reduction program, a new customer
                         management system and revenue improvement measures. The current closing date of the project is
                         July 31, 2015 and activities under the first AF are also nearing completion, with about 75% of the
                         Credit disbursed on 15 February 2015.

                         The implementation status for the components under the original project is as follows:

                         Component A: Sector and institutional development:
                         1.         Four sector entities (the Ministry of Energy, ECG and the two energy sector regulators, the
                         PURC and the Energy Commission), were supported by this component from the original project.
                         Implementation has been mixed. The Renewable Energy Act was approved by Parliament in late
                         2011 as a result of work carried out under GEDAP. Renewable resource assessments have been
                         completed for biomass energy, wind, and mini-/micro-hydro electricity generation. Tariff studies and
                         utility benchmarking were carried out by the PURC, along with capacity building activities for
                         several oversight agencies. However, while measures to enhance ECG’s operational performance
                         helped to reduce losses, this did not achieve the expected improvements in ECG’s financial
                         performance.

                         Component B: Electricity distribution improvement:
                         2.       This component has been completed. It has helped to upgrade the ECG distribution system in
                         order to contain or reduce technical energy losses on the network and improve the quality of supply
                         to consumers. A recent (2012) loss-reduction study estimated these to be about 11 percent, which is
                         considered to be reasonable and which could not have been achieved absent these interventions under
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the original project scope. As a result overall losses have been brought down from 26% to around
                         22%.

                         Component C: Electricity access and renewable development:
                         3.       Implementation of activities under this component is proceeding well. ECG and the Northern
                         Electricity Distribution Company (NEDCO) have connected over 140,000 households to their
                         distribution networks. In addition, the program of providing solar photovoltaic (PV) systems has
                         brought electricity to 15,000 remote rural households, while demonstrating a successful business
                         model for distributing PV systems to communities where the grid is not expected to reach. One
                         activity that is still under implementation is the construction of pilot mini- and micro-grids in
                         inaccessible areas in and around Lake Volta. The construction of these systems is expected to be
                         completed by the third quarter of 2015, and the contractor will operate them until July 2017 under a
                         contract with the Ministry of Power.

                         4.       The activities under the first Additional Financing were included under a new Component D,
                         Expanded Capacity for Electricity Distribution Improvement which was added to the original project
                         scope. The implementation status is as follows:
                         Distribution system upgrade. Substation and medium-voltage line works are progressing
                         satisfactorily and will be completed by Credit closure.



                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                         Commercial and technical capacity upgrade. Seven district offices/customer service centers have
                         been built to deal with the growth in customer population. Implementation of a new, company-wide
                         Commercial Management System (CMS) was rolled out to the regional offices in May 2015. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         installation of 6,000 meters in the Ashanti region was completed by November 2015, and
                         manufacturing of 71,000 additional meters are ongoing.

                         SECOND ADDITIONAL FINANCING:

                         The second AF, approved by the Board in April 2015, will scale up and expand the activities under
                         the GEDAP and the first additional financing. The activities comprise (a) revenue protection program
                         targeting ECG’s revenues from large and medium customers, (b) bulk metering for medium voltage
                         networks, (d) an incident management system (IMS) to support effective management and resolution
                         of outages and incidents in electricity supply, and (d) technical assistance and project management
                         support. The bulk of the proposed activities would be focus on improving revenue and commercial
                         loss reduction. The second additional financing has not become effective yet.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project covers the entire country.

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Anita Bimunka Takura Tingbani (GEN01)
                         Gloria Malia Mahama (GSU01)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              No            The restructuring will not provide additional funding to
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                    activities which will trigger this policy.This project is
                                                                   piloting the use of borrower systems and an ESIA has
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   been prepared using the Ghana EPA regulations (EPA Act
                                                                   490, and LI 1652) and procedures, hence OP/BP 4.01
                                                                   Environmental Assement and OP/BP4.11 Physical
                                                                   Cultural Resources have not been triggered in this project.
                                                                   Capacity gaps found in country procedures (mainly
                                                                   environmental policies, procedures and staff) have been
                                                                   addressed, hence country procedures continue to be used
                                                                   in addressing any adverse impacts identified in the ESIA
                                                                   although no new impacts are envisaged as a result of the
                                                                   restructuring.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP     Yes           Borrower systems are not being used to address OP/
                          4.04                                     BP4.04 on natural habitats because they were not found to
                                                                   be equivalent. The restructuring does not include
                                                                   additional activities from the original project however this
                                                                   safeguard policy remains in force under this restructuring
                                                                   as activities have been carried forward from the original
                                                                   project.The restructuring will not provide additional
                                                                   funding to activities which will trigger this policy.




                                                                     Page 4 of 7
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No             The restructuring will not provide additional funding to
                                                                       activities which will trigger this policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No                 The restructuring will not provide additional funding to
                                                                       activities which will trigger this policy.
                            Physical Cultural           No             The restructuring will not provide additional funding to
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                       activities which will trigger this policy.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No             The restructuring will not provide additional funding to
                            BP 4.10                                    activities which will trigger this policy.
                            Involuntary Resettlement    Yes            The restructuring will not provide additional funding to
                            OP/BP 4.12                                 activities which will trigger this policy.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        Yes            Borrower systems were not found to be equivalent to OP/
                            4.37                                       BP 4.37 on safety of Dams and hence this policy remains
                                                                       triggered as sub-projects could bring about the need to
                                                                       apply the policy even under the restructured project.
                            Projects on International   No             N/A
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No             N/A
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The proposed restructuring reallocates from underspent categories to expenditure category that
                              requires additional support in operational cost, training and audits. The investments planned under
Public Disclosure Copy




                              the categories from which the funds will be taken will not be curtailed, and activities which will
                              received the reallocated funds do not have any any components that will cause significant and/or
                              unprecedented changes in the natural environment. The project has piloted the use of borrower
                              systems and hence the EPA regulations will provide guidance for any general environmental
                              impacts and mitigation measures as spelt out in the ESIA. The re-allocation of funds towards
                              operational costs, training and audits does not result in additional activities outside the original
                              project scope and hence the potential for any unknown large scale, significant or irreversible
                              impacts remains minimal.safeguard implications.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               None.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                               Not considered.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                               Country systems are being used to address safeguards issues under OP/BP4.01 and OP/BP 4.11,
                              the remainder of the Bank safeguard policies which awere not found to be equivalent will be
                              addressed using the bank safeguard policies and these are OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitat, OP/BP4.12


                                                                        Page 5 of 7
                           Involuntary resettlement and OP/BP 4.37 Safety of Dams. These Bank policies will be used
                           address safeguard issues should they arise during project Theimplementation. The Borrower will
                           continue to use the existing Project Management Unit for this project implementation. In addition,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the project management team will benefit support from the World Bank Safeguard team when
                           required.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Key stakeholders were identified and consulted in August 2006. All relevant safeguards
                           documents have been prepared and disclosed in-country and in the InfoShop (Diagnostic report
                           was disclosed in the InfoShop in on January 29, 2007 and the draft RPF was disclosed on
                           February 20, 2007). This restructuring does not involve any new activities, however disclosure and
                           consultation on individual subprojects will be carried out in accordance Ghanaian environmental
                           assessment regulations and procedures under the restructured project.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank
                           Date of submission to InfoShop
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected




                                                                      Page 6 of 7
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                             Have dam safety plans been prepared?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                             Bank?
                             Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Shinya Nishimura
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                       Date: 21-Mar-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Meike van Ginneken (PMGR)                     Date: 31-Mar-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
