                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC14735

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Apr-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Cabo Verde                       Project ID:      P146666
                            Project Name:      Competitiveness for Tourism Development (P146666)
                            Task Team          Penelope Demetra Fidas,Julian Casal,Kofi-Boateng Agyen
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          27-Apr-2015                      Estimated        10-May-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTC07                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General industry and trade sector (75%), SME Finance (25%)
                            Theme(s):          Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (50%), Regulation and
                                               competition policy (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      5.00                     Total Bank Financing:           5.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   5.00
                              Total                                                                         5.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           14.       The development objective of the proposed project is to increase private investment and the
                           competitiveness of the private sector. This will be achieved by (i) strengthening the institutional
                           capacity and regulatory framework to increase private investment; (ii) supporting the establishment
                           of a National Tourism Organization to diversify and improve the quality of the tourism product; and
                           (iii) strengthen the capacity of entrepreneurs to implement business ideas and generate employment.
                           C. Project Description
                         The Competitiveness for Investment and Innovation Project concept has been informed by the
                         findings of the “Addressing the Challenges of a Middle-Income Small State” Country Economic
                         Memorandum (World Bank, 2013); the “Tourism Development in Cabo Verde: Is it Time to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Abandon the All-Inclusive Model?” study (World Bank, 2013); the “Establishing a Tourism
                         Ministry, Board, or Institute? Selecting an Institutional Arrangement to Promote Tourism Growth in
                         Cabo Verde” Technical Assistance (World Bank, 2014); the ongoing “Financial Sector Development
                         Strategy” Technical Assistance (World Bank, 2014); and lessons from the SME & Economic
                         Governance Project. As part of the preparation of the Project, the Bank facilitated a South South-
                         Knowledge Learning Exchange between the governments of Cabo Verde and the Seychelles focusing
                         on the reforms needed to properly support the tourism sector and diversify the tourism product.

                         The project’s focus on facilitating increased foreign direct investment and improving the
                         competitiveness of Cabo Verde is well aligned with the government’s agenda of fostering the private
                         sector, investment and productivity growth . The sectoral focus on tourism, agribusiness, and
                         maritime economy is also aligned with the prioritization of clusters in the GPRSP III, which
                         promotes a private sector-driven approach to implement the clusters.

                         The project intends to support selective, targeted, and integrated interventions to improve the
                         business environment, strengthen the capacity of both public sector institutions and the domestic
                         private sector, and create a culture of entrepreneurship. The proposed project will include the
                         following four components with preliminary estimates of allocations: (1) Strengthening the
                         Institutional and Enabling Environment to Invest and Compete (US$ 3m); (2) Improving the
                         Competitiveness of the Tourism Sector (US$ 5m); (3) Investment Marketplace for Innovation and
                         Entrepreneurship (US$10m); and (4) Project Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$2m).

                         COMPONENT 1. Strengthening the Institutional and Enabling Environment to Invest and Compete
                         The objective of this component is to implement investment climate reforms that can reduce
                         bottlenecks and facilitate investment, and improve the capacity of the investment promotion agencies
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to bring a new surge of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI). This will include: (i) the implementation of
                         targeted reforms that will reduce the time and cost of doing business; (ii) the provision of technical
                         assistance to strengthen the institutional capacity of the investment promotion agencies (Cabo Verde
                         Investments and the Society for the Integrated Development of Boa Vista and Maio) to attract,
                         manage, and deliver FDI transactions; and (iii) the provision of technical assistance to strengthen the
                         institutional capacity of selected embassies for the formation of trade and investment promotion
                         sections. Given the plethora of regulatory reforms required, the project support for business
                         environment reforms will need to be selective, pragmatic, readily implementable, sequenced and
                         based on a business environment assessment that will be carried out during project preparation in
                         close coordination with UCRE (State Reform Coordination Unit).

                         COMPONENT 2. Improving the Competitiveness of the Tourism Sector
                         The objective of this component is to strengthen the capacity of the new National Tourism
                         Organization and support the diversification of the tourism product. This will include: (i) the creation
                         of an advisory council comprised of international tourism experts that can provide ongoing guidance
                         to the NTO and identify areas in need of technical assistance; (ii) the creation of a quality label
                         program for small accommodations establishments to help Cabo Verde position itself beyond the all-
                         inclusive market; (iii) institutionalization of public-private dialogue; and (iv) the creation and
                         implementation of a tourism strategy with a strong focus on promoting the segments covered by the
                         quality label program, including revamping the country’s website, development of mobile apps, and
                         the sponsoring of marketing/PR representation in two to three strategic source markets so as to build
                         awareness of the destination. A detailed assessment of the criteria, cost, and benefits of the quality
                         label program will be carried out during project preparation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         COMPONENT 3. Investment Marketplace for Innovation and Entrepreneurship
                         The objective of this component is to improve the capacity of the private sector to prepare bankable
                         business plans and to facilitate financing from external investors and diaspora. This will include: (i)
                         technical assistance for entrepreneurs to refine business plans for start-ups and expansion of ongoing
                         businesses; (ii) the creation of an online marketplace where entrepreneurs can post their refined ideas
                         and be found by potential business partners (i.e. diaspora); (iii) competitive financing of innovative
                         business plans (including events) in the three priority clusters (tourism, agribusiness, and maritime
                         economy); and (iv) a reality television show to promote business ideas found in the online
                         marketplace and create a demonstration effect that showcases that entrepreneurship as a viable option
                         in Cabo Verde.

                         The component will be implemented through annual Business Plan Competitions (BPCs) during
                         which entrepreneurs will receive technical assistance to refine their business plans, and compete for
                         grant financing to implement innovative ideas. The business ideas will be posted on the online
                         marketplace and promoted through road shows in countries with large diaspora populations and
                         potential foreign investors. Winners of the BPCs will receive ongoing support, and gazelle
                         enterprises will be recognized in the online marketplace and become eligible for further funding
                         support. The additional funding support will match any external investor’s funds (up to a certain
                         limit). In order to promote transactions and create a demonstration effect, the project will support the
                         production of a reality television show (such as “Shark Thank”, “Dragon’s Den”, and “The
                         Apprentice”) where owners of gazelle enterprises would pass through challenges and compete for
                         financing in front of a panel of local and foreign investors.

                         The eligibility criteria, size of financing, eligible expenditures to be financed, procurement and
                         disbursement procedures will be determined prior to project approval based on a demand-supply
Public Disclosure Copy




                         assessment and drawing lessons from similar initiatives such as the Dell Challenge, Startup Chile,
                         Chile Global, Philippines’ Business Advisory Circle, Colombia’s Pro Micro, Lebanese Business
                         Network, and other Bank competitions. Any activities that could be categorized as “B” will be
                         ineligible.

                         COMPONENT 4. Project Coordination, Monitoring, and Evaluation
                         A small project coordination unit will be established in MTIBD to coordinate the implementation of
                         project activities, fiduciary management, monitoring and evaluation and reporting. Monitoring and
                         evaluation will include the implementation of annual visitor expenditure surveys through the
                         National Institute of Statistics (INE). These surveys, conducted with tourists upon departure from the
                         country’s various international airports, capture invaluable information in terms of average spend
                         (broken down by types of expenditures), average length of stay, reason for visit, source of
                         information about the country, activities undertaken, level of satisfaction, etc.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is nationwide, and no specific investment sites are known.

                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Ministry of Environment is responsible for the enforcement of the environment assessment
                           legislation (law 29/2006) and procedures, through the DGA. Because of the country’s geography
                           (several isles and islands) and lack of resources, DGA is unable to carry out proper oversight of the
                           implementation of the environmental and social management plans (ESMP). But, the Ministry of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Tourism, Investment, and Business Development has experience in implementing World Bank
                           projects, including the current Recovery and Reform of the Electricity Sector Project. However, to
                           ensure that the safeguard instruments of the proposed project be implemented efficiently, specific
                           capacity support measures will be identified and financed.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSU01)
                           Maman-Sani Issa (OPSPF)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         Yes            The project will finance activities such as expansion
                           OP/BP 4.01                                      of ongoing business, financing of business plan in
                                                                           three sectors (tourism, agribusiness and maritime
                                                                           economy) and potential infrastructure investments
                                                                           (likely upgrade of roads and/or water/sanitation) that
                                                                           hold also potential direct and indirect adverse
                                                                           impacts though of moderate to low magnitude.
                                                                           Therefore the project is classified B. Because, the
                                                                           investments will be identified during
                                                                           implementation, the borrower will prepare
                                                                           frameworks (ESMF, RPF and PMP) which will be
                                                                           approved and disclosed in-country and at the Bank
                                                                           Infoshop prior appraisal. Because of the mechanism
                                                                           of funding (grants, competition and criteria) and that
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           the activities will be implemented by third parties
                                                                           (awarded enterprises), the ESMF will include both an
                                                                           exclusion and inclusion lists which will serve to
                                                                           inform the criterion ‘’eligible expenditure’’ as
                                                                           mentioned under component 3.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04      No             The project will not finance any activity that
                                                                           threatens natural habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36               No             The project will not finance activities related to
                                                                           forest exploitation, harvesting, direct or indirect
                                                                           forest degradation, and increase of access to forests.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09          Yes            Fostering agricultural productivity is likely to induce
                                                                           increase of agricultural chemical (fertilizers,
                                                                           pesticides) consumption. Also, eligible innovative
                                                                           business plans of the agribusiness sector may
                                                                           comprise purchase, transport, storage and use of
                                                                           chemical inputs. The borrower will prepare a Pest
                                                                           Management Plan (PMP), approve and disclose it in-
                                                                           country. The PMP will be disclosed at the Bank
                                                                                                                        Infoshop along with the ESMF and the RPF before
                                                                                                                        the project appraisal.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources                                 Yes                        This policy is triggered because of the nature of civil
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 OP/BP 4.11                                                                             works related to road and water/sanitation
                                                                                                                        infrastructures upgrading. To prevent involuntary
                                                                                                                        destruction of cultural wealth during works,
                                                                                                                        exploitation of quarry and sand pits, a chance find
                                                                                                                        procedure will be detailed as part of the ESMP and
                                                                                                                        inserted in enterprise contracts.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    No                         There are no indigenous people in the project areas.
                                 4.10
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                Yes                        Mostly the project activities are not expected to
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                induce temporary displacement of socio-economic
                                                                                                                        activities, physical displacement of human settlement
                                                                                                                        or loss of productive land. However, if road and
                                                                                                                        sanitation infrastructures have to be upgraded/
                                                                                                                        rehabilitated, physical and economic displacement
                                                                                                                        may occur. Therefore, an Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                                        Framework (RPF) will be prepared, consulted upon,
                                                                                                                        approved and disclosed in-country and at Bank
                                                                                                                        Infoshop prior appraisal. This instrument will set
                                                                                                                        forth guidelines for the preparation, approval and
                                                                                                                        execution of Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for
                                                                                                                        eligible case that arise in the course of
                                                                                                                        implementation.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         The project will not finance construction or
                                                                                                                        rehabilitation of dam or activities associated to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        existing dam.
                                 Projects on International                                   No                         The project will not finance activities that will
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   interfere with international watercourses; either in
                                                                                                                        terms of water uptake or discharge of pollutants.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The project intervention areas are not under dispute.
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 29-May-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      First quarter of 2015
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Penelope Demetra Fidas,Julian Casal,Kofi-Boateng Agyen
                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)                  Date: 30-Apr-2015
                                 Advisor:


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Practice Manager/   Name: Jean Michel Noel Marchat (PMGR)   Date: 06-Apr-2016
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
