INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC 12009
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:          Kenya                     Project ID:   P154586
Project Name:     Kenya Climate Venture Facility
Team Leader(s): Aun Ali Rahman
Estimated Date    30-Apr-2015
of Approval:
Managing Unit:    GTCID                     Lending       Lending Instrument
Instrument:
Sector(s):        SME Finance (100%)
Theme(s):         Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (100%)
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:  4.9                   Total Bank Financing: 0
Financing Gap:       0
Financing Source                                                          Amount
InfoDev                                                                        4.9
Environment       B - Partial Assessment
Category:
B. Project Development Objective(s)
The development objective is to pilot an innovative investment facility that addresses the financing
gap for promising start-up and early-stage climate technology companies in Kenya, and to develop a
deal flow of investible, sustainable and scalable enterprises that contribute to Kenya's growing
climate innovation and clean tech sectors.
C. Project Description
1. Description
The project is to establish an innovative financing facility, the Kenya Climate Venture Facility
(KCVF) to provide seed and early stage financing to promising start-up and early-stage climate
technology firms in Kenya.
(a)    KCIC Background and Context
The KCVF will be set up by and capitalize on the activities of the existing Kenya Climate Innovation
Center (KCIC, http://kenyacic.org/). The KCIC was launched in September 2012 in Nairobi and
currently supports more than 80 start-up and early-stage Kenyan firms developing innovative


﻿technologies and businesses in climate change sectors such as renewable energy, climate-smart
agriculture and water and sanitation. The KCIC provides its client companies with a range of services
including proof-of-concept grants (US$25K - US$1 OOK), business advisory services and training,
access to technical and office facilities, information and international linkages. Companies being
O
supported by the KCIC benefit from assistance to get from concept to initial market testing in the
course of a successful incubation process, which typically takes at least 12 months or more.
The KCIC is implemented by a consortium of four organizations that bring complementary strengths
to the project:
Global Village Energy Partnership (GVEP) - GVEP is a non-profit firm that supports
Kenyan SMEs providing renewable energy access to under-served communities. GVEP supports
KCIC clients with strategy/business plan development, access to finance and related activities.
*      PriceWaterhouse Coopers (PWC) - PWC provides back-office financial management for the
project.
*      Kenya Industrial Research and Development Institute (KIRDI) - KIRDI is a government
research and development body that supports KCIC clients with technology prototyping and
development as well as getting key IP protection for their technologies.
*      Strathmore University - Strathmore provides office facilities for KCIC and its clients in its
business school as well as technology development support.
The KCIC is strongly supported by the Government of Kenya and is featured prominently in the
Kenya National Climate Change Action Plan (NCCAP):
"Kenya has recently established the first Climate Innovation Centre (CIC) in the world at the
Strathmore Business School. Dedicated to supporting climate change technologies and research and
development entrepreneurship, its main focus will be on innovative technologies in the area of
energy, agriculture and water supply that will contribute to Green Development and growth. The CIC
will play an important role in developing green technologies in Kenya and will target solutions that
are relevant across the East Africa Region."
(b)    KCVF Overview
Now that the KCIC has gained critical traction with the Kenyan clean tech startup community, it is
the right time to launch the KCVF with a mandate to support the financing of the most viable of
these firms. KCVF will focus on those innovative companies that are at a stage of development when
a      they require financing for further market testing and business model validation, leading to a full
market roll-out. The KCVF will pioneer an innovative financing model - among the first of its kind
in the East Africa region -by investing patient capital (in the form of equity, debt and/or related
instruments) along with high engagement management and technical assistance (Figure 1). It will
target companies that will have the potential for a positive financial return on investment while also
creating social, economic and/or environmental impact. These will include companies developing
promising - but unproven - business models in renewable energy (on-grid, off-grid, and home-based
products such as solar lighting or cook-stoves), water/sanitation and climate-related agriculture. To
maximize deal flow however, portfolio companies for the KCVF will include but not be limited to
KCIC clients.
The KCVF will be set up by KCIC, which will capitalize it with an anchor equity contribution of
approximately $4.5M (made possible through a grant of $4.9M to KCIC from infoDev).
Key features of the KCVF model are as follows:
*      Geographic Focus - The principal geographic focus of the Facility is Kenya, but KCVF will
also be open to investment possibilities in the greater East Africa region in due course.


﻿*      Investment Size - Individual investments could range from $1 00K -$1 M; however most
investments will be under $500K. To mitigate risk, investments will be milestone based, with
smaller amounts of initial capital and subsequent capital injections tied to performance milestones
and growth outlook.
O
 *    Legal Structure - KCVF is envisioned to be an investment company, as this structure is more
suited to this type of higher risk investment category than traditional VC/PE models. The actual
details of the legal structure will be further developed during the project development phase.
*      Investment Instruments and Approach - Individual investments will consist of equity, equity-
like debt and other innovative non-grant instruments (such as revenue based financing), and priced
on commercial terms using a disciplined investment approach. However, they will be more patient
and flexible in structure than traditional commercial sources of capital, given the early stages of the
companies and their need for more tailored and flexible sources of capital. Such investment
principles are already being effectively applied in impact investing.
*      Management/Technical Assistance - A key features in the KCVF model - alongside capital
provision - is the strong focus on management/technical assistance to portfolio companies. Start-up
and early stage companies need a lot of hand-holding and support to realize their potential. Some of
the areas for management /technical assistance will include:
o      Talent development - Mentoring/coaching for entrepreneurs, and building core management
team;
o      Strategy and business model development
o      Financial and operational systems development;
o      Market intelligence and marketing support;
o      Government linkages and assistance on getting regulatory approvals;
o      Access to finance linkages (with banks, donors, other investors) for companies, value-chain
players, and end-consumer financing;
o      New business development and partnerships.
infoDev has applied for an additional $0.8 M in grant funding for Technical Assistance for KCVF
portfolio companies from the SREP Private Sector Set-Aside of the Climate Investment Funds
administered by the World Bank. The proposal has been endorsed by an Expert Group reviewing all
proposals and is pending formal approval from the SREP Approval Committee.
O
Because of the pioneering nature of KCVF as one of the first seed-stage investment and TA vehicles
o      in Africa focused on climate technologies, details of its business and investment model, strategy and
structure will need to be kept open at this point to encourage the KCVF to adapt itself as it is
informed by the experiences from its early investments.
(c)    Operational Relationship between KCIC and KCVF
A central element of KCVF -and a principal innovation in its investment model which sets it apart
from other early-stage funds - is its close operational relationship with the KCIC. The KCIC will
support KCVF in the following ways:
*      Pipeline sourcing and pre-screening - Start-up and early-stage companies being developed
by KCIC will be a principal source of deal flow for the KCVF. The KCIC will also be able to vet/
screen them for suitability for KCVF investment as per the Facility's funding criteria. At present,
KCIC management estimates that about 25 of the 80 companies currently being supported by KCIC
are seeking to raise their first round of investment capital and would be potential pipeline for KCVF.
Additionally, KCIC also has built a network of other early-stage clean-tech companies that were too
mature for KCIC's incubation support, but would be promising pipeline for KCVF. This ready-made
pipeline from KCIC will reduce the KCVF's time and cost in sourcing deal pipeline and screening.


﻿*      Post-investment management & technical assistance - The KCIC has the infrastructure to
build capacity and provide support to start-up and early-stage climate-tech companies. For
companies that KCVF invests in, KCIC will provide management/technical assistance alongside the
KCVF team.
o
(d)    Management of KCVF
It is envisioned that the management of the Facility will be done by an investment firm with strong
experience in SME investing (including managing early-stage investments) and with a local Kenyan
presence. The Facility manager will:
i)     source deals (in addition to the pipeline generated from KCIC);
ii)    conduct due-diligence and negotiate/structure/close individual investments;
iii)   conduct post-investment monitoring and governance of portfolio companies;
iv)    coordinate management assistance to portfolio companies from the KCVF investment team
and KCIC;
v)     administer the Facility governance and reporting requirements;
vi)    bring additional investors into the project.
An alternative management option is to hire an in-house investment team within KCIC/KCVF to
manage the Facility. The investment team would be led by a seasoned VC/PE investment
professional (who would serve as the Chief Investment Officer) and include a small team of finance
professionals (which will grows as needed as the portfolio expands). In this scenario, the KCVF
investment team will remain independent of KCIC incubation team, reporting instead to an
investment committee (on investment matters) and to the KCVF Board (on general governance
matters).
Both management options appear feasible at this stage and this will be finalized during project
development prior to disbursement of the grant to KCIC. The Facility manager's contract terms
(along with the compensation/incentive structure) will be developed during project development as
well.
(e)    Leveraging Additional Capital
KCVF will initiate investing with the $4.5 M anchor equity contribution from KCIC, laying its
structural foundations and refining its model based on its initial investment experiences. As these
foundations are built, the project will aim to leverage and "crowd in" other public and/or private
a       funders to increase the overall funding base for target companies. Such leverage can come at two
levels:
i)     Investors can invest directly into KCVF, adding to the pool of funds contributed by KCIC.
The goal is to increase the size of KCVF to at least $15 M in total capitalization over time.
ii)    Investors can co-invest with KCVF directly into the target portfolio companies. The pre and
post-investment activities of KCVF/KCIC will make it easier for potential co-investors to reduce
their diligence/transaction and post-investment management costs.
One source of financing is other institutional donors who also have a strategic interest in enabling
early-stage climate-tech companies. Another source is impact investors, who seek to address social
and/or environmental problems while also making reasonable financial returns. Impact investors are
interested in areas such as SME financing, clean/renewable energy and sustainable agriculture. They
also recognize the importance of early-stage businesses in developing such innovations. However, in
practice all these possible partners struggle to make investments because of the higher risks of failure
associated with them. These other investors may wish to avail themselves of risk mitigation support
from the KCVF.
To prepare for and enable risk mitigation support for such investors, infoDev submitted a request for


﻿$6M guarantee funding to the SREP Private Sector Set-Aside of the Climate Investment Funds, as
mentioned above. The guarantee will be in the form of a "first loss" cover on the principal amount
invested and will be available both type of target investors for the project. Those co-investing with
KCVF directly into portfolio companies will have a portion of their principal protected in individual
O
U       deals. Likewise, those investing into KCVF directly will have a portion of their investment into the
Facility also protected. Initial estimates are that the "first-loss" cover could be between 25-35% of
the principal amount invested, potentially unlocking about $20 M in additional financing for the two
investment categories. The exact extent of the first-loss protection and how the guarantee structure
works will be determined during the project development following conversations with potential
investors.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The KCVF will be primarily implemented in Kenya. In view of the fact that the investment will be
applied and disbursed on a demand-driven basis and no specific sub-projects have been identified at
this stage during project design, an environmental and social framework approach is recommended.
The recommended safeguard instrument is an Environmental and Social Management Framework.
The project will not finance activities that: involve land acquisition leading to involuntary
resettlement and/or restrictions of access to resources and livelihoods; or involve or affect natural
habitats, forests and physical cultural resources. The project also does not involve pest management
or dams. . However, as and Wwhen sub-projects are identified during the implementation phase of
the project, appropriate supplemental safeguard instruments such as site-specific environmental and
social impact assessments/environmental and social management plans (ESIAs/ESMPs), resettlement
action plans (RAPs), Process Frameworks (PFs), etc may be prepared to preclude and/or remediate
any safeguards risks and impacts likely to emerge from execution of those investment projects.
The project is expected to be implemented in cities and towns and so does not meet the criteria for
triggering OP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples). Should it become apparent that some of the sub-projects
will be implemented in areas where Indigenous Peoples are present, a Vulnerable and Marginalized
Groups Framework will be consulted upon and disclosed before sub-project activities commence.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
It is envisioned that the management of the Facility will be done by an investment firm with strong
experience in SME investing or through an in-house investment team within KCIC/KCVF itself.
Based on groundwork on grant facility management done by the infoDev team in Kenya, both
management options appear feasible for the management of the proposed Facility. It is however not
clear if this groundwork study included an assessment of the entities' capability to effectively and
efficiently carry out compliance monitoring for environmental and social safeguards. There is no
documentary proof that under the initial KCIC support operation implemented by KCIC itself
safeguard management was considered during either project design or implementation. In view of the
foregoing, it is advised that during the project design and development phase of the successor
operation, the project will commission an in-depth assessment of the implementing (management)
agency's capacity to also manage environmental and social safeguards as well as other non-social
safeguard related issues.
It is hereby proposed that whichever agency may be appointed to manage the Facility will have to
install and build safeguard management/compliance monitoring capacity within its ranks to carry out
environmental and social safeguards due diligence, including screening sub-projects and conducting
environmental and social safeguards studies for investments that may be proposed by proponents


﻿seeking support from the Facility. Furthermore, the selected Facility management entity may resolve
any existing or unforeseen safeguard management capacity constraints by: (i) designating/assigning
one or two of its staff (full time) to be responsible for the management of environmental and social
safeguards of the project. Whoever is assigned to deal with safeguard issues would, however, need to
O
U       be trained properly in safeguards and also be exposed to all the Bank's safeguards policies as well as
the national environmental and social safeguard policies, legislation and guidelines; or (ii) hiring a
safeguards expert or firm with expertise in both environmental and social safeguards from the market
who could be kept on a retainer basis to provide advice and monitor safeguard compliance. These
experts, whether they are the management entity's own staff members or are hired from the market
and entrusted with the responsibility of screening and vetting investment proposals that will be
submitted to the Facility management entity will be using the checklist in the ESMF to initially
screen and vet proposals. They will also be responsible for providing technical support to proponents
during the preparation of appropriate supplemental safeguards instruments and implementation of
mitigation/management plans and monitoring compliance of safeguards. The nature, type and scope
of investments under the Facility will determine whether the services of World Bank's
Environmental and Social Specialists will be needed at all times during implementation of this
project.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies             Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes           An ESMF has been prepared to guide the
BP 4.01                                      screening of sub-projects, address potential risks
and impacts and propose mitigation measures.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No            The project does not involve or affect natural
habitats.
U5      Forests OP/BP 4.36             No            The project does not involve or affect forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09        No            The project does not involve pest management
a                                                   measures.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  No          The project will not affect physical cultural
BP 4.11                                      resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10  No            The project is being implemented in cities and
towns and thus does not meet the criteria of the
Indigenous Peoples policy.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  No           The project does not involve land acquisition
4.12                                        leading to involuntary resettlement or
restrictions of access to resources and
livelihoods.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No            The project does not involve dams.
Projects on International      No            N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No          N/A
7.60


﻿III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?: Yes
i. Explanation
0
ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
12-Apr-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.
IV. APPROVALS
Team Leader(s):          Name: Aun Ali Rahman
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:      Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (SA)                   Date: 13-Apr-2015
Practice Manager/        Name: Ganesh Rasagam (PMGR)                         Date: 13-Apr-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.
U


