                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                     Report No.: ISDSA14956

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Aug-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Aug-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Bangladesh                        Project ID:    P155389
                                                       Parent         P090807
                                                       Project ID:
   Project Name:     Additional Financing Skills and Training Enhancement Project (P155389)
   Parent Project    Bangladesh - Skills and Training Enhancement Project (P090807)
   Name:
   Task Team         Md. Mokhlesur Rahman
   Leader(s):
   Estimated         17-Aug-2015                       Estimated   29-Oct-2015
   Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    GED06                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                       Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Public administration- Education (5%), Vocational training (90%), General
                     industry and trade sector (5%)
   Theme(s):         Decentralization (5%), Export development and competitiveness (10%),
                     Technology diffusion (10%), Education for the knowledge economy (75%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:     120.80           Total Bank Financing:               100.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                      Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                      20.80
     International Development Association (IDA)                                            100.00
     Total                                                                                  120.80
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?



                                             Page 1 of 8
 2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The project development objective is to strengthen selected public and private training institutions
   to improve training quality and employability of trainees, including those from disadvantaged
   socioeconomic backgrounds.
   B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


 3. Project Description
Component 1. Improve the Quality and Relevance of Training : This component has two sub-
components. Sub-component 1.1 focuses on the expansion of support to targeted public and private
institutions offering diploma level programs. The AF will extend competitive institutional grants to
new and existing institutions as well as expand stipend support for disadvantaged students. Sub-
component 1.2 focuses on the expansion of support to selected additional institutions providing
short-term vocational and technical training. The AF will facilitate grants to new short-course
training institutions and support to market-relevant trades.

Component 2. Innovative Programs in TVET: This component, originally titled “Pilots in TVET”,
has been renamed “Innovative Programs in TVET". It has three sub-components: (i) establishment
and operationalization of the NSDCS and ISCs; (ii) an apprenticeship program in the secondary level
vocational training program; and (iii) Recognition of Prior Learning.

Component 3. Institutional Capacity Development: This component will continue to focus on
strengthening the institutional capacity of the Directorate of Technical Education (DTE), the
Bangladesh Technical Education Board (BTEB) under the Ministry of Education (MOE), and the
Bureau of Manpower Employment and Training (BMET) under the Ministry of Expatriates’ Welfare
and Overseas Employment (MOEWOE) and Ministry of Public Administration (MOPA).

Component 4. Project Management, Communications, Monitoring and Evaluation: This component
will continue to support project management, monitoring and evaluation of Project progress and
outcomes.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The program will be implemented nationwide. The project will support small civil works,
rehabilitation of existing schools, and construction of additional training rooms or laboratories. As
activities supported by this project are limited to rehabilitation works, it is expected that no land
acquisition and/or resettlement will be caused by civil works. In addition, the exact location of
training centers supported by this project will only be known during project implementation. For that
reason, a Framework approach has been taken to mitigate potential negative impacts, and an
Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been prepared.

 From an environmental perspective, the most important issues to address include: (i) rehabilitation
and renovation of existing buildings, classrooms, workshops and libraries, (ii) introduction of
environmental, occupational health and safety curricula in training institutions, and (iii) safe disposal
of waste generated from laboratories and workshops.



                                              Page 2 of 8
 The project will not trigger OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. A mandatory requirement for
eligibility is that no land acquisition is necessary to implement civil works. Furthermore, all project
civil works will be carried out in existing infrastructure or on land that is already the property of the
institutes concerned.

 The project triggers OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples (or Adivasis as they are referred to in
Bangladesh), since the location of training institutions to be selected for financing under the project
is not known ex-ante and some may be in areas inhabited by Indigenous Peoples. The project will
make best efforts to include Indigenous groups and other marginalized or disadvantaged people as
project beneficiaries, through appropriate consultation, outreach and targeting strategies.

 To comply with World Bank social safeguards policies and to ensure inclusiveness of approaches,
the GOB has prepared a Social Management Framework. Beyond compliance with safeguards
measures, the GOB and the Bank team have agreed to target scholarships using means testing so that
children from marginalized and disadvantaged groups will be able to participate as program
beneficiaries. Finally, gender-equity is an issue that the GOB has paid tremendous attention to and
has achieved gender parity in both primary and secondary education. Record keeping for vocational
and technical programs is poor, and we do not have a clear understanding of the proportion of girls/
women in such programs, though anecdotal figures suggest that the proportion is quite low.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Nadia Sharmin (GSURR)
Sabah Moyeen (GSURR)
Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (GENDR)

6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental                Yes             The project involves only rehabilitation/renovation/
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                        refurbishment of existing building, classrooms,
                                             workshops, and library, and enhancement of workshop
                                             and laboratory facilities. Component 3 will support
                                             vertical expansion of the three floors of DTE. The
                                             chemical constituents of the raw materials may require
                                             special disposal unit. To ensure limited environmental
                                             impact due to the expansion of the existing building to
                                             accommodate the workshop/laboratories for new trade
                                             courses, if necessary, World Bank OP 4.01 for
                                             Environmental Assessment Policy will be followed.
Natural Habitats OP/BP       No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36           No

Pest Management OP 4.09 No

Physical Cultural            No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/       Yes             The STEP AF triggers OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous People



                                               Page 3 of 8
   BP 4.10                                   (IP). The selection of institutes to receive project
                                             financing will reveal the exact location of the institutes
                                             and since it is difficult to determine whether program sites
                                             coincide with those districts where there is a significant
                                             presence of IP groups. If this does happen, GOB has
                                             prepared a Social Assessment and Management
                                             Framework which will come into effect. In each such
                                             location, the selected institute’s Institute Development
                                             Plan, will be shared with IP groups and wide
                                             consultations will be held with these groups. These
                                             consultations will be prior, free and informed so as to
                                             ensure their compliance with the IDA’s OP/BP 4.10. In
                                             addition to IP groups, the project will also directly support
                                             gender equity in training programs and emphasize access
                                             for all female students and marginalized groups. In
                                             particular, means-testing will be used to identify and
                                             support potential trainees from poor and disadvantaged
                                             groups.
   Involuntary Resettlement No               The activities identified under the project are mainly
   OP/BP 4.12                                technical assistance in nature and no major infrastructural
                                             activities are proposed. It will not require any acquisition
                                             of land, construction of any new institution or building or
                                             any major physical expansion. Hence, the project will not
                                             trigger the Bank’s OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary
                                             Resettlement. The SMF includes a negative list of
                                             activities that involve involuntary resettlement of people/
                                             households which will be ineligible for support under
                                             STEP-AF.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
   4.37
   Projects on International   No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed        No
   Areas OP/BP 7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     TThe major tasks in the STEP Additional Financing (AF) with environmental issues involved in
     the project include: rehabilitation/renovation/ refurbishment of existing building, classrooms,
     workshops, and library, and enhancement of workshop and laboratory facilities. These tasks are
     under Component 1. Component 3 will support vertical expansion of the three floors of
     Directorate of Technical Education (DTE). The chemical constituents of the raw materials may
     require special disposal unit. To ensure limited environmental impact due to the expansion of the
     existing building to accommodate the workshop/laboratories for new trade courses, if necessary,


                                               Page 4 of 8
  World Bank OP 4.01 for Environmental Assessment Policy will be followed.

  Given that the nature of all the above referenced activities are small and highly localized in nature,
  there are no large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts associated with STEP AF. Only
  minor and localized impacts are expected to arise from such construction and/or upgrading of
  existing infrastructure. Others issues that will be addressed through the project will be to ensure
  that institutions that receive project financing have appropriate classroom and laboratory
  conditions (e.g., light, ventilation, temperature and noise), students have access to adequate
  protective gear (e.g., helmets, goggles, gloves, boots, etc.), proper sanitation (latrines and waste-
  management), and appropriate means of disposing waste materials generated through the training
  program. Furthermore, all institutes will be required to offer as part of the training, courses on
  occupational safety as it pertains to the specific trades being covered by the institute.

  The STEP AF triggers OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous People (IP). Since the exact locations of project
  implementation are yet to be determined, an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will need to be
  developed if a project site is determined to be in an IP populated area. This will help ensure that all
  IP groups in the project area have an opportunity to participate in training that is culturally
  appropriate. In addition, the process by which such training is guaranteed will meet the World
  Bank’s OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples which requires free, informed and prior consultations
  with IP groups during project preparation and implementation, leading to broad-based support for
  the proposed training program. If an IPP is required to be prepared, the institution which has
  triggered the policy will be responsible for preparing the IPP. These institutions will include the
  polytechnic institutes that will participate in the project.

  The original project has supported an increase of female TVET students, by (i) providing stipends
  to all female students to alleviate financial constraints, (ii) removing the supply-side constraint by
  improving the institutional environment, and (iii) increasing awareness raising. As a result, the
  enrollment share has increased from 5 percent in 2008 to 30 percent in 2014 in the project
  supported institutions. Training institutions are offering more female-favored training courses,
  including garments, computer, civil-engineering, and electronics. Success stories of female TVET
  graduates in opening self-employment businesses or working in industries have been widely
  disseminated among potential training aspirants for encouraging their participation in skills
  training. The AF will continue to support participation of women in skills training through direct
  stipend support at polytechnics and short-courses, and policy level support for making training
  environment more attractive to women. The Results Framework of the AF will provide
  information on female beneficiaries as well as the pass rate of female and disadvantaged students.

  The activities identified under the project are mainly technical assistance in nature and no major
  infrastructural activities are proposed. It will not require any acquisition of land, construction of
  any new institution or building or any major physical expansion. Hence, the project will not trigger
  the Bank’s OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. The SMF includes a negative list of activities
  that involve involuntary resettlement of people/households which will be ineligible for support
  under STEP-AF..
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  There are no expected indirect or direct long term impacts of STEP after following guidelines
  above.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse


                                              Page 5 of 8
  impacts.
  Given the nature of STEP, no alternative proposals were feasible for the small scale infrastructure
  works being considered under this project. Furthermore, the project does address some key equity
  issues directly.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  Under the original STEP project, the GOB has invested considerable effort in developing the
  Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and Social Assessment and Management
  Framework (SAMF) covering environmental and social safeguards issues respectively. Over the
  past few years, the Directorate of Technical Education (DTE) has developed enhanced capacity to
  implement a Bank led program. DTE and Ministry of Education (MOE) is now very familiar with
  IDA supported projects and in particular the environmental and social safeguards issues therein.

  The STEP AF’s EMF defines simplified steps, procedures and emphasizes use of guidelines or
  criteria and/or standards while planning, developing and executing civil works under the project.
  DTE has been gaining experience with World Bank project through STEP. DTE designated a focal
  person to ensure the environmental compliance of STEP activities in light of the EMF. The DTE
  local focal persons are primarily responsible of filling out the screening forms and sending them to
  DTE PIU for review. The activities of the DTE focal person will include: (1) coordinating the
  environmental screening activities in different institutions where physical interventions are being
  made, (2) assessing the nature of the impacts, (3) preparing IEE/EIA whenever necessary, (4)
  ensuring that the EMP is adequately reflected in the Contractor’s bidding documents, (5) carry out
  monitoring activities in the works sites to assess the implementation of the EMP, (6) preparing
  reports of monitoring activities from time to time, (7) oversee the enhancement measures
  (incorporation of occupational health and safety in curriculum, establishing synchronized
  operating protocols for the laboratories) and tracking their progress. Based on the environmental
  screening, budget for implementation of EMP will be allocated with each sub-project. The
  additional financing has provision of an Environmental and Social Safeguard Specialist to
  strengthen the implementation and reporting of the EMF. The specialist will review all the sub-
  project specific documents and related the environmental safeguard issues, monitor the
  environmental issues during implementation and operational stage and will help to prepare the
  environmental law and occupational safety courses to be incorporated in the curricula. In addition,
  DTE will also assign 2 staffs. These staff will be trained on monitoring environmental
  management in the campus during project implementation and operational stage.

  Project Director of DTE will submit half yearly progress report on the environmental management
  to the World Bank. The report will have two parts. One part will contain the initial screening
  report of all proposals, identified environmental concerns, appropriate mitigation measures and
  monitoring plan and costing. Another part will present the monitoring and management status of
  the EMP implementation of the ongoing activities in the selected institutions.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The EMF will be shared by the Ministry of Education with concerned academic institutions,
  Department of Environment and civil society. It has been disclosed in both Bangla and English
  by the Ministry of Education on behalf of the GoB in Bangladesh and it has also been made
  available at the World Bank’s InfoShop.
B. Disclosure Requirements


                                            Page 6 of 8
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                       29-Jul-2015
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                    25-Aug-2015
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive       ////
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Bangladesh                                                        29-Jul-2015
  Comments: The Draft EMF, SMF and Framework and Guidelines for Small Ethnic Communities
                Plan were disclosed by GoB for public comments on July 25, 2015. These
                documents were redisclosed after the Bank's review on August 25, 2015
 Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                       29-Jul-2015
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                    25-Aug-2015
"In country" Disclosure
  Bangladesh                                                        25-Aug-2015
  Comments: The Draft EMF, SMF and Framework and Guidelines for Small Ethnic Communities
                Plan were disclosed by GoB for public comments on July 25, 2015. These
                documents were redisclosed after the Bank's review on August 25, 2015
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 report?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
 Indigenous Peoples?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Practice Manager review the plan?
 If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
 Development Unit or Practice Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 place in a form and language that are understandable and
 accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?


                                            Page 7 of 8
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader(s): Name: Md. Mokhlesur Rahman
   Approved By
   Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                       Date: 26-Aug-2015
   Practice Manager/    Name: Halil Dundar (PMGR)                           Date: 26-Aug-2015
   Manager:




                                             Page 8 of 8
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
