INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC14670
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Nov-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         India                      Project ID:   P154525
Project Name:    Uttarakhand Workforce Development Project (P154525)
Task Team        Shinsaku Nomura
Leader(s):
Estimated        04-Jan-2016                Estimated     30-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDO6                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Vocational training (100%)
Theme(s):        Education for the knowledge economy (70%), Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprise support (30%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      89.00             Total Bank Financing:    74.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                         15.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development            74.00
Total                                                            89.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) would be "to improve the skills development system to
provide better quality and more labor-market relevant training, and to provide equitable access to
training opportunities among disadvantaged population in Uttarakhand."
C. Project Description
The Project Development Objective (PDO) would be "to improve the skills development system to


﻿provide better quality and more labor-market relevant training, and to provide equitable access to
training opportunities among disadvantaged population in Uttarakhand."
The following three outcome indicators are proposed for measuring progress towards achievement of
O
PDO:
 *    Job placement rate among graduates of priority ITIs 6 months after completing training
 *    Pass-out rate in priority ITIs
*      Completion rate among hard-to-reach students in short courses
The proposed project is designed with the spirit of developing a sustainable and efficient skills
development system in Uttarakhand. While one of the measurable short-run goals would be closing
the immediate skills gaps in terms of both quality and quantity, the expected long-run outcomes
would be establishment of a demand-driven and high quality system of skills and training. The
proposed project would support the implementation of national level policies (where relevant) at the
State level. Moreover, the Project would complement national-level projects in the sector, such as
the Vocational Training Improvement Project (VTIP).
Component 1: Comprehensive quality and relevance improvement of Priority ITIs
Component 1 would use results-based financing to support a comprehensive package of quality and
relevance improvement activities in a specific number of ITIs. The long-term goal of this
intervention is to establish a functional model of quality ITI system that is efficient, sustainable, and
relevant to the needs of labor market and of students. The component aims to support reforms and
demonstrate them in a selected number of priority ITIs (initially discussed number is 25 ITIs). The
proposed activities would include: (i) Conversion of priority trades from SCVT to NCVT in priority
ITIs, (ii) Rationalization of trades based on discussions with industry and stakeholders, (iii)
Development and implementation of a Professional development plan (teachers, foremen and ITI
Principals) with a focus on priority ITIs, (iv) Modernizing TVET testing including MIS and online
systems, (v) Forging industry linkages at all levels including creation of district management
committees. The activities would be implemented through Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs).
O
Component 2: Supporting sector coordination and increasing access
Component 2 would use the traditional financing modality of an Investment Project Financing (IPF).
The main objective of the component would be to strengthen the Skills Development Mission (SDM)
to fulfill its mandate of sector coordination and to provide training opportunities to the population
which are hard to reach and most likely to be left out of the formal system. The component consists
of two main activities: Sub-component 2.1 - Support to Skills Development Mission, and Sub-
component 2.2 - Support to hard-to-reach students.
Sub-component 2.1 - Support to Skills Development Mission: This sub-component would support
the state SDM to enhance overall skills sector coordination and strengthen its ability to fulfill its
mandate and activities within that mandate. Under the leadership of the national government, a lot of
training opportunities have emerged through different Ministries, but the efforts have not been
effectively catalyzed for producing concerted outcomes. The sub-component supports, among others,
the SDM's scheme to contract out short-term training to Private Training Providers (TPs), which was
initiated in 2014 on a pilot basis. The sub component may also support the state to improve the
relevance of short-course training by assisting the process of National Skills Qualification


﻿Framework (NSQF) compliance, by identifying existing certifications and supporting application of
programs for NSQF accreditation.
Sub-component 2.2 - Support to hard-to-reach students: The sub-component aims to promote
O
U       equitable access to training opportunities among hard-to-reach (The preliminary definition includes
students from families below the State's poverty line and other beneficiaries which is to be further
fleshed out). The program would use a voucher and stipend mechanism to provide flexible options to
students in selecting relevant trades and institutes - i.e. the students would have a choice of programs
and an incentive attached to it. The activities may include stipends provided to students to attend
both ITIs (public and private) and short-term training (usually private providers). The stipends to
potential ITI students would be selected based on a set criteria, for those who would otherwise not
have access to training opportunities. The stipends would also target the unemployed and
underemployed youth, who require short-term skills training for obtaining decent jobs or further
enhancing their job-related skills.
Component 3: Capacity building, M&E, and Project Management
Component 3 supports mainly advisory, technical and capacity building activities to enhance the
administrative capacity of the GoUK's skills and training sector. The component consists of three
sub-components, including: Sub-component 3.1 - Support to evidence based decision making;
Subcomponent 3.2. - Monitoring and Evaluation; and Sub-component 3.3 - Support to project
implementation.
Sub-component 3.1 - Support to evidence based decision making: This sub-component aims to
strengthen administrative capacity of the DTE in implementing skills development sector programs.
It will support establishment of a decision making support Management Information System (MIS),
which includes: Human Resources (HR) management, student management, and logistics and
inventory management. It will also support improvement of ITI and training system accountability,
U       by supporting monitoring of institutions and develop quality score cards for ITI and training
institutions.
O
Sub-component 3.2 - Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E): This sub-component focuses on
a      improvement of M&E system and sector knowledge through technical assistance and studies. Third
Party Monitoring for various aspects of programs will be introduced for strengthening regular
monitoring, and Third Party Validation will be used specifically for DLIs. The component would
also support the development of State's Skills Development Policies and Strategies for effectively
coordinate various skills development programs and establish a sustainable framework for skills
development.
Sub-component 3.3 - Support to project implementation: This component supports project
management, focusing mainly on the activities of State Project Implementation Unit (SPIU).
Communication and awareness raising activities will be also supported by the sub-component.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Project will be implemented in the Himalayan Indian state of Uttarakhand (UK) in India. Located
between Latitude: 28043' N to 31027' N and Longitude 77034' E to 81002' E, the Himalayan state has
an area of:53,483 sq.km of 7448 sq. km are plain areas and the rest hill areas. The province has


﻿34651 sq. km of forest areas. The state is divided into 13 administrative units, called districts.
Dehradun is its temporary capital. Uttarakhand has a population of 10.086 million, 51% of which are
male and 49% female. The state has a literacy rate of 78.80% and average sex ratio of 963. 70
percent of the people live in rural areas. The state has a scheduled caste (SC) population of 1.893
U       million and scheduled tribe population of 0.292 million of which 0.265 million live in rural areas.
72% of the population are Hindus whereas about 10% people are Muslims. The major tribes
inhabiting in the state include: Bhoksas in the Dehradun area, Juansaris in western Gharwal region,
Rajis living the northern areas bordering Nepal, the Bhotias in the upper Himalayan valleys in the
Kumaon region, Tharu in the Tara region bordering Nepal and a limited number of nomadic pastoral
tribes called the Gujjars. Many of the tribal groups living in Uttarakhand share geographical spread
beyond its territory into Nepal and Himachal Pradesh, and Uttar Pradesh.
Application of Safeguard Policies: The Project may finance limited civil works in the form of mostly
rehabilitation of existing facilities and provision of most required new training/boarding facilities
within the existing premises of the industrial training institutes (ITI). Environmental Assessment will
be undertaken based on environmental impacts anticipated from limited construction activities, and
will be analyzed so as to develop an Environmental Management Framework (EMF). The EMF will
be applied to each infrastructure activity envisaged under the project in each ITI and an EMP if
required shall be developed.
The Project shall not finance any civil works that may involve land acquisition or involuntary
resettlement. Social screening shall be carried out for civil works proposed to be undertaken by any
ITI in order to rule out any involuntary resettlement impacts. Therefore OP 4.12 (involuntary
Resettlement) has not been triggered. Given that the project shall be implemented state wide, OP
4.10 (Indigenous People) has been triggered.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The project would be implemented by the GoUK, led by the Directorate of Training, which is located
in Haldwani. The Directorate, which consists of five units, including (i) Training and Research, (ii)
Examination and Assessments, (iii) Academic, (iv) Industry Liaison and Apprenticeship, (v) Human
Resources and Logistics, is currently understaffed. The GoUK is currently preparing the staffing
plan, which will need to be in place by the effectiveness of the project. The Directorate will be
supported by the SPIU (State Project Implementation Unit), which was set up by VTIP and located in
Dehradun. The SPIU will be responsible for the day-to-day operation and implementation of the
Project. It is proposed to be staffed with 9 dedicated staff, including 1 project director, 3 deputy
project directors (to be responsible for each component), 1 financial management, 1, procurement, 1
M&E, 1 communication, and 1 liaison officer for Kumaon Division to be located in Haldwani, as
well as necessary supporting staff.
The Client will prepare an Indigenous People's Policy Framework (IPPF) based on an assessment of
social issues and concerns through free, prior and informed consultations with the key stakeholders
including general and tribal students, faculty members, industry representatives, and relevant CSOs.
The IPPF will include Gender Equality and Social Inclusion (GESI) Guidelines. The Component-2 of
the Project provides a window for extending additional support to the hard to reach students
including those from the disadvantaged scheduled caste and tribe populations. The ITIs have
reservation of seats and special support measures for the SCs and STs students. The ITIs also have
established grievance redress mechanisms with special attention to women students' needs and
concerns.


﻿Initial stakeholder consultations have been held during September 2-3, 2015 with students, industry
representatives, and NGOs working with tribal groups in Dehradun to understand their issues and
concerns. The IPPF will incorporate these provisions with providing additional GESI guidelines
finalized through stakeholder consultations. The IPPF will be finalized and disclosed by the client at
O
)       local level and by the Bank on its Project Portal prior to Project Appraisal.
The state has experience of having implemented World Bank assisted projects including the UK
Watershed project currently in implementation. The specific Department identified to implement this
project has however no previous experience in managing safeguards in a Bank assisted Project. The
SPIU will hire an Information, Education and Communication and Social Specialist (IEC and Social
Specialist), who will be in charge of coordinating and monitoring the implementation of IPPF.
An independent environmental assessment shall be undertaken for the project to determine the
capacity of the State to address any gaps for effective implementation of the project including State's
policy, institutional and management systems. Due diligence shall also be undertaken as part of the
assessment to ascertain if the curriculum for various trades includes courses on health, safety and
environment (or occupational health and safety - OHS) and labor legislations.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Charu Jain Kalia (GWA06)
Pyush Dogra (GENDR)
Satya N. Mishra (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         Environmental Assessment will be undertaken based
OP/BP 4.01                              and environmental impacts anticipated from limited
construction activities will be analyzed so as to
develop an Environmental Management Framework
Q)                                               (EMF). The EMF will be applied to each
infrastructure activity envisaged under the project in
each ITI and an EMP if required shall be developed.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No          OP 4.04 is not being triggered for the project as no
interventions are envisaged in natural habitats,
including those defined as 'critical' under the policy.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          OP 4.36 is not being triggered for the project as no
interventions are envisaged in forest areas and
therefore no conversion/degradation of this natural
resource is expected to occur.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No          OP 4.09 is not being triggered for this project as
biological/environmental control methods or reliance
on synthetic chemical pesticides is not envisaged.
Physical Cultural Resources  No         The implementation of the IPF is not likely to affect
OP/BP 4.11                              religious structures of local significance or other
physical cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    Yes         The Policy 4.10 is triggered as the project will be


﻿4.10                                       implemented state wide in Uttarakhand which has a
tribal population dispersed in a few districts.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  No           The Project shall not finance any civil works that
BP 4.12                                    may involve land acquisition or involuntary
resettlement. Therefore OP 4.12 has not been
triggered.
Safety of Dams 0P/l3P 4.37   No            OP 4.37 is not being triggered for the IPF as there is
no construction of new dams or activities that are
concerned with safe functioning of existing dams.
Projects on International     No           OP 7.50 is not being triggered for the IPF as no
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       interventions are envisaged in international
waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No          OP7.60 is not being triggered for the project as no
BP 7.60                                    intervention is envisaged in the disputed areas.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 22-Dec-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
An IPPF including GESI guidelines shall be prepared and disclosed before Project Appraisal.
Environmental Assessment based Environmental Management Framework will be prepared to be
applied to civil work activities proposed under the project and EMP will be prepared for
implementation.
Environmental Due Diligence will also be applied to the modules of training so as to add
guidelines / awareness module related to environment, health, safety and labour laws.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Shinsaku Nomura
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                  Date: 03-Dec-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Keiko Miwa (PMGR)                         Date: 04-Dec-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


