INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC13230
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Jul-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Jul-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         China                      Project ID:   P153173
Project Name:    Anhui Road Maintenance Innovation and Demonstration Project (P153173)
Task Team        Jens Christian Helbech Hede
Leader(s):
Estimated        04-Apr-2016                Estimated     01-Sep-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIO2                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (70%), Information technology
(15%), Sub-national government administration (15%)
Theme(s):        Other public sector governance (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     380.00             Total Bank Financing:   150.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                        230.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development           150.00
0          Total                                                          380.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve road highway asset management capacity
and road service delivery in the participating municipalities and county in Anhui Province.
C. Project Description
The project is designed to address some of the principal challenges of road asset management in
Anhui. The main focus of the project will be on supporting: (i) better network knowledge (data),


﻿improved capacity for analysis (systems), and their adoption for better decision-making through
reforms; (ii) better value-for-money of maintenance allocations through new maintenance
technologies focusing on preventive maintenance and new contracting models to increase efficiency
through the involvement of the private sector; and (iii) better response to emergencies, which affect
O
Q)      road usage. The project will hence focus on improvements in maintenance planning as well as on
delivery.
The project will introduce two new features in road maintenance in Anhui: (i) large scale PBC
through private sector participation; and (ii) preventive maintenance techniques currently not used in
Anhui. The project will also serve as a demonstration for these innovations, which if successful, can
be replicated in other provinces.
Anhui has proposed that five pilot municipalities and one county will participate in the project
(Hefei, Chuzhou, Suzhou, Anqing and Xuancheng Municipalities, and Guangde County). The pilot
municipalities and county have been selected by Anhui Province based on criteria discussed with the
Bank, and represent a geographic spread, socio-economic development levels, levels of poverty, road
network conditions and road maintenance financing levels. These selections will be reviewed during
project preparation, taking into account, inter alia, implementation capacity, fiscal capacity and the
suitability of the road networks.
In support of the achievement of the PDO and to support Anhui's highway maintenance development
plan, the proposed project will comprise the following components.
Component A - Road Asset Management System Upgrade. In response to the need for better and
more efficient road asset management, this component will provide technical assistance, equipment,
and software for the integration, optimization, and upgrade of the current road asset management
information systems of Anhui, as well as introduction of relevant new modules and systems, e.g.
condition monitoring on roads, bridges and tunnels; analysis of needs for maintenance and
rehabilitation; prioritization of needs under budget constraints; and maintenance cost accounting.
o
Understanding that the developed and implemented technologies will only make an impact if
institutionalized and embedded into the actual decision-making processes, this component will also
include necessary activities to reform and enhance business processes to make full use of the asset
a       management technologies. Project preparation will include analysis of and decisions regarding
sustainable funding mechanisms and approaches to data collection (e.g., data collation in-house or
keep it outsourced as today), systems operation and management (e.g. system upgrades and software
licenses) as well as maintaining needed capabilities (e.g. replacement training). Taking into account
the current implemented decentralized structure, the reforms will address revised roles and
responsibilities as well as the re-engineered business processes, where system outputs will be used in
decision-making. It will also examine opportunities to enhance the benefits of having up-to-date data
and improved analytical capabilities in information dissemination, for instance through annual
reports.
Component B - Road Maintenance Marketization. In response to the needs for restructuring the
organization of maintenance and rehabilitation works in the sector, this component will provide
financing for the civil works under the marketization of road maintenance and rehabilitation for
about 1,100 km of roads for minor, medium and major works. It is a PCN stage estimate that medium
and major works would amount to about 800 km of national and provincial roads over the contract
period.


﻿Minor maintenance includes routine maintenance (pavement surface cleaning, snow cleaning, grass
cutting, drainage cleaning, slope erosion protection, pothole patching etc.) and patching of smaller
areas. Medium maintenance includes renewal of pavement surface by overlaying or by replacing the
O
existing wearing course. Major maintenance includes pavement reconstruction or rehabilitation. The
project is not expected to include new roads, nor road widening.
The private sector is expected to be a key driver in this restructuring, with enhanced private sector
involvement in asset management (primarily in maintenance programming and application), and will
be the vehicle for achieving improved efficiency and secure sustainable funding levels.
Marketization will be implemented through PBC to the private sector where the contract holders will
be required to plan and fund their work to meet defined road standards, and will be paid in
installments linked to meeting these service standards. Contract periods are envisaged to be between
3 to 10 years, and that about 200 km of roads will be packaged into each contract package using
Output and Performance Based Contracts (OPRC) types of private engagements.
Based on lessons learned from the previous project, this component will need to be carefully
designed to: (i) offer work packages that will be of interest to private firms, as well as (ii) address
internal resistance to marketization, especially resistance linked to staff losing their current jobs.
The key for developing attractive work packages includes a suitable combination of roads (condition
and length) and work types and contract length (which will support efficient use of the contractor's
equipment and staff). Works packages will thus include a range of maintenance activities (minor,
medium, and major works) and the contract duration will be suitable for efficient deployment of the
contractor's equipment and staff. During project preparation the Anhui Province, with assistance
from the Bank, will reach out to the industry to get a better feel for their preferences.
Anhui has indicated that staff affected by the marketization will either be relocated to other road
sections currently in need of staff or will be reassigned to the emergency centers to be established
under the Project. This is expected to significantly reduce the likely internal resistance. The
possibility of transferring current in-house staff to the contractors under certain conditions and
obligations may also be considered during project preparation. Finally the project timing will benefit
a       from being aligned with the Five Year Plan cycle (the 13th FYP will cover 2016-2020); this will
make it easier to handle multi-year contracts, especially if the 5 year contract option is selected.
A key feature of the design of this component is to bring international experience to Anhui and
modify it to the specific context of China in general, and Anhui in particular.
Component C - Innovative Preventive Maintenance Technology. This component will finance the
application of innovative preventive maintenance technologies (medium maintenance) on about 640
km of national and provincial roads (not the road sections under PBC). Technologies envisaged
include pavement surface recycling, micro-surfacing, and slurry seal. Technologies to be applied will
be analyzed during project preparation, and will take into account technologies already applied
elsewhere in China as well as new external technologies relevant to the road types and climate in
Anhui. This component will also include the manuals and technical specifications needed to support
the application of the new technologies into the maintenance works portfolio.
Component D - Establishment of New Road Emergency Response System. This component will


﻿finance the development of maintenance emergency response centers (both upgrading of current
facilities and new construction) in the participating municipalities/county (one in each), and equip the
centers with advanced maintenance emergency response facilities and equipment. The centers will
provide storage for equipment, and will include a maintenance workshop and office space.
O
)       Emergency response capabilities are part of national regulations, and this component will pilot
improvements towards meeting these regulations. The component will also strengthen the
institutional system of operation, in order to fully benefit from improved capacity and will look into
possibilities of enhancing Disaster Risk Management (DRM).
Component E - Institutional Capacity Building. This component will finance strategic studies and
technical assistance (including international technical assistance) activities aimed at improving local
capacities for planning and operating and maintaining road assets in Anhui. It will also support
international and domestic study tours for relevant staff as well as relevant training. It is envisaged
that study tours will focus on international and domestic best practices in asset management systems,
asset evaluation, financial management, maintenance contracting, and maintenance technologies.
Activities, including possible support to Project Management, and studies under this component will
be developed during project preparation.
Project Costs and Financing
The total project cost is estimated at RMB 2.28 billion (US$ 380 million) of which US$ 150 million
will be financed by the proposed IBRD loan and the remaining US$ 230 million will come from
counterpart funds. Component A is currently budgeted at RMB 6 million (US$ 1 million of which
US$ 800,000 is proposed as IBRD loan); Component B and C are together budgeted at RMB 2.20
billion (US$ 366 million, of which US$ 140 Million is proposed from IBRD); Component D is
estimated at RMB 75.7 million (US$ 12.6 million of which US$ 8.3 million is proposed from IBRD);
and Component E is estimated at RMB 3 million (US$500,000, all proposed from IBRD). The
distribution of project costs and loan allocation within the overall ceiling will be determined during
project preparation.
O
U       D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
O
The proposed project is located in Anhui Province, an inland province in central China. The physical
activities of the proposed project are the road maintenance works on the existing roads (component B
and C) and construction of road maintenance emergency response centers in six cities in Anhui
(component D). The specific roads and locations for maintenance will be selected during the project
preparation and implementation based on actual road quality and maintenance needs. Suitable
locations for the emergency centers will also be selected based on further analysis during project
implementation.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Anhui PMO (i.e. Foreign Capital Utilization Office and Anhui Highway Administration Bureau)
is very experienced in the application of World Bank safeguards policies given that they have
successfully implemented four World Bank transport projects in the past decade. An experienced EA
consultant will be engaged for safeguards documents preparation, and the Bank safeguards
specialists will provide guidance and supervision on the project preparation and implementation.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Peishen Wang (GENO2)


﻿Zhefu Liu (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment     Yes         The project will include physical activities of road
OP/BP 4.01                               maintenance and construction of emergency response
centers in participating municipalities of Anhui
Province. The road maintenance will include typical
activities such as minor repairing of potholes, road
surface overlays and pavement rehabilitation. The
emergency response centers are storage warehouses
for emergency response equipment, vehicles and
materials standing by for emergent road repair needs.
It is envisaged that the main environmental and
social impacts of the road maintenance works will be
construction related impacts, such as disturbance of
road traffic, nuisance of dust and noise/vibration,
management of wastes, worker and community
safety, and impact on existing green belt etc. All
maintenance works will be conducted on existing
roads and within the existing right-of-way, and
maintenance materials (e.g. aggregate, sand, cement,
asphalt etc.) are to be purchased from market
suppliers, so there will not be new quarry sites or
borrow pits involved. Therefore, the environmental
and social impacts will be site-specific, temporary in
nature, and can be readily managed with known
mitigation measures and good construction
management practice. Therefore, the project is
proposed to be a Category B project as per OP4.01.
Since not all the roads for maintenance may be
identified during the project preparation stage, an
environmental safeguards framework approach will
be used for the environmental assessment. An
Environmental Management Framework will be
prepared, which will address the potential
environmental and social impacts related to project
activities, safeguards screening process for future
roads maintenance, and include a set of generic
Environmental Code of Practice (ECOPs). The
ECOPs will be developed as a standard
environmental manual for all the road maintenance
activities, which will be incorporated into bidding
documents and contracts with contractors. For the
road maintenance identified during the preparation


﻿for the first year of implementation, an EIA/EMP
will be prepared to address road-specific
environmental and social impacts.
A key social issues will be the relocation of the in-
house workers who are currently undertaking minor
maintenance, but who will need to be relocated to
other job locations or positions, as their current
duties will be outsourced under the marketization.
The EIA and EMP under this OP4.01 will include a
robust analysis of the social impacts of this, not only
for those directly impacted by the project, but also
beyond the project scope, should Anhui decide later
to rollout the marketization to the entire road
network.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No           The road selected for maintenance will not involve
natural habitats. All maintenance works will be
conducted on existing roads and within the existing
right-of-way, and maintenance materials are to be
purchased from market suppliers, so there will not be
new quarry sites or borrow pits involved. Therefore,
this policy is not triggered.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No           The road maintenance works within the right-of-way
on the existing roads will not have impacts on
forests; therefore this policy is not triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No           The project will not involve procurement of pesticide
or have any impact on pest management practice.
This policy is not triggered.
0
Physical Cultural Resources  No          As all the road maintenance works will be within the
OP/BP 4.11                               right-of-way on the existing roads, there are no
physical cultural resources involved. Nevertheless,
the chance-find procedures will be included in the
EMF (ECOPs).
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     TBD         As it is not known at this stage if indigenous people/
4.10                                     ethnic minorities are present in the project influence
area, triggering of OP 4.10 is To Be Decided.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        The project will not require collective land and
BP 4.12                                  housing demolition, and the road maintenances will
be implemented within the right-of-way of the
existing highways in the participating municipalities.
In case there are any project modifications causing
land acquisition and resettlement relocation prior to
the Closing day of the Bank loan, resettlement policy
framework is requested to guide the project
modification. As the result, OP 4.12 was triggered.


﻿Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No            The project will not involve any dams; therefore, the
policy is not triggered.
Projects on International      No            The project will not involve any international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                         waterways. Therefore, the policy is not triggered.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No            The project will not involve any disputed areas.
O
BP 7.60                                      Therefore, the policy is not triggered.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 11-Jan-2016
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Environmental Management Framework - October, 2015.
Social impact analysis - October, 2015.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Jens Christian Helbech Hede
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:      Name: Josefo Tuyor (SA)                           Date: 13-Jul-2015
Practice Manager/        Name: Michel Kerf (PMGR)                           Date: 14-Jul-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


