INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA14025
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Jun-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-May-2015, 12-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Tajikistan                 Project ID:  P154729
Parent       PI18196
Project ID:
Project Name: Tajikistan Second Dushanbe Water Supply Project - Additional Financing
(P 154729)
Parent Project Second Dushanbe Water Supply Project (P118196)
Name:
Task Team       Pier Francesco Mantovani
Leader(s):
Estimated       11-May-2015                Estimated    30-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWADR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Water supply (100%)
Theme(s):       Urban services and housing for the poor (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      12.00            Total Bank Financing:   10.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          2.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                 5.50
IDA Grant                                                                   4.50
Total                                                                      12.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
Page 1 of 9


﻿2. Project Development Objective(s)
A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The project development objective is to improve water utility performance and water supply
services in selected areas of Dushanbe
B. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
The project development objective is to improve water utility performance and water supply
services in selected areas of Dushanbe.
3. Project Description
The activities to be financed by the AF are aligned with the PDO, aimed at fully achieving DWSP2
outcomes. The benefits of the AF include major improvements in the quality and reliability of water
service in Dushanbe. In particular:
a.     With the full reconstruction of SAM filters, DVK will be able to distribute strictly potable
water across its system and the SAM service area will no longer be vulnerable to "brown water"
turbidity events.
b.     The completion of the metering program in the southern half of the city, and the initiation of
network sectorization and renewal program as part of a non-revenue water reduction strategy, are
expected to curb water demands, resulting in locally increased availability of service across the city,
including in summer and in the upper floors of apartment buildings.
c.     DVK's efficiency, revenue, cost-recovery and sustainability will also benefit from the
completion of the partial metering program, launch of a NRW reduction strategy and energy
efficiency upgrades, and introduction of block tariffs.
The activities financed by the AF are consistent with the components of the original DWSP2 project,
and are summarized as follows:
Under Component 1. Metering and Demand Management, the AF will finance:
a) Installation of 10,000 meters in completion of metering program in south Dushanbe
b) Implementation of energy efficiency upgrades
c) Network sectorization, mains replacement and leak reduction
d) Communications strategy and ICT-based reporting system
e) Annual customer satisfaction surveys
Under Component 2. Water Quality Improvement, the AF will finance:
a) Reconstruction of additional 50% tranche of filters at SAM WTP and associated inlet and outlet
structures
b) Automation of coagulation dosage at SAM WTP
c) Installation of in-network re-chlorination systems
Under Component 3. Institutional Strengthening & Capacity Building, the AF will finance:
a) Tariff and connection fee study
b) Technical Assistance for corporate development, financial management and customer
service
c) Technical assistance for operational improvements, including NRW reduction strategy
d) Training program for operational and administrative capacity building
Under Component 4. Implementation Support, the AF will finance:
Page 2 of 9


﻿a) Project Management Consultant, design and supervision services
b) Project Administration Unit operating costs
c) Annual Audits
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Dushanbe, capital city of the Republic of Tajikistan. The project will finance works on the premises
of Dushanbe VodoKanal - Intakes, treatment plants. Pipe replacement may occur on private and
publicly used land.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (GSURR)
Cesar Niculescu (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                (EMMP) from the first project DWSP1 proved to be
acceptable for DWSP2 and will be used without revision
for the AF project. Because the previous consultation and
disclosure was several years ago, the EMMP was re-
disclosed and there was a new program of public
consultations on DWSP2 activities and impacts. The team
ensured that the EMMP was part of those public
consultations.
EMMP for DWSP2 was updated and disclosed in country
and in Infoshop (January 14 and 25 2011).
RPF for DWSP2 was prepared and disclosed in country
and in Infoshop (January 25 2011).
Weak implementation capacity of the Borrower
(Municipality of Dushanbe, Dushanbe Vodokanal and the
Project Cordination Unit) was a problem in the early
stages of the first project. However, capacity has
improved for DWSP2 with experience and through
enhanced implementation assistance and some TA, which
will continue to be provided in the form of a Project
Management Consultant embedded in DVK. The practice
of incorporating EMMP provisions within contractors'
contracts will continue, with monitoring of
implementation by PMC. The project will also have a
separate capacity building component for the utility which
will address long term monitoring of services and water
quality among other things.
The EMMP stipulates all contracts for construction works
will include requirements for implementation of the
specific measures as per EMMP provisions and good
construction practices. Furthermore, daily control and
Page 3 of 9


﻿monitoring of construction works will be part of
responsibilities of the utility operator. The quality of
drinking water supply will be monitored according to
international and local standards using new laboratory
equipment to be financed by the project.
OP/BP 4.01 is being effectively complied with in the
ongoing DWSP2, with satisfactory EMPs in place for
relevant works contracts, and no issues to date.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           There are no important wildlife and wildlife habitats in
4.04                                 the vicinity of proposed rehabilitation works and thus the
OP is not triggered.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No           There are no impacts on physical cultural resources which
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 are located in the vicinity of the existing water supply and
sanitation network and respectively this OP is not
triggered.
Nevertheless, the environmental screening process will
screen for the presence of physical cultural resources. In
addition, chance find procedures will be included in all
works contracts.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           Indigenous Peoples' as per OP 4.10 are not present in the
BP 4.10                              project area.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         Impacts on land use that may have impacts as detailed in
OP/BP 4.12                           OP 4.12 may result from project activities. A
Resettlement Policy Framework is in place as the specific
sites of impacts are not known. Where site-specific
impacts are identified a Resettlement Action Plan will be
prepared and submitted to the Bank for approval. In
addition, all site-specific Resettlement Action Plans will
be disclosed in-country and in the InfoShop.
OP/BP 4.12 is being effectively complied with in the
ongoing DWSP2, with a satisfactory RPF in place and
one RAP under preparation. There are no involuntary
resettlement-related issues to date.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  Yes       Groundwater from the Kafernigan and Southwest well
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 fields is the main source of water supply for the city of
Dushanbe. A hydro-geological map of the area shows that
these aquifers are local and the fragmented nature of the
Page 4 of 9


﻿aquifer system isolates these well fields from any water
bodies shared with Uzbekistan. However, the portion of
the water supply which comes from surface water
(Varzob river and canal, supplying Dushanbe's
Samotechnaya and Napornaya water treatment plants) are
part of the Amu Darya river watershed which extends into
Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan.
Therefore, OP 7.50 is triggered.
However, the project consists only of rehabilitation, and
through components for demand management and
improving efficiency of water use, it aims to substantially
reduce Dushanbe's extremely high water consumption
rates. The DWSP2 and AF investments are expected to
support the rehabilitation and improvement of existing
schemes, and will not cover works and activities that
would exceed the original scheme, change its nature, or so
alter or expand its scope and extent as to make it appear a
new or different scheme. Further, DWSP2 and the AF aim
to improve efficiency of water use and to substantially
reduce Dushanbe municipality's high water consumption
rates. Accordingly it is anticipated that investments
supported under DWSP2 and related AF will not (i) cause
appreciable harm to the other riparian as it will not
adversely change the quality or quantity of water flows,
and (ii) will not be adversely affected by the other
riparians' possible water use.
DWSP2 was accordingly exempted from the OP 7.50
riparian notification requirement. AF activities do not
introduce any new condition or impact that may cause the
DWSP2 exemption criteria not to be met. An exemption
to the requirement to notify other riparians was processed
in line with paragraph 7(a) of OP 7.50. The exemption to
the notification was approved by ECA Regional Vice
President on May 14, 2015.
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The AF would support only rehabilitation of water supply network activities (renovation of
coagulation and chlorination facilities, rapid sand filters; replacement of distribution network; and
rehabilitation, replacement or installation of production water meters) which are not expected to
generate significant environmental and social impacts.
Page 5 of 9


﻿Social Impacts: The completed pre-feasibility studies indicate that the project will largely be
limited to rehabilitation of existing structures on DVK grounds or public land. However, as project
design is further detailed, there is a possibility that some construction may exceed available land
and may have to take place on sites not yet identified. Further, some land within residence
compounds may have to be temporarily occupied for works such as excavation of trenches.
Aside from above, there are no major adverse social safeguard impacts expected through this
project. The project will alleviate the socio-economic impacts of poor service such as: (i) coping
costs, or costs incurred to compensate for poor service (household filters, water boiling, water
storage systems, purchase of tanker water); (ii) Productivity losses, or time spent in dealing with
irregular or poor quality water supply; and (iii) Public health costs, or healthcare expenditures and
time lost due waterbome diseases. The AF will also help design a block tariff structure integrating
a first block with a lifeline tariff to ensure the affordability of basic service. It is also assessed that
the additional debt service incurred by DVK with the AF will not have unsustainable tariff impacts
on the poorest households. In addition, the project will also strengthen the complaint system in an
effort to make it more accessible and responsive to customers (including the poor and women).
The complaint system which also serve to monitor project progress and impacts.
Activities to be funded by the AF are either already included in the original project or correspond
to a scaling-up of investments initiated under the Project for which equivalent scale-up designs
have already been developed under the Project. The activities are not foreseen as having any new
potential environmental or social impacts, and there are no changes in triggered safeguards
policies.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Potential environmental adverse impacts of the project would relate to: (i) inappropriate disposal
of water treatment sludge; (ii) safety hazards from chlorination process; (iii) pollution by
construction run-offs; (iv) disturbance during construction including dust, noise, vibration, access
restriction, closure of roads, and increased traffic; (v) improper disposal of demolition debris; (vi)
damage to existing utility services during pipe repairs and installation; (vii) safety hazards from
construction activities; (viii) spillage of fuel and oil from construction; and (ix) damage to trees
and vegetative cover. At the same time the project is expected to bring significant environmental
and health benefits, such as improvements in public health through better quality and availability
of treated water, and improvements in the sustainability of raw water sources through reductions in
losses and wastage. Based on mentioned above the project is qualified as Category B for which a
partial EA and a simple EMP should be prepared and applied during the project implementation.
The required mitigation measures for the project activities are standard and widely use in
construction practices. They are well prescribed in the Environmental Management and
Monitoring Plan (EMMP), which was prepared for the initial project. As the new project will
support same types of activities as under the initial project it is proposed the exiting EMMP to be
applied also for the new project. The EMMP stipulates all contracts for construction works will
include requirements for implementation of the specific measures as per EMMP provisions and
good construction practices. Furthermore, daily control and monitoring of construction works will
be part of responsibilities of the utility operator. The quality of drinking water supply will be
monitored according to international and local standards using new laboratory equipment to be
financed by the project.
Social Impacts: The completed pre-feasibility studies indicate that the project will largely be
Page 6 of 9


﻿limited to rehabilitation of existing structures. The planned new pumping station and reservoir of
the Napomaya water treatment plant will be built on the premises of the authority, where there are
no activities or residences. However, as project design is further detailed, there is a possibility that
some construction may exceed available land and may have to take place on sites not yet
identified. Further, some land within residence compounds may have to be temporarily occupied
for works such as excavation of trenches. None of these impacts are major or irreversible.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower, including the Municipality of Dushanbe, the Dushanbe Vodokanal and the Project
Management Consultant, have managed the ongoing 2nd Dushanbe Water Supply Project and are
familiar with the World Bank's Safeguard Policies. Application of environmental policies has
improved in the last 2 years, following specific supervision and advice provided by the Task
Team. The WB team will continue closely monitor EMMP implementation, providing relevant
assistance and capacity building.
Under DSWP 2 a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared, approved by the Bank, and
disclosed. The RPF is being implemented with no challenges identified to date. The RPF will
continue to be used for the Additional Financing. No civil works will commence until
Resettlement Action Plans are prepared and approved by the World Bank. A RAP is under
preparation for limited impacts along the public land path of a rehabilitated pipeline. The RPF is
implemented by DVK with support from the Project Management Consultant and the
Municipality. Appropriate technical support has been and will continue to be provided.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The main beneficiary groups are the customers i.e. the inhabitants of Dushanbe, Tajikistan. Under
DSWP 2 the project has involved and consulted with these stakeholders through the detailed social
analysis and a customer satisfaction study which is in progress and was an important input to the
project design. This study included a range of quantitative and qualitative instruments such as
questionnaires, focus group discussions and case histories which served as an important tool to get
the beneficiary's perspective on needs and priority. The study disaggregated different user groups
based on residence type, water source and socio-economic criteria, with a focus on identifying
vulnerable groups. This study served as the baseline for project M & E. Annual customer
satisfaction surveys are being conducted under DSWP 2 and will continue under the AF.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                14-Jan-20 11
Date of submission to InfoShop                             02-Feb-20 11
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Page 7 of 9


﻿Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                28-Jan-2011
Date of submission to InfoShop                             02-Feb-2011I
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ ] No [ X] NA [ ]
report?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?   Yes [  ]  No [ X ]  NA [    ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [X] No [     ]  NA [    ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                  Yes [X] No [     ]  NA [    ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Page 8 of 9


﻿Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]NA[]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Pier Francesco Mantovani
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (PMGR)          Date: 12-Jun-2015
Manager:
Page 9 of 9


