                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSR13946
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jun-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Jun-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Ukraine                                      Project ID:           P127156
                            Project Name:      SECOND ROAD AND SAFETY IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P127156)
                            Task Team          Eric R. Lancelot
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          24-Apr-2012                                  Estimated   20-Sep-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTIDR                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector:            Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (99%), Public administration-
                                               Transportation (1%)
                            Theme:             Infrastructure services for private sector development (34%), Trade facilitation
                                               and market access (33%), City-wide Infrastructure a nd Service Delivery (33%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                          No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       540.00           Total Bank Financing:                                      450.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                             90.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                               450.00
                              Total                                                                                               540.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The proposed project is a follow-on (or repeater) project to the ongoing Road and Safety
                           Improvement Project (RSIP, P100580) which was approved in 2009 and is under successful


                                                                                 Page 1 of 9
                         implementation. The proposed project would have the same development objective as the ongoing
                         RSIP, which is an "improved condition and quality of sections of the M-03 road, and increased
                         traffic safety on roads". The new project will rehabilitate and upgrade additional sections of the same
Public Disclosure Copy




                         M-03 road and will improve road safety conditions on several road corridors in Ukraine.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The proposed project is a follow-on (or repeater) project to the ongoing Road and Safety
                         Improvement Project (RSIP, P100580) which was approved in 2009 and is under successful
                         implementation. The proposed project would have the same development objective as the ongoing
                         RSIP, which is an "improved condition and quality of sections of the M-03 road, and increased
                         traffic safety on roads". The new project will rehabilitate and upgrade additional sections of the same
                         M-03 road and will improve road safety conditions on several road corridors in Ukraine.
                         3. Project Description
                         The proposed project will have three components:

                         Component One: Road Rehabilitation and Upgrading between Lubny and Poltava ($397.0 million).
                         The RSIP2 will rehabilitate and upgrade the section of the M-03 road between Lubny and Poltava.
                         This is the direct continuation of the M-03 road section that is being rehabilitated under the ongoing
                         RSIP project. It links central Ukraine and Kiev with the eastern industrial region of Ukraine and the
                         border with Russia. The project road sections mostly run through rural areas with very little
                         population, on a flat to slightly rolling terrain, with many long straight sections and only a few slight
                         curves. The road presently carries about 16,000 vehicles per day with a high share of heavy vehicles
                         (around 40 percent). The existing Lubny-Poltava road has a length of 165 km, of which 55 km have
                         four lanes and the remainder has only two lanes. The project will upgrade the existing two-lane road
                         sections to a four-lane road (category I.b) with median. It will also rehabilitate the existing four-lane
                         road sections. The existing road presently receives routine maintenance, but has not received periodic
                         maintenance for more than twenty years; therefore is highly deteriorated with an average roughness
                         more than 6 IRI, m/km. The project will also include two bypasses designed to improve the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         alignment of the road and go around two small villages, and another bypass designed to avoid long-
                         distance traffic having to go through the city of Poltava (connection between M-03 and M-22 roads).
                         Although the proposed short Poltava bypass may eventually become part of a larger Poltava bypass
                         road, at this time it is considered a stand-alone investment that is justified on its own as a connection
                         between the M-03 and the M-22 roads. The costs of Land acquisitions needed for the execution of
                         the works of the component 1 as well as the costs of taxes will be eligible to the financing from the
                         loan under June 2015 Project restructuring.

                         Component Two: Road Safety ($50.0 million). This component will finance road infrastructure
                         safety improvements on 2 to 4 high risk road sections and road corridors that will be identified by
                         UKRAVTODOR, based on the safety inspection of about 1500 km of national roads with high
                         accident rates. The Road Safety Inspection will be carried out using the International Road
                         Assessment Program (iRAP) risk mapping and star rating protocols. The corridors to be improved
                         under the RSIP2 will be selected and prioritized primarily on the basis of cost-benefit analysis. This
                         component will also improve the two existing village road sections in the villages where bypasses are
                         to be built under Component 1. The costs of Land acquisitions needed for the execution of the works
                         of the component 2 as well as the costs of taxes will be eligible to the financing from the loan under
                         June 2015 Project restructuring.

                         The revised Component Three will include Institutional Support and Strengthening of the road sector


                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         ($3.0 million) through the provision of technical advisory services, training and equipment, including
                         the introduction and fostering of management by performance, support to the improvement of the
                         quality assurance of the Project Cycle, increased transparency and strengthened road safety
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management

                         The total cost of the proposed RSIP2 is US$ 450 million net of taxes; this amount is to be funded
                         through an IBRD SIL. The State budget will fund the value-added taxes (VAT) expected to amount
                         to US$ 112 million equivalent.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Component 1 (expected locations):

                         Lot     Location      Length (km)         Type of works
                         2.1     210+000 to 220+782     10.8 Widening
                         2.2     228+000 to 239+317     11.3 Widening
                               243+720                    Interchange
                         2.3     258+000 to 275+000    17.0 Widening
                         2.4     277+900 to 300+550     22.7 Widening; Interchange
                         2.5     300+550 to 323+000     22.5 Rehabilitation
                         2.6     329+050 to 336+873      7.8 Rehabilitation
                         2.8B 220+782 to 228+000         7.2 Bypass
                         2.9B 275+000 to 282+000         7.0 Bypass and Widening
                         2.10B 333+800 to 339+300       11.5 Bypass Poltava I
                         Total              113.7 km

                         Component 2 (concept advanced based on iRAP recommendations, design to be prepared):
                         Section 38 of M12 (km 291+240 - km 332+052) rehabilitation and road safety measures including,
                         but not limited to, one short short realignment triggering limited land acquisitions (about 1ha),
Public Disclosure Copy




                         installation of barriers on existing 2x2 lanes, limited third lanes and duplications on existing right of
                         way, improvement of shoulders, improvement of junctions, segregation of road vehicle traffics from
                         other fragile road users (e.g. bicycles, pedestrians) notably in cities crossed etc.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alexei Slenzak (GENDR)
                         Chukwudi H. Okafor (GSURR)
                         Klavdiya Maksymenko (GSURR)
                         Sophia V. Georgieva (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes             Widening of the M-03 road and capital repairs will be
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                       undertaken within the existing right of way of the road
                                                                      and environmental impacts can be mitigated by good
                                                                      construction and housekeeping practices. Environmental
                                                                      issues will be similar to those under the ongoing RSIP1.
                                                                      All bypasses to be built under the RSIP2 will go through
                                                                      farmland and partially through forested areas (planted
                                                                      forests with low-value species). No protected areas will


                                                                        Page 3 of 9
                                                          be affected by the project. An Environmental Impact
                                                          Assessment (EIA/OVOS) for the new sections of the road
                                                          (bypasses) was prepared by the client, since those
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                          bypasses were not covered in the original EIA carried out
                                                          in 2007. An Addendum to existing Framework EMP was
                                                          prepared by UKRAVTODOR and will serve as a
                                                          framework for preparation of site-specific EMPs (as part
                                                          of preparation of final construction drawings by
                                                          Contractors). The EIA/OVOS and the Addendum to the
                                                          Framework EMP were disclosed by Ukravtodor and by
                                                          Poltava oblast administration and public hearings were
                                                          organized.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP     No
                         4.04
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36         No
                         Pest Management OP 4.09    No
                         Physical Cultural          No
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/     No
                         BP 4.10
                         Involuntary Resettlement   Yes   Land acquisition under the Project is governed by a
                         OP/BP 4.12                       Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) approved by the
                                                          Bank. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was prepared
                                                          in March 2012 in accordance with the RPF for 104 land
                                                          parcels required under Component 1. Acquisition and
                                                          associated resettlement for 10 of these parcels has been
                                                          completed in a manner satisfactory to the Bank, using
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                          counterpart funds. In addition, 60 parcels for about 24 ha
                                                          will be needed to complete one of the by-passes under
                                                          component 1, which are also proposed to be financed by
                                                          the loan.
                                                          Under component 2, it is anticipated that additional
                                                          parcels for a total of approximately 1 hectare in size will
                                                          need to be acquired. In both cases, a RAP has not yet been
                                                          completed, but will be prepared in accordance with the
                                                          Project RPF. In short, about 155 parcels remain to be
                                                          acquired, comprising approximately 125 hectares.
                                                          The landowners to be affected by these acquisitions have
                                                          been offered the option of land swap (with equivalent
                                                          price and properties) or monetary compensation. They
                                                          have agreed in principle to sell their lands for the purpose
                                                          of the works and notarized consents have already been
                                                          received for the lands to be acquired under component 1.
                                                          As of now, final agreements on purchase prices are being
                                                          finalized following the valuation process detailed below
                                                          and consistent with the provisions of the RAP for



                                                           Page 4 of 9
                                                                      component 1. The process is less advanced for the lands
                                                                      to be acquired to complete the third by-pass under
                                                                      component 1 and the one to be acquired under component
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      2, where the final design of the road still needs to be
                                                                      concluded. None of the land acquisitions that are the
                                                                      subject of this memorandum are expected to result in
                                                                      physical resettlement.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Environmental: Risks are limited to the typical risks associated with road construction and
                              rehabilitation projects. The severity of potential impacts is moderate and mostly limited to the
                              construction period: (i) air pollution and noise from trucks and other construction machinery, and
                              asphalt plants, (ii) soil disturbance, and (iii) tree-cutting. An Environmental Assessment has been
                              prepared for all road sections to be repaired or upgraded, and for the new bypasses included in the
                              project. The bypasses will go mainly through farmland and partially through forested areas.
                              Protected areas will not be affected by the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             The area's primary ecological functions have long been significantly modified by human activities
                             during the last centuries. Large-scale farming has dominated land use for several decades. The
                             landscape was also significantly modified by the development of infrastructure associated with
                             large-scale farming, populated villages and towns along the road (private housing, shops, public
                             buildings and various local infrastructure facilities). In addition, the existing main road between
                             Kyiv and Kharkiv was constructed more than 50 years ago and has changed the landscape and
                             local ecosystems in the broader road corridor. Given that the ecosystems' biological communities
                             have been historically affected by the above economic and social activities, and taking into
                             account that the road upgrading works will not result in significant conversion or degradation of
                             natural habitats, OP 4.04 (Natural Habitats) will not be triggered.

                             Forested areas touched by the project do not represent natural forests or related natural habitats.
                             The predominant land use in the project area is agricultural and not dependent on forest cover.
                             The project will affect only small segments of forested areas as a result of construction of
                             bypasses. All forested areas affected by the project are planted with low-value tree species. Based
                             on the above, OP 4.36 (Forests) is not triggered.

                             Social: Social safeguard issues are associated with land acquisition necessary for construction of
                             bypasses and interchanges, and for road widening. Land acquisition will affect mostly agricultural
                             land. In two cases, single-family houses were affected due to road widening (village of


                                                                        Page 5 of 9
                           Belotserkivka, and village of Konoplianka). The two owners have expressed their desire to be
                           offered alternative housing - one, within the same village, and the other in a neighboring village.
                           They were provided the houses of a greater value and with improved living conditions in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           location of their choice, in addition they were provided assistance in relocation. The construction
                           of the bypasses is going to improve safety in the settlements and provide better conditions for
                           public transport users safer waiting areas, lighted road crossings). The upgrading of the Mo03 road
                           to highway standards may have negative impact on the local communities’ access to social
                           facilities, communal pastures, etc. In order to mitigate these effects the consultations have been
                           held at the design stage to ensure that the needs of the local communities are reflected in the
                           design of the road.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            The project will not have indirect negative impacts, but will rather result in environmental, social
                           and operational benefits due to improved access to markets and services, better vehicle operational
                           conditions and better road safety. The project will also contribute to increased safety for
                           pedestrians and for inhabitants of the villages along the road, especially in cases where bypasses
                           will be constructed.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            The proposed design of the road was chosen based on careful review of potential alternatives.
                           The proposed specific location of the road includes sections (i) for road rehabilitation of the
                           existing four lanes and (ii) for widening from two to four lanes, within the existing right of way
                           and (iii) for the construction of new bypasses where road upgrading within the boundaries of
                            villages/towns was not possible due to potential large-scale resettlement. Bypasses are also
                           justified because they increase road safety for village residents.

                           In selected cases, e.g. road straightening at Kovtuny village, road alignment plans were altered to
                           avoid resettlement of single-family homes.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            For the purposes of the ongoing RSIP1 a corridor-specific Environmental Impact Assessment/
                           OVOS (EIA/OVOS 2007) was prepared in 2007, documenting baseline conditions and
                           environmental risks for the whole road Kyiv-Poltava. Based on this, a generic (or "framework")
                           Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was prepared (2007) and its disclosure and public
                           consultations organized under RSIP1. Given that most of the road sections (except bypasses)
                           proposed for financing under RSIP2 were already covered by this earlier EIA/OVOS 2007, the
                           client now carried out the EIA/OVOS for the new sections/bypasses of the road not already
                           covered under the earlier EIA/OVOS 2007. Based on the new EIA/OVOS report an Addendum to
                           the earlier EMP Framework document was prepared. This Addendum represents the framework
                           for the preparation of site-specific EMPs at the time of the preparation of final designs.

                           UKRDORINVEST has experience of working on environmental safeguards under the ongoing
                           RSIP1 and under other projects funded by EBRD/EIB. A designated full-time staff at
                           UKRDORINVEST has been assigned to work on environmental issues in close collaboration with
                           the road design institute (UKRGIPRODOR), local authorities and the Road Service of Poltava
                           oblast. UKRDORINVEST has prior experience in organizing public consultations and organized
                           such consultations on TOR for EIA/OVOS, draft EIA/OVOS reports, and on the Addendum to the


                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                           Framework EMP in project locations. A recent site visit showed that the existing environmental
                           safeguards management arrangements are functioning appropriately, demonstrated by the case
                           when the number of trees that needed to be removed under the RSIP1 project had to be revised.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The collaborative effort between the contractor, the supervision consultant and UKRDORINVEST
                           led to an orderly review of the needs for tree cutting and a downward revision of the BOQ for the
                           contractor.

                           Under RSIP1, UKRDORINVEST (PIU) prepared a Land Acquisition and Resettlement
                           Framework (2007). In preparation for RSIP2, the PIU assigned a staff to prepare an updated and
                           more detailed Resettlement Policy Framework (completed in February 2012 and updated in March
                           2012) and also specific Resettlement Action Plans. The RAP for Component 1 of the RSIP2 has
                           been completed in March 2012, covering the road sections where land acquisition and/or
                           resettlement is expected. UKRAVTODOR has designated a staff member to monitor land
                           acquisition / resettlement to be carries out under the RSIP2 and report to the PIU and the World
                           Bank any potential irregularities and shortcomings during the implementation of the Resettlement
                           Action Plan - both with respect to identified impacts, or related to additional unexpected negative
                           impacts occurring in the course of the project. For the sections of the road where the works have
                           already started the land acquisition is successfully completed and compensations paid.

                           The PIU will also rely on close cooperation with regional authorities and the Poltava road service
                           for monitoring resettlement and compensations of PAPs in sub-projects. For land acquisition and
                           resettlement, each six months the Poltava region road service will select a random sample of cases,
                           visit each, and report on the progress of land acquisition and resettlement. The results will be
                           summarized in a report to the project managers and the Bank which uses key performance
                           indicators selected by the project and agreed in the RAP as reporting topics.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             There are 83 communities in the area affected by the project, the majority of which are situated
Public Disclosure Copy




                           outside the immediate vicinity of the road as such. The affected population of villages and towns
                           in the area affected by the road constitutes about 230.000 people, or 793 inhabitants per kilometer
                           of road. Key stakeholder groups are: (a) the residents of areas affected by the road, (b) individuals
                           and legal entities which will work on the construction of the road, and (c ) individuals and legal
                           entities in the project area which benefit from using the M03 road✎

                           Following the requirements for Category A projects, public consultations on the TOR for EA/
                           OVOS were organized in five project locations (Lubny, Khorol, Bilkotserkivka, Poltava,
                           Reshetylivka) in October 2011. Public consultations on the draft EIA/OVOS reports were
                           organized on November 14, 2011 with participation of representatives of all rayons of the area of
                           prospective construction. Key data and findings of these EIA/OVOS reports were used for
                           preparation of the Framework Addendum to EMP. Public consultations on the Framework
                           Addendum to EMP and Resettlement Policy Framework were organized by the client on
                           December 23, 2011.
                           Preliminary consultations with owners of the two houses to be resettled have been held in
                           December 2011 during which owners have stated their desire to be provided with house and land
                           of equivalent value to their property in the village of Belotserkivka. In early March 2012 the Bank
                           team, jointly with officials of UKRAVTODOR and Poltava Road Service visited the PAP's to be
                           resettled; they confirmed their willingness to be resettled to houses nearby. The resettlement of the



                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                           households needing relocation has been completed successfully. The Bank's supervision mission
                           had conversations with selected PAPs.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      ///
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   ///
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      ///
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ukraine                                                          23-Dec-2011
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      ///
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   ///
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ukraine                                                          22-Feb-2012
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?


                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Eric R. Lancelot
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                           Date: 26-Jun-2015
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Juan Gaviria (PMGR)                         Date: 29-Jun-2015
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 9 of 9
