INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR16266
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Feb-2016
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Feb-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Afghanistan                Project ID:  P123845
Project Name: Afghanistan Capacity Building for Results Facility (CBR) (P123845)
Task Team       Yousif Mubarak Elmahdi
Leader(s):
Estimated                                  Estimated
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GGO18                       Lending      Technical Assistance Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         General public administration sector (100%)
Theme:          Administrative and civil service reform (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                  No
Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     150.00            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                         0.00
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund                          150.00
Financing Gap                                                    0.00
Total                                                          150.00
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
The proposed PDO is to improve budget execution and service delivery in some key areas of
Government operations. These would be achieved through: (i) reorganiza
tion of key ministry structures; (ii) improved management practices and professi
Page 1 of 5


﻿onalized staffing by civil servants; (iii) improvements in the civil service man
agement environment; (iv
) expansion of training opportunities; and (v) strengthened government oversight.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
The proposed PDO is to improve budget execution and service delivery in some key areas of
Government operations. These would be achieved through: (i) reorganiza
tion of key ministry structures; (ii) improved management practices and professi
o        onalized staffing by civil servants; (iii) improvements in the civil service man
agement environment; (iv
) expansion of training opportunities; and (v) strengthened government oversight.
3. Project Description
The Project will be restructured to formalize changes instructed by Presidential Order Number 852
on the "Implementation of the Capacity Building for Results (CBR) Facility" (Annex 1) issued by
the President of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan on July 29, 2015. The Project will also be
adjusted to reflect Presidential Legislative Decree Number 82 on Recruitment issued on September 6,
2015 which transfers the responsibility of Grade 1 and 2 (of Tashkeel) recruitment from the
Independent and Administrative Reform and Civil Service Commission (IARCSC) to line ministries.
The proposed changes are intended to turnaround the Project and enhance the implementation of the
project towards achieving its development objectives. Over the past three years of implementation,
CBR has made limited progress. The amount of funds disbursed under the Project has been low, with
only US$18.43 million disbursed to date out of the total commitment of US$100 million.
The project will assist priority line ministries and independent agencies to integrate and incentivize in
a strategic manner their restructuring, organizational, staffing, institutional, and human capacity
development efforts to deliver clear budget execution and service delivery targets supported by a
framework of approved rules. There are three components as follows:
Component 1:Technical Assistance Facility for Preparation and Implementation of Capacity Building
Programs:
This component focuses on the provision of technical assistance for the preparation and
implementation of Capacity Building for Results Program Proposals (CBRPs). The proposed changes
to the design of this component are twofold: to simplify line ministries' access to Capacity Building
for Results and to make the provision of Technical Assistance (TA) to line ministries - for their
CBRPs' development and implementation - more structured and easily accessible. This involves
elimination of "Requests to Apply". Instead, CBR will apply a more focused approach that prioritizes
line ministries with prepared or approved CBRPs, thereby demonstrating a clear demand for CBR. In
order to better manage the resources of the project, eligibility criteria will be set for the number, type,
and length of TAs available to line ministries and independent agencies. TAs will need to be closely
linked to CBRP results frameworks. Based on the approved CBRPs, new types of TAs will also be
facilitated for Minister's and Head of Agencies' Offices and to support accelerated and improved
civil servants recruitment.
Component 2:Building Human Resources:
Under this component, support will be expanded to accommodate common function positions for all
interested line ministries and government agencies. Common function non-uniform civilian
personnel in Financial Management, Internal Audit, Human Resources, Administration and
Procurement will also be provided to security ministries after confirmation of "civilianization"
Page 2 of 5


﻿process of the mentioned functions. Also, this component will adopt a number of CBR-specific
recruitment measures in order to overcome bottlenecks associated with civil servants recruitment.
These primarily center around entrusting recruitment responsibility for all grades of approved
(Tashkeel) positions directly to respective line ministries and independent agencies in line with
)         Presidential Decree Number 82 on Recruitment, issued on September 6, 2015.
Component 3: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation:
The scope of this component has been reoriented to support the gradual transition of Project
implementation responsibility to core government functions by supporting the institutional capacity
of the relevant departments in MoF and IARCSC. Besides, this component will support the Project
Secretariat to the Steering Committee.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project focuses on capacity building of civil servants at central and provincial level, with a view
to improving the services delivered to the wider population. The proposed activities do not include
any physical works and are not expected to have any adverse social and environmental impacts.
Consequently, none of the World Bank's safeguards policies are triggered.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Mohammad Arif Rasuli (GEN06)
Mohammad Ateeq Zaki (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           No          The will be no physical or construction work. Also, the
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               project will not be engaged in any land acquisition
activities during its life and does not envisage any activity
that can possibly lead to trigger any safeguards policies
after the completion of the project.
4.0
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No         This policy is not triggered. Because, none of the project's
4.04                                components engages in any work that has direct or
indirect relationship with Natural Habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          The project activities do not impact forests in any way, as
defined by the policy.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          The project will neither use nor finance pesticides.
Physical Cultural       No          This restructuring does not support any work that would
Resources OP/BP 4.11                trigger this policy.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          This policy is not triggered. There are no Indigenous
BP 4.10                             Peoples that meet the criteria of OP/BP 4.10 within the
project area that could potentially benefit or be adversely
affected by the project's activities.
Involuntary Resettlement No         No involuntary land acquisition, land donation and land
OP/BP 4.12                          transfer is expected in this project.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No          This project does not have any activity involving dams.
4.37
No
Page 3 of 5


﻿Projects on International           The project does not involve any activity that will affect
WoJecaipM1lWBlkc.50  No          iterpa6jeuttlDtwways.olve any activity in any known
Areas OP/BP 7.60                    disputed area.
0
Q
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
No environmental and social impacts are envisaged under any component of the CBR project.
The project solely provides technical assistance, capacity building and institutional reform
services.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
None
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
NA
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Although no safeguards policy of the World Bank is being triggered, it is necessary to apply
relevant Citizen Engagement tools in this project. Citizens will be engaged during implementation
through establishment of a project-level grievance redress system. The borrower has the required
capacity and resources to implement this measure, Independent and Administrative Reform and
Civil Service Commission already implements a complaints/appeals mechanism related to
recruitment, and this will be expanded to receive and handle feedback and complaints on any
variety of issues related to respective line ministry and independent agency involvement in the
Project. It is essential that the client introduced a Social Safeguards focal point from the existing
staff, who may, based on the needs, get training on Citizen Engagement tools and its application.
An indicator has been included in the revised results framework to track implementation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are line ministries and independent agencies, and candidates applying for
recruitment to civil service positions through the Project. A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM)
is being implemented to receive and handle feedback and complaints on any variety of issues
related to respective line ministry and independent agency involvement in the Project. This will
include but will not be limited to complaints related to recruitment for which the Project, through
the Independent and Administrative Reform and Civil Service Commission already implements a
complaints/appeals mechanism. In addition, in line with the Citizen Engagement Framework of
the Bank, the client may explore and utilize other Citizen Engagement tools, as and when required,
such as Beneficiary Feedback.
GRM: Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a Bank-
supported project may submit complaints to existing project-level GRMs or the Bank's Grievance
Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed to
address project-related concerns. Project-affected communities and individuals may submit their
Page 4 of 5


﻿complaint to the Bank's independent Inspection Panel which determines whether harm occurred,
or could occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures. Complaints
may be submitted at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the Bank's attention,
and the Bank management has been given an opportunity to respond. Information on how to
O
submit complaints to the Bank's corporate GRS are available at http://www.worldbank.org/GRS.
Information on how to submit complaints to the Bank Inspection Panel are available at www.
inspectionpanel.org.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Technical Assistance Project
For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please
indicate type of document disclosed, if any.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
o          in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Yousif Mubarak Elmahdi
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)            Date: 17-Feb-2016
Practice Manager/     Name: Alexandre Arrobbio (PMGR)           Date: 19-Feb-2016
Manager:
Page 5 of 5


