                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA16197
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Apr-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Bangladesh                        Project ID:   P154511
                            Project Name:      Bangladesh Regional Waterway Transport Project 1 (P154511)
                            Task Team          Diep Nguyen-Van Houtte
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          04-Apr-2016                       Estimated   16-Jun-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTI06                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Ports, waterways and shipping (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Other trade and integration (50%), Trade facilitation and market access (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        387.70                Total Bank Financing:        360.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       27.70
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                             360.00
                              Total                                                                                   387.70
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of the Project is to improve Inland Water Transport (IWT) efficiency and
                           safety for passengers and cargo along the Chittagong-Dhaka-Ashuganj Regional Corridor and to
                           enhance sector sustainability.
                            3. Project Description
                           The Project will provide US$360 million in IDA funds to finance interventions aimed at improving

                                                                      Page 1 of 15
                         IWT for cargo and passengers along the heavily-trafficked Chittagong-Dhaka-Ashuganj river routes.
                         These fall under the jurisdiction of the Bangladesh Inland Water Transport Authority, a Government
                         authority mandated to oversee sector development. Main interventions include: navigation channel
Public Disclosure Copy




                         maintenance and improvement; navigation safety improvements; the construction, rehabilitation, and
                         modernization of select river terminals; development of River Information Systems; institutional
                         capacity development; and, funding for research and development to enable continuing sector
                         improvement and sustainability. This includes work on sector policies and strategies needed to:
                         improve revenue collection and management; incentivize public and private sector investments
                         especially related to container transport; and, mitigate and improve IWT’s impact on the social and
                         physical environment. The Project consists of three components as follows:

                         Component 1: Improved Inland Waterway Navigation (IDA financing: US$235 million). This
                         component shall include work to guarantee advertised depths and widths of navigation channels on
                         select river routes. The work also includes provision of aids to navigation. The work is to be done on
                         an Output- and Performance-based Contracting method designed to increase the efficiency and
                         effectiveness of river asset management and maintenance. It is designed to ensure that the physical
                         condition of the rivers under contract are adequate for the need of river users, over the entire period
                         of the contract which is six to seven years. This type of contract significantly expands the role of the
                         private sector, from the simple execution of works to the management and conservation of river
                         assets. This is a departure from the traditional river maintenance contracts used in Bangladesh which
                         have been less-than-optimal. Even where works have been carried out according to plan, the nature
                         of the rivers has meant that advertised depths, aids to navigation and other river infrastructure do not
                         last as long as they should because of deficiencies in the original design, aggravated by inadequate
                         maintenance. The beneficiaries of the new concept are expected to be the river users. In a wider
                         sense, future generations will be able to benefit from a better maintenance of past investments. River
                         users will be able to know the Service Level they can expect in return for the payments they make for
                         the use of the infrastructure (tolls, tariffs, user fees, taxes, etc.). The River Administration shall also
                         benefit by obtaining better overall river conditions with reduced levels of expenditure.
                         Also included in Component 1 is work to provide safe harbors (storm shelters) whereby users can
Public Disclosure Copy




                         seek shelter from stress of weather in the Meghna Delta area during tropical cyclones. The Bay of
                         Bengal is responsible for the formation of some of the strongest and most destructive tropical
                         cyclones in the world. Adverse wave conditions, heavy rainfall and associated storm surges from
                         these cyclones are a major cause of loss of life and infrastructure damage in the maritime delta area.
                         It is intended that the storm shelters shall be constructed under the same Output and Performance-
                         based Contractor, using dredged material as a resource. Among others, this component will finance
                         the following activities: (i) bathymetric and other surveys to determine the extent and types of
                         dredging required, river training, environmental protection or other works; (ii) visual aids for day and
                         night navigation such as light buoys, radar beacons, leading lines and other aids; (iii) limited and
                         selected performance-based dredging to guarantee Least Advertised Depth; and (iv) development of
                         six vessel shelters within remote cyclone areas equipped with mooring buoys to ensure safety for the
                         vessels.

                         Component 2: Improved Services at Priority Inland Waterway Terminals and Landing Ghats/Stations
                         (IDA financing: US$75 million). This component supports the development of two cargo terminals,
                         four passenger terminals and 14 landing ghats/stations. The development of passenger and cargo
                         terminals are within existing inland waterway port areas under the jurisdiction of BIWTA. It includes
                         the modernization and extension of existing facilities to cater for increased demand. Terminals and
                         landing stations are part of the network of about 448 river terminals, 374 landing stations, 23 coastal
                         terminals and 25 pilot stations already provided by BIWTA. The passenger terminals and landing

                                                                       Page 2 of 15
                         stations will specifically incorporate the needs of women users and less abled users, and all
                         investments will address safety-related issues for all users. Specifically, this component will finance
                         the following:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         A.       The cargo terminals include: (i) extension of the existing Pangaon Container Terminal with
                         new general cargo vessel berths and land access infrastructure on the Buriganga river; and, (ii)
                         rehabilitation and modernization of the existing general cargo terminal at Ashuganj including river
                         bank erosion prevention, the replacement of pontoons, gangways and other dilapidated marine
                         structures, the extension of berthing space

                         B.       The passenger terminals include: (i) construction of a new passenger terminal at
                         Shashanghat, downstream of the existing terminal at Sadarghat where landside congestion preclude
                         the development of additional berths; (ii) rehabilitation works for the passenger terminal at
                         Narayanganj; (iii) rehabilitation of works for the passenger terminal at Chandpur; and, (iv) extension
                         of the existing passenger terminal at Barisal

                         C. Rehabilitation works or new construction of 14 landing stations or launch ghats under this Project
                         are designed to provide access for rural communities, some of which in the lower Meghna delta have
                         no alternative means of transport.

                         Component 3: Institutional Capacity Development and Sector Sustainability (IDA financing: US$50
                         million). A series of activities are proposed that will support BIWTA’s overall enhancement of its
                         management systems and human resources capacity for modern, efficient, and high quality
                         management of the IWT sector in line with international standards, and to help BIWTA achieve
                         long-term operational and financial sustainability. Activities to be supported include: (i) the
                         development of River Information Systems to help BIWTA improve data collection for the planning,
                         maintenance and development of IWT, as well as enhance climate resiliency of the IWT sector in
                         Bangladesh by creating a more systematized baseline understanding of river hydrology and
                         navigational implications, and provision of a Traffic Monitoring System for passengers and cargo;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (ii) improvement of Human Resources capacity for better management of the IWT sector through
                         upgrading and modernizing the IWT Deck and Engine Personnel Training Centre (DEPTC)) into a
                         regional IWT Training Center with open access to all users in the Region and the world; (iii) a
                         project preparation facility to finance feasibility, surveys, design and safeguards studies for
                         continuous sector development; and, (iv) support for the Project Implementation Unit.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Component 1 focuses on the main Class 1 (rivers with a minimum Least Advertised Depth of 4m)
                         route between Dhaka and Chittagong Corridor, as well as Class 1, 2 and 3 branch routes (with
                         minimum advertised depths of 2.5m and 1.8m respectively) to Ashuganj, Narayanganj, Gorashal, and
                         Barisal. In total, the project address navigation needs on about 900km of river routes as follows:
                         •       The main Dhaka-Chittagong Corridor Route, which includes parts of the Buriganga,
                         Dhaleshwari, and Meghna Rivers, as well as the Meghna Delta and coastal areas in the Bay of
                         Bengal. While the route links to Bangladesh’s main port at Chittagong, the Project does not include
                         interventions on the Karnafuli River or areas under the jurisdiction of Chittagong Port Authority,
                         which areas are regularly dredged enabling access by Ocean Shipping.
                         •       The Munshiganj-Demra Route to Gorashal on the Shitalakhya River (a distributary of the
                         Old Brahmaputra River)
                         •       Connecting routes to Ashuganj follow the Upper Meghna River and its floodplain


                                                                      Page 3 of 15
                         distributaries.
                         •        Connecting routes to Barisal following the Lower Meghna, and its delta distributaries
                         including the Arial Khan, Tentulia, and Kirtonkhola Rivers. These distributaries are essentially part
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of the extensive delta area which form as the amount of sediment supply exceeds the rate removal.
                         The delta is divided into two distinct parts, the old western part (formed when the Ganges dominated
                         the deposition system before moving eastwards to join with the lower Meghna) and the active
                         Eastern Part. This part of the delta is characterized by opposing influences of fluvial and marine
                         processes and has lead to the formation of many distributary channels and tidal estuaries.

                         Navigation hindrances on these routes include soft shoals and bars, which constantly move with
                         changing river conditions. The Project aims at providing periodic and routine maintenance dredging
                         to address problems of sedimentation, together with provision of aids to navigation allowing the
                         delineation of navigation channels. However, dredging is not expected to be required at all locations.
                         Along the Project rivers, shallow depths occur especially in the delta area, and at the confluences of
                         the major rivers and their tributaries, river bends and mouths. Based on hydrographic surveys carried
                         out in September-November 2015, the main problem areas where dredging activities are expected to
                         be most needed include: i) the Hatiya Channel and area near Sandwip Island, at the mouth of the
                         Meghna River; ii) on the approaches to Barisal; iii) on the Lower Meghna ferry crossing routes; and,
                         iv) on the Upper Meghna towards Ashuganj. In addition, under the same performance-based
                         dredging contract, six vessel storm shelters will be constructed and maintained (at Shatnol,
                         Chandpur, opposite side of Char Bhairabi, Mehendiganj, Hatiya, and Sandwip), and the main river
                         ferry crossing routes (Chandpur and Shariatpur on the Lower Meghna River; Lakshmipor and Bhola
                         on the Lower Meghna River; and Beduria and Laharhat on the Tentulia River) will also be
                         maintained.

                         The locations and salient features of investments under Component 2 are described below:
                         i.       Construction of Pangaon General Cargo Terminal: a new common user general cargo
                         terminal with access infrastructure will be constructed on the Dhaleshwari River adjacent to the
                         existing Pangaon container terminal, for vessels carrying construction materials in general cargo
Public Disclosure Copy




                         form, including cement, sand, rock and other cargo carried in bagged or break-bulk form. The
                         identified site is about 8 acres in size and includes the foreshore area (land between the lowest and
                         highest water level), and two small flood ponds. The land is owned by BIWTA and is largely vacant
                         at present, although there are about 50 households and small shops (squatters) on the site, as well as
                         an existing ghat (engine boat operated river crossing) for crossing the Buriganga River to Pagla,
                         which is operating under a BIWTA lease and services the local community. A community graveyard
                         is adjacent to the site; its access may be restricted by the project.
                         ii.      Rehabilitation and modernization of the existing general terminal at Ashuganj. This is a
                         small existing terminal handling a variety of cargo, on the Meghna River. The surrounding area is
                         characterized by a mix of industrial, urban and rural land uses. The existing cargo terminal is in
                         general dilapidated state. The rehabilitation works shall include provision for new revetments, new
                         pontoons and link-spans, provision of a paved apron and general improvements to yard areas.
                         iii.     Construction of passenger terminal at Shashanghat: The main Dhaka passenger terminal at
                         Sadarghat is heavily congested. On a daily basis over 60 thousand people use the facility, which has
                         run out of space for expansion. The new passenger terminal will be located on land owned by BIWT
                         A downstream from Sadarghat on the Buriganga River. On the landward side, development shall
                         include provision of a multi-level passenger terminal (of approximately 20,000m2), access roads, car
                         and bus parking and waiting areas. On the riverside, it shall include works to improve the berth basin,
                         bank protection, and provision of floating pontoons together with link-span arrangements enabling
                         passenger access. The site is owned by BIWTA, but is currently being used as a shipbreaking yard,

                                                                      Page 4 of 15
                         with about 50 small businesses dealing with scrap items operating in and adjacent to the site. The
                         existing access roads are also being used for storing of scrap metal by various people. There is also
                         an adjacent existing river ghat, attached to the Maha Shashan (crematorium), which is used by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Hindu community for cremation rituals. The terminal will be developed so as to keep this ghat intact.
                         iv.     Rehabilitation of passenger terminals at Narayanganj and Chandpur, extension of existing
                         passenger terminal at Barisal: The existing passenger terminals at Narayanganj and Chandpur are in
                         poor condition. The river bank is eroding and revetments collapsing in both locations.
                         v.      Upgrading of 14 Existing Landing Stations/ Launch Ghats: These launch ghats are located
                         throughout the Project area, and are currently in unsafe dilapidated condition. Several of them are
                         associated with the ferry crossings which will be maintained through the project (Alubazar, Ilisha,
                         Moju Chowdhury, Beduria, and Laharhat).

                         The overall Project area spans 17 upazilas, which together are home to about 14 million people.
                         More than 70 percent of all IWT traffic is along the Project waterways, principally the Dhaka-
                         Chittagong Corridor. Most of the industrial units in Bangladesh are located within 10km of these
                         waterways. Dhaka, being the capital, is the major urban center for business development,
                         urbanization, export-import and industrialization of the country. There are also a wide diversity of
                         natural habitats and land uses in the Project area. The area includes floodplains, mudflats,
                         mangroves, estuarine habitat, char lands (shoals), plantations and homesteads, urban areas, and
                         industrial areas. Areas of the project rivers, estuary and coastal marine ecosystems are also home to
                         rich wildlife, including 3 species of globally endangered river dolphins, sea turtles, crocodiles and
                         other reptiles, over 125 species of birds (including numerous migratory birds), hundreds of species of
                         fish (including hilsha and others with protected or endangered status), fishing cats and other
                         terrestrial mammals, among others. Most of the lower Meghna River and estuary zone fall into a
                         hilsha sanctuary, which carry restrictions on the physical activities that can be undertaken during
                         critical spawning periods. The dredging contractor will be required to abide by these restrictions.
                         Two rivers within the Project area – the Buriganga River and the Shitalakhya River – are furthermore
                         declared Ecologically Critical Areas (ECAs) under national law, due to their highly degraded state
                         and pressures from numerous industrial and urban development activities. Project activities along
Public Disclosure Copy




                         these two rivers are permitted, but will require robust mitigation measures for potential negative
                         impacts related to river channel maintenance and terminal construction, upgrading and operation.

                         All the IWT routes selected for maintenance under the Project are already established routes that
                         have been maintained by BIWTA to varying degrees. Under the Project, an international contractor
                         will maintain all Project routes to the specified depths and provide visual aids to navigation, and will
                         be paid on a performance basis rather than a dredge-volume basis. The contractor will carry out
                         continuous hydrographic surveying throughout the contract period, and determine the most cost-
                         effective method, equipment and schedule to ensuring the required route depths and widths are re-
                         established. Locations where dredge spoils can be deposited (with preference for in-river) as well as
                         other performance criteria and environmental, health and safety management requirements of the
                         contractor have been pre-specified in the EMP. A Dredging Supervision Consultant (DSC) will
                         supervise the contractor and conduct ongoing verification of specified depths and implementation of
                         all other management requirements, prior to authorization of contractor payments. For the
                         construction and rehabilitation/modernization of river terminals and landing stations (Component 2),
                         works will be carried out by traditional works contractors, and both construction progress as well as
                         EMP implementation performance will be supervised by a Construction Supervision Consultant
                         (CSC).
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                                                                      Page 5 of 15
                         Iqbal Ahmed (GEN06)
                         Kirti Nishan Chakma (GSUGL)
                         Leanne Farrell (GEN06)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Md. Akhtaruzzaman (GSU06)
                         Mridula Singh (GSU06)

                         6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental            Yes        The Project activities consist primarily of maintenance
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01               dredging and construction or rehabilitation of the
                                                             terminals and landing stations. Since the Meghna River is
                                                             of high ecological sensitivity and vulnerability, certain
                                                             negative environmental impacts may occur on the river
                                                             ecology during the implementation and operational phases
                                                             of the Project. With the exception of the Buriganga
                                                             River, baseline assessments have not detected notable
                                                             levels of contamination in sediment samples taken along
                                                             Project rivers. Based on current hydrographic survey data,
                                                             dredging is not expected to be required on the Buriganga
                                                             River. Nonetheless, there remains a possibility that, over
                                                             the course of the project lifespan, somedredged
                                                             materialsmay contain contamination. The Project is thus
                                                             classified as an Environmental Category A project in
                                                             accordance with OP 4.01 due to the nature and scale of
                                                             the planned dredging and civil works, and the complexity
                                                             of related environmental issues. BIWTA has undertaken a
                                                             detailed Environmental Assessment (EA), consisting of a
                                                             full Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             for Component 1; Environmental Management
                                                             Framework (EMF) for Components 2 and 3, and
                                                             Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) covering all
                                                             Components;; and an ESA Executive Summary plus
                                                             Cumulative Impact Assessment covering the overall
                                                             project.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes        The Meghna River system and its floodplain provides
                         4.04                                habitat to a wealth of aquatic and terrestrial biodiversity.
                                                             While no net loss or permanent degradation of critical
                                                             natural habitat is expected to result from the Project, the
                                                             proposed activities will have impacts on some areas of
                                                             natural riverine and floodplain habitat, including legally
                                                             designated protected areas; hence, this policy is triggered.
                                                             The ESIA includes a detailed analysis of impacts to
                                                             natural habitats in the Project area, and a Biodiversity
                                                             Management Plan in accordance with the policy. Under
                                                             the plan, habitat restoration and enhancement measures as
                                                             well as rules and restrictions for dredging activities are
                                                             specified to avoid, mitigate and/or compensate for any



                                                              Page 6 of 15
                                                      adverse impacts in accordance with this policy. The initial
                                                      screening of river terminals and landings under
                                                      Component 2 did not identify any affected areas of critical
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                      habitat. Nonetheless, the EMF specifies requirements for
                                                      further detailed baseline assessments of any areas of
                                                      natural habitat which could be affected by these
                                                      investments, full assessment of any impacts to natural
                                                      habitat, and application of the mitigation hierarchy in
                                                      accordance with this policy, for all project activities not
                                                      fully specified at the time of project appraisal.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36     Yes   There are some areas of mangrove vegetation as well as
                                                      social forestry areas in the Project area of influence, thus
                                                      triggering the policy; however, no direct impacts on these
                                                      forests are expected. Disposal of dredge materials in
                                                      areas with mangroves or other forest lands, or in a manner
                                                      where such forests would be affected, will be prohibited
                                                      under the Project. In addition, any revegetation/plantation
                                                      efforts taken up as part of river terminal development will
                                                      be undertaken in accordance with this policy, as
                                                      applicable.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No   No pesticides will be procured through the Project, nor is
                                                      the Project expected to affect the use of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural      Yes   The Project area is densely populated, and public places
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11         of cultural importance such as eid gah, mosques, etc. exist
                                                      close to the riverbank in many locations, although the
                                                      ESIA did not identify any which qualify as culturally
                                                      significant as per this policy. Under Component 1,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                      dredged material will be deposited in-river unless
                                                      technically unfeasible, thus avoiding most potential
                                                      impacts to Phyiscal Cultural Resources. In case of any
                                                      material disposal near locally important cultural
                                                      resources, disposal sites will be required to avoid directly
                                                      impacting or blocking community access to locally
                                                      important cultural resources. Chance find procedures will
                                                      also be implemented by the contractors. Under
                                                      Component 2, initial screening of the locations proposed
                                                      for construction of the Shashanghat and Pangaon river
                                                      terminals have identified a community graveyard, a
                                                      prayer house, and a Hindu ashes immersion site which
                                                      have the potential to be affected through restrictions of
                                                      access. The detailed ESIA for these sites, as well as for
                                                      all other Component 2 and 3 subprojects, will require full
                                                      identification of any cultural heritage that could be
                                                      affected directly or indirectly, and adequate measures to
                                                      avoid, mitigate and/or manage such impacts in accordance
                                                      with this policy.



                                                       Page 7 of 15
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No           The Project is located on the bank line districts of Dhaka,
                            BP 4.10                                  Comilla, Narayanganj, Chandpur, Barisal of southwest
                                                                     Bangladesh. The social impact assessment undertaken
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     indicates that there are no indigenous communities
                                                                     residing in the Project area and therefore no impacts on
                                                                     them are expected under the Project.
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes             The social assessment carried out under Component 2 has
                            OP/BP 4.12                               identified minimal land requirement. Informal settlements
                                                                     are likely to be adversely affected by Pangaon General
                                                                     Cargo Terminal and Shashanghat passenger terminal.
                                                                     Almost all dredge material will be disposedas per the plan
                                                                     within the river in accordance with national laws. Only at
                                                                     locations where the river is extremely narrow, dredged
                                                                     material may be deposited on government land free from
                                                                     encumbrance. No agricultural land will be used for
                                                                     permanent or temporary filling up of the areas.

                                                                     In addition, minor land acquisition may be required for
                                                                     river terminal and landing ghats sub-projects, a
                                                                     Resettlement Policy Framework is prepared to address the
                                                                     adverse impacts including ensuring socially inclusive
                                                                     investments to safeguard the needs of benefit women and
                                                                     disabled people at terminals and landing sub-projects.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No           The Project will not finance any dams, nor do Project
                            4.37                                     activities depend on any existing dams.
                            Projects on International   Yes          The Project activities will take place mostly on the
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                     Meghna River in the Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna river
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     system. Riparians of these rivers include India, Bhutan,
                                                                     China and Nepal. However, the Project qualifies for an
                                                                     exception from the requirement to notify other riparians
                                                                     under paragraph 7(a) of the policy, given that the
                                                                     proposed interventions fit within the ongoing scheme of
                                                                     the Government’s dredging program and existing
                                                                     navigation facilities including terminals and landings. The
                                                                     activities to be financed (i) will not adversely change the
                                                                     quality or quantity of water flows to the other riparians;
                                                                     and (ii) will not be adversely affected by the other
                                                                     riparians’ possible water use.
                            Projects in Disputed        No           There are no disputed areas in the Project area of
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                         influence.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              IWT is overall a “greener” transport mode compared to road and rail, notably with respect to GHG


                                                                      Page 8 of 15
                         and other emissions per ton-km of goods or passengers transported. The Project will therefore
                         overall contribute to improved environmental sustainability of the transport sector on some of the
                         most-trafficked routes in the country, by enhancing the reliability, speed, safety and attractiveness
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of IWT transport. Nonetheless, project activities also carry a range of environmental and social
                         risks and impacts which must be appropriately minimized, mitigated and managed.

                         For IWT route maintenance (Component 1), the main environmental impacts include disturbance
                         of aquatic and benthic habitats, as well as impacts associated with disposal of dredged material.
                         Dredging involves the removal of substrate and benthic organisms at the dredging site. It also
                         leads to increased turbidity, suspended solids, and noise; reduced light transmittance; changes in
                         salinity, temperature, and pH; reduced dissolved oxygen (DO); and releases of nutrients, heavy
                         metals and organic contaminants, all with diverse related effects on aquatic biodiversity. River
                         maintenance activities may also impact downstream riverbank erosion patterns, and can
                         temporarily disrupt other river uses such as navigation routes and fishing activities. Disposal of
                         dredge spoils may also entail environmental and social impacts. Only minimal on-land disposal is
                         expected under the Project, as in-river disposal will be the preferred option wherever feasible from
                         a technical perspective. If required, on-land disposal will take place on government land, and sites
                         will be selected so as to minimize impacts to terrestrial or floodplain habitat, with disposal
                         facilities designed to minimize and mitigate impacts to water quality and aquatic life from
                         tailwater draining from deposited spoils. In areas close to heavy industries and urban areas in
                         particular, there is furthermore a possibility that sediments may contain contamination, although
                         baseline assessments carried out as part of the ESIA have not identified this as a major issue. If
                         contaminated sediments are identified in dredge locations during project implementation, their
                         disposal will need to consider potential impacts to both aquatic and terrestrial flora and fauna, as
                         well as possible risks to human health.

                         For Component 2, the construction and rehabilitation/upgrading of river terminals and landings, as
                         well as their ongoing use and maintenance, will meanwhile result in various positive and negative
                         impacts. Construction will entail building or rehabilitation of infrastructure such as jetties, bank
Public Disclosure Copy




                         protection works, pontoons, and on-shore facilities including buildings, toilet facilities, parking
                         areas, storage facilities, and improvements/widening of access roads. At some of the locations,
                         Chandpur terminal in particular, dredging will be required. In the construction stage, typical
                         construction impacts will include noise, dust, construction-related vehicular traffic, management
                         of solid waste and effluent discharges, etc. At the proposed location of the new Shashanghat
                         passenger terminal, soil remediation and clean-up may also be required, as the site is currently
                         being used for iron/scrap processing, manufacturing, trading and transporting.

                         In most locations, only minor land acquisition is expected to be needed; however, squatters and
                         lessees will need to be displaced at terminal and landing locations. The World Bank policy on
                         involuntary resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) has therefore been triggered for this project. As none of the
                         residents or likely affected persons along the IWT corridor, river terminals and other sites is from
                         the tribal communities (indigenous peoples), OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples has not been
                         triggered.

                         In the operations phase, positive impacts for local communities will be felt through the increased
                         local commerce and trade, and associated employment and livelihood opportunities. Terminals
                         and landings catering to passengers will also include female-only toilets and waiting areas, and
                         will take into account the needs of the disabled and elderly. However, terminal operations will
                         also generate ongoing noise to surrounding communities, and localized air pollution from idling

                                                                    Page 9 of 15
                           ship engines. Management of ship-related waste (solid waste as well as effluents), as well as on-
                           shore management of port-related vehicle traffic, will also be significant issues. All of these issues
                           will be studied in depth during the detailed ESIA and design stage of river terminals and landings
Public Disclosure Copy




                           during project implementation.

                           Project activities under Component 3 may meanwhile entail minor, localized impacts. All
                           Component 3 sub-projects will be screened for relevant environmental and social issues during
                           project implementation, with more detailed assessments carried out where required.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           During the operations phase of the waterways, the improvements to navigational reliability and
                           safety will induce increased river traffic, resulting in a variety of positive socioeconomic benefits
                           for communities along the waterways, who stand to benefit from livelihood and employment
                           opportunities associated with the increased commerce.

                           Greater traffic volumes on the waterways will also increase the risks of improper discharge of
                           waste, ballast waters, and oil spills from ships, with associated impacts to aquatic species and to
                           fishing community livelihoods. Wave action from boats may also further induce erosion and
                           affect riverbank habitat in some locations. Based on the ESIA, dredging activities under the
                           Project are not expected to cause significant long-term impacts to aquatic or benthic ecology in the
                           main project rivers, given the existing highly dynamic nature of river morphology, with high
                           sediment and flow volumes. In the smaller navigation channels within the Project area, dredging
                           activities could over time lead to a marginal decrease in benthic community abundance and
                           diversity within and near the dredge locations. Such impacts will be monitored under the Project,
                           and a biodiversity conservation and enhancement program will be implemented to respond to any
                           observed material effects of such benthic impacts on species of conservation concern.

                           Over the long term, the river terminals and landings may also induce land-use changes in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           surrounding areas over time, such as industrial development, urbanization, etc. These effects are
                           not expected to be significant, however, given that in most cases the Project will only rehabilitate
                           or upgrade existing facilities, and the only two new terminals to be developed under the project –
                           Shashanghat and Pangaon – are already located in the Dhaka metropolitan region and in close
                           proximity to existing port facilities. Nonetheless, they will be fully studied during the detailed
                           ESIA and design stage for all terminals and landings, so that the extent of impacts can be fully
                           understood and appropriate mitigation and management measures identified.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The design of the performance-based river maintenance contract under Component 1 differs from
                           a traditional dredging contract in that the contractor is given discretion to select the most
                           appropriate alternative method to maintain the specified channel depth, rather than all such
                           decisions being planned and specified upfront. The idea of this approach is to incentivize the most
                           cost-efficient methods of achieving the desired channel depth, and also reflects the fact that the
                           river environment is constantly changing and upfront rigid planning over a long period (6-7 years)
                           is impractical. Nonetheless, the ESIA reviews the potential dredging and other river maintenance
                           techniques and evaluates their comparative environmental impacts and costs in different
                           environments. The EMP provides recommendations of the most environmentally benign methods
                           of river maintenance – such as adjusting the channel alignment to accommodate changes to river
                           morphology and minimize dredging, where feasible. The EMP also indicates where dredge spoils

                                                                      Page 10 of 15
                           can be safely deposited from an environmental perspective, as well as thresholds for impacts to
                           water quality and benthic disturbance during known critical periods and locations (such as during
                           the hilsha spawning period, within hilsha reserves).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           For river terminals, landings, and vessel shelters, alternative locations for their siting and
                           alternative existing facilities to include within the Project, were evaluated. For the two new
                           proposed terminals – at Shashanghat and Pangaon – criteria for preliminary site selection included:
                           proximity to Dhaka, accessibility via existing road networks and market areas, minimal land
                           acquisition needs and physical displacement, absence of environmentally sensitive features or
                           habitats, and – in the case of Shashanghat -- proximity to the existing passenger terminal at
                           Sadarghat so that future on-land connectivity between the two locations would be possible. For
                           vessel shelters, proposed locations were screened for environmental and social sensitivities and, in
                           some instances, were adjusted based on the findings of site screening to avoid sensitive habitats
                           and to better service the shipping routes. For existing terminals and landing stations to be
                           upgraded, the selected list considered the highest priority locations from the perspective of
                           potential socioeconomic benefits, the need for upgrading and rehabilitation, as well as the urgency
                           of improving public safety and accessibility, including especially for women and disabled people.
                           Since in all cases the detailed designs will only be developed during project implementation phase,
                           detailed site specific alternatives analysis will be carried out as part of the detailed ESIA study for
                           this project component, and site layouts and designs will be adjusted as needed to minimize
                           negative effects and maximize benefits.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Bangladesh Inland Water Transport Authority (BIWTA) under the Ministry of Shipping (MoS) is
                           the implementing agency of the Project. BIWTA is responsible for development, maintenance and
                           control of inland water transport and of certain inland navigable waterways in Bangladesh.
                           BIWTA has carried out a full ESIA for Component 1 activities. This study also includes a
                           Cumulative Impact Assessment covering the full Project area of influence (full IWT routes plus
Public Disclosure Copy




                           launch terminals, landings, ferry crossings and vessel shelters), as well as an ESA Executive
                           Summary also spanning the entire project. The ESIA includes an EMP, which specifies (a) the
                           environmental, social, health and safety (ESHS) requirements of the contractor as well as of
                           BIWTA during the life of the navigation and vessel shelter maintenance performance based
                           contract(s), (b) roles/responsibilities/staffing and budget requirements for ESHS management by
                           both contractor and BIWTA; (c) reporting requirements on ESHS aspects, including any
                           performance indicators related to ESHS management; and (d) capacity assessment and necessary
                           capacity building measures for BIWTA. The EMP includes both site-specific provisions – such as
                           prohibitions on depositing of dredge spoils in areas of critical habitat, and limitations on dredging
                           activities in hilsha sanctuaries during the peak spawning periods – as well as general measures and
                           performance criteria to minimize negative impacts of dredging operations and to manage impacts
                           associated with vessel shelters. Contractors will furthermore be required to demonstrate adequate
                           management systems such as through ISO 14001 certification, to retain appropriate EHS expertise,
                           and to apply relevant good practice management practices in line with WBG General EHS
                           Guidelines, EHS Guidelines on Ports, Harbors and Terminals, and other applicable international
                           guidelines such as those of PIANC --World Association for Waterborne Transport Infrastructure.

                           BIWTA has also developed a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for land acquisition needs
                           related to dredge materials disposal and vessel shelters. This framework will be guidance for
                           BIWTA for identification of land needs and displacement issues, if required, and to prepare


                                                                      Page 11 of 15
                          Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) and implement them. A Community Engagement and
                          Communications Strategy and a Grievance Management System have also been outlined as part of
                          the ESIA.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          For river terminals and landings under Component 2, as well as any activities under Component 3
                          with possible impacts, given that feasibility and design studies will be carried out during
                          implementation of the Project, BIWTA has prepared an Environmental Management Framework
                          (EMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework covering the potential and likely impacts of these
                          facilities and specifying the requirements for further assessment, planning, and management/
                          mitigation of all such impacts during project implementation. The full detailed ESIA for these
                          facilities will be commissioned during year one of the Project, in parallel to the feasibility and
                          design studies. The EMF and RPF include site screenings of the proposed investment locations,
                          preliminary identification of key issues, and requirements for the full ESIA and design studies to
                          ensure environmental and social issues are fully assessed and taken into account. The frameworks
                          also lay out institutional arrangements, responsibilities, and systems and preliminary budget
                          estimation for completing the detailed assessments and for implementation, monitoring and
                          oversight of mitigation and management measures. The RPF will guide BIWTA in land
                          acquisition, social impact assessment, and preparation and implementation of Resettlement Action
                          Plans.

                           Borrower capacity: BIWTA does not have any existing permanent environmental or social
                           management capacity. Capacity building on environmental and social management aspects will
                           therefore be an important component of the Project. BIWTA will establish a Project
                           Implementation Unit (PIU), which will include an Environmental and Social (E&S) Cell, headed
                           by a Superintending Engineer (Civil), and supported by two Deputy Directors – one for
                           environmental management and one for social management – all deputed from the agency’s
                           permanent staff. In addition, the Cell will be supported by individual consultants employed under
                           the Project for environmental, social and communications support. The E&S Cell shall be fully
                           responsible to coordinate with the Project activities and ensure compliance with all environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and social safeguards and communications requirements in planning and implementation of
                           Project interventions following the legal and policy framework of GoB and the World Bank. The
                           PIU’s E&S Cell shall also manage the necessary handling of grievances / complaints including
                           preparing reports on such grievances. In addition, the PIU will be supported in overseeing
                           contractor performance by a Dredging Supervision Consultant (DSC) for Component 1 and
                           Construction Supervision Consultants (CSC) for Component 2 activities, each of which will count
                           with appropriate environmental and social expertise to monitor EMP and RAP implementation.
                           Furthermore, external M&E consultants will also be engaged by the PIU to conduct third-party
                           monitoring and evaluation of the EMP and RAP implementation, and to advise on adequate
                           functioning of all E&S management arrangements. Additional specialized consultants will be
                           hired by the PIU to carry out studies and implement further sustainability oriented activities under
                           Component 3 of the Project.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Project stakeholders are diverse, including IWT passengers, boatmen and shipping companies,
                           traders, water transport workers, shop owners and vendors at terminals, lease holders of terminals,
                           day laborers and porters working at terminals, fishermen and fishing communities, farmers,
                           squatters who may be displaced by project investments, conservation NGOs, and government
                           agencies.


                                                                     Page 12 of 15
                           BIWTA has carried out a comprehensive consultation program as part of preparation of the ESIA,
                           EMF and RPF. In total, over 4,000 individuals have been engaged during project preparation,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           through a combination of formal workshops, community level focus group discussions, and key
                           informant interviews.

                           During implementation, the BIWTA will establish a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) and a
                           communications system to ensure ongoing fluid communications and channels for engagement
                           with local communities on project related issues. The detailed ESIA study to be carried out
                           during implementation for river terminals and landings will also include consultations with
                           stakeholders at each investment location, as well as broader stakeholders of the Project.

                           All safeguards documents – ESIA, EMF, RPF and ESA Executive Summary – have been
                           disclosed by BIWTA on their website, as well as on the World Bank’s Infoshop. In addition,
                           Bangla-language versions of the RPF and ESA Executive Summary are also made available
                           locally in hard copy. The ESIA for river terminals and landings under Component 2 will be
                           similarly disclosed once completed during project implementation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   04-Feb-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bangladesh                                                       04-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   04-Feb-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bangladesh                                                       04-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?


                                                                   Page 13 of 15
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?


                                                                     Page 14 of 15
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Diep Nguyen-Van Houtte
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                       Date: 11-Apr-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Karla Gonzalez Carvajal (PMGR)                Date: 12-Apr-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 15 of 15
