The World Bank                                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
SOUTH-WEST ROADS: WESTERN EUROPE-WESTERN CHINA INTERNATIONAL TRANSIT CORRIDOR
(CAREC 1B & 6B) (P099270)




                     Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                  Restructuring Stage


      Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Feb-2017| Report No: ISDSR21375




                      Regional Vice President:    Cyril E Muller
                             Country Director:    Lilia Burunciuc
               Senior Global Practice Director:   Jose Luis Irigoyen
                  Practice Manager/Manager:       Binyam Reja
                           Task Team Leader:      Jacques Bure, Aliya Karakulova
           The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           SOUTH-WEST ROADS: WESTERN EUROPE-WESTERN CHINA INTERNATIONAL TRANSIT CORRIDOR
           (CAREC 1B & 6B) (P099270)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

I. BASIC INFORMATION

1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

Project ID                                                     Project Name
                                                               SOUTH-WEST ROADS: WESTERN EUROPE-WESTERN
P099270                                                        CHINA INTERNATIONAL TRANSIT CORRIDOR (CAREC 1B &
                                                               6B)
Task Team Leader(s)                                            Country
Jacques Bure                                                   Kazakhstan
Approval Date                                                  Environmental Category
30-Apr-2009                                                    Full Assessment (A)
Managing Unit                                                  Is this a Repeater project?
GTI10

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

Total Project Cost                                             Total Financing
2,500,000,000.00                                               2,500,000,000.00
Financing Gap
    0.00

Financing Source                                                                                           Amount
Counterpart Funding                                                                                 375,000,000.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                      2,125,000,000.00
Total                                                                                             2,500,000,000.00

2. PROJECT INFORMATION
           The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           SOUTH-WEST ROADS: WESTERN EUROPE-WESTERN CHINA INTERNATIONAL TRANSIT CORRIDOR
           (CAREC 1B & 6B) (P099270)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The objective of the Project is to improve transport efficiency along road sections in Kyzylorda, South Kazakhstan and
    Almaty Oblasts, improve road management and increase traffic safety in Kazakhstan.



.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


1. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

This proposed restructuring would constitute the third restructuring of the SWRP project. The first
restructuring presented and approved by the Bank in 2012 used a first set of savings to finance an additional
80 km of the same road corridor. The second restructuring, approved by the Bank in June 2015, aimed at
financing an additional 85km road section north of Almaty beyond the original project location. However, that
restructuring was not countersigned by GoK and is now partially being consolidated as part of this third
restructuring.

Specifically, this proposed restructuring includes upgrading of (a) around 85km between Kurty and Togyz in
Almaty Oblast along the CS corridor (NOTE: This section impact was anlaysed as part of the SWRP ESIA
process, and revsied and cleared as part of the preparation of the SWRP restructuring; the relevant general
ESMP was also cleared before the detailed design was finalized) and (b) around 96 km section between Otar
and Uzynagash west of Almaty towards the border with Kyrgyzstan along the WE-WCh corridor (NOTE: This
section impact was anlaysed, reveiwed and cleared as part of the EWRP ESIA process), as well as (c) activities
to further improve road safety, roadside services, and road maintenance and operation.
  Civil works
    1. Kurty-Togyz section: Civil works will upgrade the existing Kurty-Togyz section of the CS corridor (from
        km 2295 to km 2380). The alignment lies in Zhambyl and Ili district of Almaty oblast and will be
        expanded based on two designed sections - a 40 km length Togyz-Kanshegel (2295-2335 km) and a 45
        km length, Kanshegel-Kurty (2335-2380 km). The road will be upgraded to four lane, (class-1 road)
        from the currently 2 lane and Catgeory III in line with the national road standards. The planned
        construction includes two bridges (over Buryozek and Kurty rivers), upgrading of existing intersection
        afiliated road structure features and facilities (drainage system, pavments, rest areas, exit roads,
        borrow pits, etc) but no overpasses or bypasses. The pavement design is based on 13 tons axle load
        bearing capacity. The design speed is set to 120 km per hour. Average annual daily traffic reached
        around 6,290 vehicles in 2014. EBRD financing is sought for the the Burybaytal-Aksuek section (2152-
        2214 km) and the 2214-2295 km section received also EBRD financing previously. Economic Analysis:
        Project benefits have been calculated for the project over a life of 20 years from the assumed opening
        date. The economic evaluation indicates the estimated economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of
        18.9% for a net present value of US$135 million at 6% discount rate. A sensitivity analysis was
        conducted on results of the economic modeling to assess potential impacts of the variation in capital
          The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          SOUTH-WEST ROADS: WESTERN EUROPE-WESTERN CHINA INTERNATIONAL TRANSIT CORRIDOR
          (CAREC 1B & 6B) (P099270)



         costs and traffic. Analysis shows that the NPV reduces to US$ 49.3 million consequently, at 12%
         discount rate.
      2. Otar-Uzynagash section: Civil works will upgrade another section of the WE-WCh corrdior, which is the
         existing Otar-Uzyngash road, on a section from km 63 to km 159 of the «Almaty- Kordai -
         Blagoveschenka-Merke-Tashkent-Termez» road. The road section will be upgraded to a four lane,
         class-1 road. Three bridges, 2 bypasses (for the settlements of Samsy and Targap) and four
         interchanges are envisaged, still overall the construction remains simple. The same technical
         parameters as the Kurty-Togyz investment will apply. Average annual daily traffic reached around
         6,800 vehicles in 2015. Economic Analysis: Project benefits have been calculated for the project over a
         life of 20 years from the assumed opening date. The economic evaluation of the Otar-Uzynagash road
         section indicates the estimated EIRR of 16% for a net present value of US$158 million at 6% discount
         rate. A sensitivity analysis shows that the NPV reduces to US$ 41.8 million at 12% discount rate. If
         capital works are increased by 20% and road user benefits are reduced by 20%, the EIRR reduces to
         11.4%, confirming the satisfactory economic justification of the project.

    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

3. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
   KNOWN)
This restructuring includes upgrade and reconstruction of additional road sections which extend into Almaty
Oblast (about 85km for Kurty-Togyz and about 96 km for Otar-Uzynagash road sections). The Kurty-Togyz
section (2295-2380km) passes through Ili and Zhambyl districts of Almaty Oblast. The proposed road will be
partly reconstructed along the existing road but with a widening of the present right of way (50% of the total
alignment), and partly newly constructed alignment almost parallel to the existing road. The road alignment
crosses several river beds (identified in ESMP) mostly always dry, notably being the Ili river..The road runs
through the Zhusandaly Nature Preserve which is inhabited by a number of mammals including goitered
gazelle, wolfs, jackals, foxes, corsac foxes, hares and various birds. A certified archaeological company has
undertaken a study and identified all sites and objects that are of cultural significance in the vicinity of the
road (they are listed in ESMP with proper mitigation measures). Land acquisition of 53 land plots of around
320 ha is required. These impacts are site-specific; localized and manageable with readily available standard
mitigation measures. The Otar-Uzynagash road section runs in 10-30 km away from and in parallel to Tien-
Shan mountain ridge and the landscape is generally mild. Total length of the road sections, where road
widening will be carried out (from 2 to 4 lanes, Category I) is 69 km and total length of bypasses (2 lanes,
Category II) is 27 km. The area has abundant ground water resources. The climate has distinct continental
features with cold winter and hot, dry summer and precipitation during short periods in spring and fall. There
are no risks from natural hazards in the project area. The major risk factor is from the rivers crossed by the
alignment. These rivers start in mountains and have high seasonal variability with significant flood potential
during rainstorms. The alignment is located to the North-West from Almaty in the area of existing and
historic human economic activity. The existing road network is most dense in the western part with intensive
economic activity, including industries, construction, mining and intensive irrigated farming. Irrigated
       The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       SOUTH-WEST ROADS: WESTERN EUROPE-WESTERN CHINA INTERNATIONAL TRANSIT CORRIDOR
       (CAREC 1B & 6B) (P099270)



farming, animal husbandry, infrastructure and transport corridors are present along the alignment in
general. There will be no significant impacts on landscapes and natural habitats in the area of the alignment.



4. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Name                                                      Unit
Mohamed Ghani Razaak                                      GSU03
Aimonchok Tashieva                                        GSU03
Rustam Arstanov                                           GEN03
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
5. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED


 Safeguard Policies                       Triggered              Explanation

                                                                 Expected environmental and social impacts of the
                                                                 restructured projects will not differ from those of
                                                                 the original project.The major part of construction
                                                                 works will be confined to the existing right-of-way.
                                                                 The corridor of the ROW is generously
                                                                 dimensioned, thus no significant / major impact on
                                                                 local population's health, safety or quality of life is
                                                                 expected. The impact of the works on soils and
                                                                 vegetation is expected to be minor, if managed
                                                                 diligently. Rehabilitated road sections show
                                                                 natural re-vegetation only 2-3 years after works,
                                                                 despite the arid climatic conditions.              The
                                                                 extraction of fill and aggregate materials will be
                                                                 restricted to non-river sources in the project
Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                                 area.Reconstruction of the road may also require
                                                                 temporary land use for the entire period of
                                                                 construction to accommodate concentrated off-
                                                                 the-way borrows soil, construction camps, parking
                                                                 areas for road-building equipment and road-
                                                                 building materials warehousing sites. However,
                                                                 some of these impacts cannot be verified
                                                                 accurately at this stage. RAPs have been prepared
                                                                 which identifies broader social impacts including
                                                                 potential land acquisitions, PAPs, and mitigation
                                                                 measures. It also specifies the procedures to be
                                                                 followed by the Government of Kazakhstan
                                                                 through the Committee for Roads (CR) and the
                                                                 Ministry of Investment and Development (MOID),
       The World Bank                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       SOUTH-WEST ROADS: WESTERN EUROPE-WESTERN CHINA INTERNATIONAL TRANSIT CORRIDOR
       (CAREC 1B & 6B) (P099270)



                                                 as well as actions that will be taken for proper
                                                 resettlement and compensation payment to the
                                                 Affected Persons. Only 15 persons and properties
                                                 will be affected by the road expansion from 2-to 4
                                                 lanes. Of these 10 are agricultural lands grazing
                                                 and are not used for cultivation, 5 are commercial
                                                 lands, which are underdeveloped lands with no
                                                 structures, therefore no loss in incomes or
                                                 demolition of structures is anticipated. Two ESISs
                                                 and one ESMP were cleared and disclosed on May
                                                 31 (locally and June 1 (English version). Another
                                                 ESMP was disclosed in May 2017 and will be
                                                 finalized before the presentation to the Board.
                                                 The proposed additional road sections crosses
                                                 over dry river beds and are located within the
                                                 vicinity of Lake Alakol and Balkhash, where there is
                                                 a variety of flora and fauna that could potentially
                                                 be impacted. The risk associate with the proximity
                                                 to those flora and fauna has been assessed as high
                                                 given the sensitivities related to species and
                                                 conservation value. Specifically, the existing road
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)           Yes    alignment Kurty-Togyz passes through the
                                                 territory of Zhusandaly preserved area, which
                                                 occupies very large territory (2 757 500
                                                 ha). As noted in ESIA/ESMP, there are a large
                                                 number of species listed as rare and considered of
                                                 conservation value. There is therefore a potential
                                                 high risk of disruption of these natural habitats
                                                 along this road section by poor construction
                                                 management.
                                                 No forests or forestry activities are involved in the
                                                 project. In the case of trees from the roadside
                                                 need to be cut due to project activities, they will
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                    No
                                                 be replaced under the measures prescribed in the
                                                 ESMP. This will be undertaken by a separate
                                                 landscaping contract.
                                                 No activities related to agriculture, pest
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                 No     production or transportation are included in the
                                                 project
                                                 The policy is triggered for the additional road
                                                 sections (Otar-Uzunagash and Kurty-Togyz) to be
                                                 financed under the proposed restructuring due to
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes   physical cultural sites of archaeological and
                                                 cultural significance (monuments, historical burials
                                                 and cemeteries) found at the right-of-way of these
                                                 sections as reported during the ESIA/ESMP
       The World Bank                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       SOUTH-WEST ROADS: WESTERN EUROPE-WESTERN CHINA INTERNATIONAL TRANSIT CORRIDOR
       (CAREC 1B & 6B) (P099270)



                                                 process. The PCR management plans have been
                                                 prepared in line with the national legislation and
                                                 relevant elements are provided in the ESMPs.


Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)         No     Not applicable to the project

                                                 The policy is triggered due to anticipated land
                                                 acquisition and resettlement activities related to
                                                 construction works associated with road upgrades.
                                                 RPF was cleared and disclosed in 2009. A first RAP
                                                 was cleared and disclosed on May 31, 2017. A
                                                 second RAP, in draft form, was also disclosed on
                                                 the same day and will be finalized and disclosed
                                                 again once detailed designs will be available and
                                                 prior to the signing of civil works contracts.
                                                 Additional impacts are expected due to temporary
                                                 land acquisition for ancillary activities such as
                                                 material stockpiling, construction camps, traffic
                                                 diversions and borrow pits.RAPs have been
                                                 prepared for two sections - Kurty-Togyz and Otar-
                                                 Uzynagash. Under the Kurty-Togyz section, there
                                                 will be no need for relocation of any households
                                                 and the project will not affect private or leased
                                                 land plots, acquisition will be carried out for state-
                                                 owned land plots only. Under the Otar-Uzynagash
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)   Yes    road section, 15 land lots are to be acquired. Of
                                                 these, 10 are agricultural lands grazing and are not
                                                 used for cultivation, 5 are commercial lands, which
                                                 are underdeveloped lands with no structures,
                                                 therefore no loss in incomes or demolition of
                                                 structures is anticipated. The affected 15 owners
                                                 have been paid compensations for their land plots
                                                 in agreement with them. Main adverse impact
                                                 would be loss of grazing lands and all the affected
                                                 persons will be provided with alternative pasture
                                                 lands in the same locality. Lands that required for
                                                 construction of camps and borrow pits to be
                                                 acquired from the State and/or obtained through
                                                 rental agreement on a temporary basis by the
                                                 contractor, in case of private land. It has been
                                                 agreed that the ccontractor pays cash
                                                 compensation for rental and materials at
                                                 replacement value for the lands acquired. Where
                                                 willing buyer/ willing arrangement is not feasible
                                                 an ARAP will be prepared in accordance with the
       The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       SOUTH-WEST ROADS: WESTERN EUROPE-WESTERN CHINA INTERNATIONAL TRANSIT CORRIDOR
       (CAREC 1B & 6B) (P099270)



                                                                   RPF. All the lands acquired temporarily and on
                                                                   rental basis will restored to original status at end
                                                                   of rental. Draft RAP is disclosed locally and
                                                                   external website of the Bank on May 31, 2017.

                                                                   No dam safety issues were found during the
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)               No
                                                                   detailed design process.

                                                                   No international waterways will be affected by the
                                                                   project. The impact on the hydrological regime
Projects on International Waterways (OP)                           and flow pattern of rivers crossed by bridges will
                                            No
(BP 7.50)                                                          be insignificant. Moreover, the project area
                                                                   belongs to the basins of Lakes Balkhash and Alakul
                                                                   which are closed systems.

                                                                   The project is not located in or near disputed
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)   No
                                                                   areas.

KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A. SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
   potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
   The Client prepared ESIA studies for Kurty-Burylbaital (under original SWRP) and Otar-Uzynagash (under EWRP) and
   relevant ESMPs. The draft ESMPs have been disclosed in May 2017 and finalized by Board date. The baseline data
   (land use, vegetation, soils, fauna and flora, climate, surface and groundwater, etc), the potential impacts of the
   project, and the related mitigation measures are similar with the original project. The majority of construction
   works will be confined to the existing right-of-way. The corridor of the ROW is generously dimensioned, thus no
   significant / major impact on local population's health, safety or quality of life is expected. The impact of the works
   on soils and vegetation is expected to be minor, if managed diligently. Noise and vibration impacts are not expected
   to be significant. Mitigation measures to address the potential negative impacts are described in the ESMPs for both
   sections and will be included in the contract requirements. The archeological survey of two new sections have
   revealed numerous sites of cultural importance including the historic monuments, historic burial sites and modern
   cemeteries located in the right of way of the road. These sites will have to be protected and managed. Under the
   original project, the Borrower prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) prior to Appraisal providing detailed
   information about procedures and standards set in Kazakhstan for the acquisition of private land and rights-of-way.
   The RPF also identifies any additional provisions and requirements that will be undertaken by the borrower to
   assure compliance with OP 4.12. The RPF was disclosed in country and in InfoShop in March 2009, and updated and
   disclosed in November 2015 in country and through InfoShop in May 2016. In parallel to the environmental and
   social impact assessment (ESIA) CR prepared draft RAPs for all sections of the project requiring land acquisition and
   address resettlement impacts. RAPs have been prepared for all road sections and a total 15 land lots identified for
   acquisition. Of these, 10 are agricultural lands grazing and are not used for cultivation, 5 are commercial lands,
   which are underdeveloped lands with no structures, therefore no loss in incomes or demolition of structures is
   anticipated. The affected 15 owners have been paid compensations for their land plots in agreement with them The
      The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
      SOUTH-WEST ROADS: WESTERN EUROPE-WESTERN CHINA INTERNATIONAL TRANSIT CORRIDOR
      (CAREC 1B & 6B) (P099270)



  broad social impacts are expected to be similar to the original SWRP.



2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  The improved roads would provide better driving conditions for travelers leading to more efficient vehicle operation
  and reduce current vehicle emissions. The ESIA addresses and investigates the impact of emissions concludes that
  the gaseous limit values set by Kazakh authorities will continue to be respected. Regarding noise the ESIA presents a
  number of mitigation and management measures, such as buffer zones, sound barriers, tree plantations and, most
  effectively, the re-routing of the alignment around settlements via bypasses. The possible development of new
  activities or the extensions of existing activities along the corridor is not considered to be a significant issue and will
  consist mainly of additional services to the road users. Any induced and indirect impacts will take effect over a
  longer period and over a larger area than affected by the Project.In addition to resettlement related impacts, labor
  influx issues will be assessed and addressed systematically. Labor camps that have not been identified at design will
  be considered only if they have minimum impacts on environment and communities, with precautionary measures
  monitored during works. The construction activities require both skilled and unskilled labor. As per the experience
  from pervious road sections completed through Bank funds, contractors may accompany a sizable number of
  outside labor force (It is difficult make an estimate on actual size/number required at this stage). Nevertheless,
  influx of labor will be kept minimal and project will employ local labor force as much as possible for construction
  works. The road sections completed under the previous Bank support shows that the labor camps established by
  the contractors are managed well and no reported incidence of adverse social impacts or disputes with local
  communities. Most of the outside labor force that brought for previous road works belong to same
  cultural/religious groups as the local communities and therefore social relations between outside labor force and
  local community was cordial and mutually beneficial. A specific GRM was established at local community and camp
  level to address issues related to labor camp management. In summary, as per the experience in previous road
  sections, the risks related to labor influx is minimal and managed carefully.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  The bulk of the Project location is defined by the existing alignment, which will largely remain unchanged and will
  be rehabilitated and reconstructed. The alignment sections will be constructed based on: (i) assessments of
  negative impacts and nuisance for local populations, and (ii) the need to avoid any significant negative
  environmental impacts.
  The project will have moderate environmental and social impacts. With appropriate mitigation measures during the
  construction phase, these impacts can be mitigated. Improved road conditions will bring social and economic
  benefits to communities living along the alignment.The proposed alignment and routing of bypasses has been
  chosen as having most socio-economic benefits and minimal potential negative environmental and social impacts.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  Potential environmental and social (including community and occupational health and safety) impacts have been
  identified and mitigation measures have been developed that are presented within the respective ESIA, and further
  mitigation measures are set out in the ESMPs in line with designs. In the course of original Project preparation the
  Borrower prepared the following safeguards documents: (a) a preliminary Environmental Assessment prepared
  (2007); (b) an Environmental Assessment Review Framework (2008); (c) an RPF (2008); and (d) an ESIA(2009) and an
        The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        SOUTH-WEST ROADS: WESTERN EUROPE-WESTERN CHINA INTERNATIONAL TRANSIT CORRIDOR
        (CAREC 1B & 6B) (P099270)



    Expanded RPF (2009). All of these documents have been subject to public consultation and disclosed at the
    InfoShop and in Kazakhstan. In 2015-2017 the ESIAs, EMPs, and RAPs for Kurty and Otar have also been prepared.
    The project will be implemented by the same implementing agency - CR through its national road operator, JSC
    KazAvtoZhol (KAZ). KAZ has built its capacity through implementing projects financed by the Bank and other IFIs
    such as ADB and EBRD. In particular, environmental and social safeguards has become an integral part of the
    requirements stipulated in the tender documentation for the civil works contractors. Each contractor employs
    environmental specialists responsible for environmental control, monitoring and reporting. There are two people in
    CR responsible for the implementation of the environmental safeguards.Significant progress is observed in relation
    to the public participation and consultation regarding the road construction works during the project preparation as
    well as the project implementation and completion. Safeguards related documents are publically disclosed on the
    existing projects website with the opportunity for the public feedback and discussion.


   5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies,
    with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
    The key stakeholders are the population of the project area, businesses, economic sectors and countries using the
    corridor: (a) CR, an agency of the GoK, as the project proponent; (b) commercial and private road users (local and
    international) who will be the primary beneficiaries from improved road quality; and (c) PAPs such as the residents
    of communities along the road, farmers, herders, and proprietors of roadside services. For this last group there will
    be benefits as well as some disadvantages and negative impacts caused by the project. To ensure that all views and
    concerns of all stakeholders are reflected in project design and implementation, and env and soc safeguards
    instruments capture the baseline situation, the expected impacts and the views and concerns of the PAPs.
    Consultations took place in March-May 2015 and July-August 2015 in villages along the alignment of Kurty-
    Burylbaital and Otar-Uzynagash sections, respectively.Additional public consultations were conducted in April 2017
    in the course of restructuring as a new safeguards policy Physical and Cultural resources and Natural Habitats have
    been triggered. The Client presented the potential impact on the identified cultural and historic sites located within
    the right-of-way of the new road sections and mitigation measures that will have to be implemented. The grievance
    management and implementation will follow the GRM procedures as defined by the RPF/RAP and will be applied to
    both safeguards and all other project related grievances, including health, safety, and labor influx issues. The social
    management measures, in addition RAP implementation, require attention to provision of cattle crossing, ensuring
    accessibility to settlements and improvements of the road signage. The contractors, through their soc. and env. mgt
    specialist will provide regular monitoring and work to ensure feasible adjustment needed during construction works
    in consultations with local beneficiaries and PAPs.The previous experience shows that the soc. and env. specialists
    attached to the Supervision Consultant team carry out regular visits to each construction site and record concerns
    and suggestions of the affected person and road users. These records then shared with the contractor and
    necessary actions were taken to address people’s concerns and their suggestions. This has been proved to be a
    ‘good practice’ and a similar exercise will be followed under these road sections as well.

 DISCLOSURE_TABLE
 B. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                  Date of submission for disclosure
01-Mar-2017                                                  03-Apr-2017
                         The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                         SOUTH-WEST ROADS: WESTERN EUROPE-WESTERN CHINA INTERNATIONAL TRANSIT CORRIDOR
                         (CAREC 1B & 6B) (P099270)



         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
         26-May-2017
         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                         Date of Disclosure
            Kazakhstan                                                      31-May-2017
            Comments
            Updated ESIA for Kurty-Burylbaital and the ESIA and ESMP for Otar-Uzynagash including new roads sections. Updated
            ESIA has been published in local language on a project website and disclosed on Bank's website. Draft ESMP for the
            Kurty-Togyz has been disclosed on June 1, 2017 and will be finalized and disclosed again prior to Board. Also the draft
            ESMP for the Otar-Uzynagash has been disclosed on June 1, 2017 and will be finalized and disclosed again prior to
            Board.


RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Date of submission for disclosure
11-Mar-2015                                                               27-May-2015
“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                           Date of Disclosure
          Kazakhstan                                                        31-May-2017
           Comments
           RPF was disclosed in March 2019 and updated and disclosed in November 2015. Draft RAP for Kurty-Burylbaital was
           disclosed in local Akimats of Almaty oblast on March 30 2015. Draft RAP for Otar - Uzynagash was disclosed on May 31,
           2017 and the RAP will be finalized and disclosed again prior to the signing of civil works contracts.
           Additional consultations were held to inform of the PCR objects found near the alignment of the Otar-Uzynagash section
           and the mitigation measures and preservation management.RAP for the two sections have been published on project
           website (in local language) and on the bank's website.
        COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                              Yes

            If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                                Yes
            and approve the EA report?
        The World Bank                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        SOUTH-WEST ROADS: WESTERN EUROPE-WESTERN CHINA INTERNATIONAL TRANSIT CORRIDOR
        (CAREC 1B & 6B) (P099270)



Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the
                                                                                    Yes
credit/loan?



NH_TABLE
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical
                                                                                    No
natural habitats?

If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures       Yes
acceptable to the Bank?



PCR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                 Yes

Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                    Yes
impacts on cultural property?



IR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy              framework/process
                                                                                    Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice
                                                                                    Yes
Manager review the plan?



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                    Yes
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups      Yes
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                    Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
          The World Bank                                                                     RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          SOUTH-WEST ROADS: WESTERN EUROPE-WESTERN CHINA INTERNATIONAL TRANSIT CORRIDOR
          (CAREC 1B & 6B) (P099270)



Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                             Yes
cost?

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
                                                                                             Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal                         Yes
documents?




III. APPROVALS


                                          Jacques Bure
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                          Aliya Karakulova

    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor                    Nina Chee                            06-Jun-2017

    Practice Manager/Manager              Binyam Reja                          06-Jun-2017

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
