                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC15559

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Dec-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Indonesia                       Project ID:      P157761
                            Project Name:        Indonesia EITI Post-Compliance - NR4D
                            Team Leader(s):      Noriko Toyoda
                            Estimated Date       01-Jan-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GGO14                           Lending          Lending Instrument
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           Public administration- Energy and mining (50%), Oil and gas (25%), Other
                                                 Mining and Extractive Industries (25%)
                            Theme(s):            Other public sector governance (100%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.44                           Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                              Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Indonesia Natural Resources for Development Program                                             0.44
                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the Project is to support the Government of Indonesia's efforts to increase
                           transparency in the oil, gas, and mining sectors, particularly through maintenance of its EITI
                           compliant status.
                           C. Project Description
                           Two previous grants to support EITI implementation were provided to the Coordinating Ministry for
                           Economic Affairs (CMEA) from the Global EITI MDTF (managed by SEGOM/E&E) for a total of
                           $2,100,000 since 2011. The grants have been financing core requirements for EITI implementation in
                           Indonesia, i.e. staffing and operations of the National Secretariat, production of the annual EITI
                           Report by Reconciler/ Independent Administrator, and communication and outreach activities to
                           publicize findings and recommendations from the Reports. Current grant (TF014993)
                           implementation status is Moderately Satisfactory and is scheduled to be closed at the end of this year.
                           It cannot be extended as its parent TF, the Global EITI MDTF (TF053509) is also closing.

                           Under the support of the MDTF grants, Indonesia successfully established EITI implementation
                         mechanism as defined per the 2010 Presidential Regulation and published two EITI Reports covering
                         the fiscal years 2009-2011. While Indonesia was declared EITI compliant in October 2014, the EITI
                         Board subsequently suspended Indonesia in February 2015, due to delays in publishing the 2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Report by end-2014. Currently, work is underway to produce the third EITI Report covering
                         2012-2013 by end-2015, implementing the expanded EITI Standard for the first time. The
                         Implementation schedule is on track to deliver the Report on time, and the temporary suspension
                         status is expected to be lifted. Going forward, EITI Reports will be published annually.

                         In response to the GOI request, a third and final grant is proposed to support the transition to pure
                         government financing, management and execution of EITI. Such a transition grant was part of the
                         original DFATD contribution to the ID-EITI Trust Fund (TF072080), while the original proposal had
                         been for the ID-EITI TF to finance the transition year in 2015, with full government management
                         expected to start in 2016. Grant funds were allocated for this purpose, but this had been postponed as
                         previous grants had not been disbursed fully and could finance EITI implementation activities
                         through 2015, such as production of the 2012-2013 Report (third report). The government is not
                         ready to take over the full financing of EITI in 2016, and the new grant is proposed to bridge the
                         transition period. Continued Bank support in 2016 is also recommended, as Indonesia will be
                         undergoing second validation in 2017, and timeliness and quality of the 2014 EITI Report (fourth
                         report) are critical. The grant is proposed at a reduced amount than previous grants ($440,000 for
                         two-years) to ensure increased government financing already starts in 2016.

                         The grant will finance the following activities:

                         Activity 1) Implementation of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative in Indonesia --
                         measured by the publication of the 2014 EITI Report in 2016, and a successful re-validation of EITI-
                         Indonesia in 2017;

                         Activity 2) Complete the transition to full Government of Indonesia management, financing and
                         execution of EITI -- measured by training of key staff and MSG members to fulfill their duties, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         percentage total funding from Government (currently 15%);

                         Activity 3) Support the outreach activities of EITI to Indonesia to increase information available to
                         stakeholders and their capacity to understand and use the information -- measured by # of public
                         socialization/training events around EITI and natural resources governance-related themes, and
                         quantitative measures of media exposure.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The EITI secretariat is stationed in Jakarta in the Coordinating Ministry for Economic Affairs and
                         some of the training and workshops shall be conducted in selected provinces, mostly in the capital
                         city of the provinces. These activities only involve administrative works, training or workshop. The
                         EITI process will not entail any physical activity, or produce plans or studies for any investment
                         project that may cause any environmental or social impact. No advice on regulatory reform or
                         investment climate issues will be provided through this grant.
                         E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Indonesia has a comprehensive legal and institutional framework for forests, biodiversity protection
                         and environmental impact assessment and licensing which is applicable to extractive industries,
                         including aspects related to management of direct, induced and cumulative impacts. However, the
                           project is not expected to cause any adverse social or environmental impact (see above), hence the
                           Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Management will not be drawn upon for this project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Flavio Chaves (GWADR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       No              The EITI process will not entail any physical
                           BP 4.01                                            activity, or produce plans or studies for any
                                                                              investment project that may cause any
                                                                              environmental or social impact. No advice on
                                                                              regulatory reform or investment climate issues
                                                                              will be provided through this grant. Hence no
                                                                              EA and subsidiary safeguard instruments are
                                                                              required for the grant.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No              The EITI process will not entail any physical
                                                                              activity, or produce a master plan or feasibility
                                                                              study of an investment project that may cause
                                                                              any adverse impact on Natural Habitats. No
                                                                              advice on regulatory reform or investment
                                                                              climate issues will be provided through this
                                                                              grant.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No              The EITI process will not entail any physical
                                                                              activity, or produce plans or studies for any
                                                                              investment project that may cause any adverse
                                                                              impact on Forests. No advice on regulatory
                                                                              reform or investment climate issues will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              provided through this grant.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09            No              The EITI process will not entail any physical
                                                                              activity, or produce plans or studies for any
                                                                              investment project that may require the use of
                                                                              pesticides.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No              The EITI process will not entail any physical
                           BP 4.11                                            activity, or produce plans or studies for any
                                                                              investment project that may result in adverse
                                                                              impacts on Physical Cultural Resources.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No              This policy is not triggered given that project
                                                                              activities are not expected to cause any impact
                                                                              on Indigenous peoples.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No              This policy is not triggered given that project
                           4.12                                               activities are not expected to need any land
                                                                              acquisition or cause any physical or economic
                                                                              displacement, nor any restriction in access to
                                                                              natural resources.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No              This policy is not triggered given the project is
                                                                                             not financing any dam construction or
                                                                                             rehabilitation nor any activities that rely on the
                                                                                             operations of existing dams.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Projects on International                    No                   This policy is not triggered given the project is
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                              not financing any activities in international
                                                                                             waterways as defined by the policy.
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                               This policy is not triggered given the project is
                           7.60                                                              not financing any activities in disputed areas as
                                                                                             defined by the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Noriko Toyoda
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Zia Al Jalaly (SA)                                           Date: 16-Nov-2015
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Robert R. Taliercio (PMGR)                                   Date: 17-Nov-2015
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
