                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA17343
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Apr-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kyrgyz Republic                   Project ID:    P155412
                            Project Name:      Integrated Dairy Productivity Improvement Project (P155412)
                            Task Team          Sandra Broka,Mai Nguyen,Serhiy Osavolyuk
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          08-Apr-2016                       Estimated   02-Jun-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GFA03                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Animal production (70%), General finance sector (20%), Agro-industry,
                                              marketing, and trade (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (25%), Rural policies and institutions (25%),
                                              Trade facilitation and market access (25%), Micro, S mall and Medium
                                              Enterprise support (15%), Climate change (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       5.00           Total Bank Financing:                   5.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                2.75
                              IDA Grant                                                                                  2.25
                              Total                                                                                      5.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Development Objective of the Project is to enhance dairy animal productivity and milk quality


                                                                       Page 1 of 8
                         on beneficiary farms.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed overall Project (Phases I and II) would consist of four components :

                         Component 1: Strengthening Public and Private Services in the Dairy Sector. This component would
                         contribute to the program development objective by improving the public-private dialogue on private
                         sector development issues, and by supporting the improvements in the breed stock (genetic quality)
                         of the dairy cows. This component would focus on the following activities: (i) Improving the Public-
                         Private Dialogue; (ii) cattle identification and registration in Issyk-kul Region; (iii) Establishment of
                         an World Organization for Animal Health (OIE)-certified Zone Free of Animal Diseases (with a
                         focus on Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD)) ; and (iii) Support to Artificial Insemination (AI) Service
                         Providers.

                         Component 2: On-farm Productivity Enhancement. This component would work towards the
                         establishment of Model Dairy Villages (MDVs). The activities under this component would improve
                         knowledge on good dairy farming practices among direct and indirect beneficiaries, including
                         through demonstrations, and train the beneficiaries in the adoption of necessary inputs, services and
                         equipment. These activities would mostly focus on small and household farms. The project would
                         leverage Central Asia Agrifinance Project (CAAP)’s work with business farms (which started in
                         January 2016 and will include demonstrations of good practices), replicate the suitable
                         methodologies, and where feasible, use the (larger) business farms as demonstration farms to entice
                         the households and smaller farms to adopt good practices. The component would focus on the
                         following activities: (i) Fodder production and feeding management; (ii) Animal husbandry and farm
                         management, including (a) Animal housing, general management and handling; (b) Animal Health,
                         Farm Hygiene and clean milk production; (c) Breeding management; (d) Manure management; and
                         (iii) Milk cooling and handling.

                         Component 3: Firm-level Investments. The objective of this component is to promote investments in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         agribusiness, fostering backward and forward linkages in the dairy value chain and support supply
                         chain infrastructure that create higher value. This would be achieved by providing: (i) a Revolving
                         Fund to facilitate access to finance to small farmer for the purchase of inputs and small equipment,
                         (ii) technical assistance and capacity building to project beneficiaries, to enable them to access
                         existing financing schemes, such as the credit lines provided by the Kyrgyz-Russian Development
                         Fund. Subject to confirmation during Phase I, a credit line for investment by farmers, milk collectors,
                         service providers, and agro-processors may be introduced. The component would be complemented
                         by CAAP’s work with financial institutions to build their capacity in financing agriculture, including
                         the dairy supply chain.

                         Component 4: Project Management. The component would cover the costs associated with project
                         management, including Monitoring and Evaluation, and results assessment. It is expected that project
                         will have two Project Management Units (PMUs): the Agribusiness Competitiveness Center (ABCC)
                         reporting to the Ministry of Agriculture and Melioration, and the Credit Line Management Unit
                         (CLMU) at the Ministry of Finance would implement the technical assistance and revolving fund
                         activities, respectively. In addition, the ABCC would be responsible for procurement activities under
                         the project, and CLMU for the financial management of the project. ABCC would also open a
                         regional office in Issyk-kul consisting of three specialists: Livestock Specialist, Training Specialist,
                         and Environmental Specialist. Both PMUs would closely liaise with the other projects under the
                         Kyrgyz Dairy Sector Development Program (KDSDP) program. The Grievance Redress Mechanism


                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                         (GRM) would be established and maintained by the ABCC.

                         Phase I of the proposed project would cover the following activities:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Strengthening Public and Private Services in the Dairy Sector (estimated cost US$
                         1.35 million, all IDA). Phase I of this component would focus on the following activities: (i)
                         Improving the Public-Private Dialogue in Issyk-kul; (ii) cattle registration and identification in Issyk-
                         kul Region; and (iii) Procurement of high quality semen straws to ensure early breeding
                         improvement in the project area.

                         Component 2: On-farm Productivity Enhancement (estimated cost US$1.78 million, all IDA). During
                         Phase I, the MDV concept would be introduced, determining the locations of the MDV service
                         points, and providing the initial support to these services. The component would start with the most-
                         needed services (which could be a veterinarian, an AI office, a milking center, a milk collection
                         point, etc.). The component would work predominantly with groups of beneficiaries. The component
                         would provide training, demonstrations and advice to farmers on good animal breeding practices,
                         including: (i) fodder production and feeding management; (ii) animal husbandry and farm
                         management, including (a) animal housing, general management and handling; (b) animal health,
                         farm hygiene & clean milk production; (c) breeding management; and (d) manure management; and
                         (iii) milk cooling and handling.

                         Component 3: Farm-level Investments (estimated cost US$1.57 million, including US$1.27 million
                         IDA, and US$0.3 million beneficiaries). Phase I would finance: (i) a US$ 1.2 million Revolving
                         Fund to facilitate access to finance for small farmer for the purchase of inputs and small equipment;
                         and (ii) technical assistance and capacity building to project beneficiaries to enable them to access
                         existing financing programs.

                         Component 4: Project Management (estimated cost US$0.6 million, all IDA). The component would
                         cover the costs associated with project management, including Monitoring and Evaluation for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project implementation, as well as the establishment and maintenance of the Grievance Redress
                         Mechanism (GRM).
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Issyk-kul Oblast has been selected as the project area based on the results of the feasibility study
                         carried out in February 2015. The study concluded that Issyk-kul Oblast is suitable for dairy value
                         chain development considering its geographical setting (it is surrounded by mountain ranges, which
                         is a natural barrier for restricting animal movement); the abundance of pastures; farmers’ willingness
                         to adapt and adopt new technologies; the support of the Oblast’s Governor’s office and local
                         authorities; the existence of a direct milk collection system from farmers; suitable level of
                         competitiveness between buyers; good milk production growth rates; and closeness to Kazakhstan.
                         The Oblasts covers about 80,000 households (rural population of 330,000 people) and 106,000 dairy
                         cows (cattle population of about 220,000).
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alisher Khamidov (GSU03)
                         Arcadii Capcelea (GEN03)




                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                            6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental               Yes
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes

                            Physical Cultural           No
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    No
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The proposed project activities (upgrading/construction of a veterinary analytical laboratory and
                              installing veterinary points; investments in improving the animal heard; purchasing of inputs and
                              machinery for feed and fodder production; animal shelter improvement; agro-processing and milk
                              collection and cooling equipment; etc.) might generate a series of various adverse environmental
                              and social impacts. These impacts would be associated with biodiversity degradation, noise, dust,
                              air and water pollution, health hazards and labor safety issues, etc. All of them are expected to be
                              typical for small scale construction/rehabilitation works or for various agricultural processing
                              activities, temporary by nature and site specific and can be easily mitigated by applying best
                              construction and/or agro-processing practices and relevant mitigation measures. The grants and
                              sub-projects to be implemented under the on farm investments will also generate a great number of
                              both direct and indirect positive economic and social impacts. Direct positive impacts will be
                              generated by increased production in milk production, which would result in creation of new jobs
                              and respectively, and increased income. Indirect positive impacts will relate to overall improving
                              of business environment, introduction of advanced agricultural diary technologies and techniques,
                              contribution to poverty reduction and food safety.
                              The project will not support any activities that would trigger the OP on Natural Habitats. Its
                              indirect impact would be reduction in number of animals and respectively of the pressure on the
                              pastures that would beneficial in terms on improving status of NHs. The project will be
                              implemented in non-afforested areas and thus no impacts on the forests status are expected.

                                                                        Page 4 of 8
                           Although the project will not support purchasing and use of mineral fertilizers and pesticides, the
                           farmers routinely use them while producing animal fodder as well as acaricides to control ticks
                           and other ectoparasites and thus OP on Pest Management is triggered. To ensure the safe usage of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           chemicals the ESMF specifies the project will support TA activities in this aspect, providing
                           public awareness and training for farmers.
                           The project will not finance any activities that might trigger involuntary resettlement issues. Any
                           infrastructure constructed under the project will be: (a) located on land already owned by
                           participants, or will be bought or leased on a willing buyer-willing seller basis, and, (b) will be
                           screened to ensure that it is free of legal encumbrance, or informal use or occupation by others
                           who lack formal title.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           As specified above the long term impacts are positive and associated with the improving of
                           business environment, introduction of advanced agricultural diary technologies and techniques,
                           contribution to poverty reduction and food safety.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           To address potential project impacts the client prepared an Environmental and Social Management
                           Framework (ESMF) which is aimed at specifying the set of mitigation, monitoring, and
                           institutional measures to be taken during the project implementation to eliminate adverse
                           environmental and social impacts, offset, or reduce them to acceptable levels. The document
                           provides the World Bank’s and national rules and procedures for project Environmental Impacts
                           Assessment (EIA), identify potential environmental impacts of the project (both positive and
                           negative), and outlines rules and procedure for the sub-projects environmental screening,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           specifying appropriate preventive actions and mitigation measures (including appropriate
                           monitoring plan) to prevent, eliminate or minimize any anticipated adverse impacts on
                           environment. The ESMF also suggests a series of environmental issues to be included in the
                           proposed project TA activities - training, preparing and disseminating guidebooks and
                           implementing demonstration activities on the following: (a) education of veterinary specialists on
                           managing sector environmental and social impacts; (b); sound manure management; (c) practicing
                           silage production and measures to ensure appropriate handling and disposal of the "silage liquor";
                           (d) promoting Integrated Pest Management while producing fodder and usage of acaricides in
                           livestock production; and (d) TA activities on conducting EA for matching grants and selected
                           sub-projects.
                           The ESMF contains also a section on Environmental Guidelines which provides rules and
                           procedures for EA of selected grants and sub-projects under the Component 1, 2 and 3, based on
                           that will be prepared an EMP and/or an EMP Checklist that will be disclosed and consulted in the
                           selected localities as well as, if needed, submitted to the State Ecological Expertise for their
                           approval. The ESMF and EMPs provisions will form part of the design documents for the project,
                           and will be included in contracts for proposed activities, both into specifications and bills of
                           quantities. Respectively the Contractors will be required to include the cost of EMPs requirements
                           in their financial bids and required to comply with them while implementing the project activities.
                           Ministry of Agriculture and Melioration and the Ministry of Finance will be the Implementing
                           Agencies for the project. The Agribusiness Competitiveness Center (ABCC) and the Credit Line


                                                                     Page 5 of 8
                           Management Unit (CLMU) of the Ministry of Finance will be responsible for implementation of
                           the technical assistance and credit line activities, respectively. The ABCC and CLMU have prior
                           extensive experience in implementing Bank-financed projects. Similar to the previous projects,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           CLMU will be responsible for project-related procurement activities, financial management as
                           well as for sub-projects and grants Environmental Assessment. The evaluation of the EA
                           institutional capacity has shown that although CLMU has basic capacities to perform its duties
                           concerning EA and enforcing the ESMF provisions, there is need for additional capacity building
                           activities, especially for the new Environmental Specialist to be hired as well as for commercial
                           banks who will participate in the project implementation. In this regard the Project will support
                           additional training activities to ensure the environmental requirements and the ESMF provisions
                           would be fully implemented.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The CLMU (MoF)/ABCC on February 10 and 16, 2016, has disseminated the draft summary
                           ESMF in Russian and Kyrgyz language in its institutions and to other relevant ministries and
                           agencies for review and comments, also posting it for wide public on the web-page of the MoF
                           (http://www.minfin.kg/ru/novosti/novosti/ramochnyy-dokument-po-ekologicheskomu-i-
                           sotsialnom.html) and disseminated through local electronic networks ABCC web-site
                            (http://www.agromarket.kg/index.php?
                           option=com_content&view=article&id=835:2016-02-10-05-27-52&catid=9&Itemid=105).
                           CAREC also posted information on public consultations and ESMF document on its web-site
                           (www.carececo.org (http://www.carececo.org/news/v-filiale-retstsa-kyrgyzstan-sostoyalas-
                           vstrecha-s-konsultantom-vsemirnogo-banka-po-proektu-programm/) . On February 26, 2016, the
                           CLMU/ABCC has conducted a public briefing and consultation on this document. Overall the
                           meeting concluded that the draft ESMF document covered practically all potential impacts and
                           possible mitigation measures. The draft ESMF was revised after the meeting taking into account
                           inputs from the consultation. The final version of the EMF was disclosed in the country and in the
                           WB Infoshop and will be used by the government agencies during the project implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       02-Mar-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    08-Mar-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kyrgyz Republic                                                   26-Feb-2016
                           Comments: On February 10, 2016, the draft summary ESMF in Russian and Kyrgyz language
                                         was posted on the web-pages of the MoF (http://www.minfin.kg/ru/novosti/novosti/
                                         ramochnyy-dokument-po-ekologicheskomu-i-sotsialnom.html), ABCC (http://www.
                                         agromarket.kg/index.php?
                                         option=com_content&view=article&id=835:2016-02-10-05-27-52&catid=9&Itemid
                                         =105), and CAREC (www.carececo.org (http://www.carececo.org/news/v-filiale-
                                         retstsa-kyrgyzstan-sostoyalas-vstrecha-s-konsultantom-vsemirnogo-banka-po-
                                         proektu-programm/) . The in-country consultations were held on February 26, 2016,
                                         in Karakol, Issyk-kul Region.
                          Pest Management Plan

                                                                     Page 6 of 8
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       02-Mar-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    08-Mar-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kyrgyz Republic                                                   26-Feb-2016
                           Comments: On February 10, 2016, the draft summary ESMF in Russian and Kyrgyz language
                                         was posted on the web-pages of the MoF (http://www.minfin.kg/ru/novosti/novosti/
                                         ramochnyy-dokument-po-ekologicheskomu-i-sotsialnom.html), ABCC (http://www.
                                         agromarket.kg/index.php?
                                         option=com_content&view=article&id=835:2016-02-10-05-27-52&catid=9&Itemid
                                         =105), and CAREC (www.carececo.org (http://www.carececo.org/news/v-filiale-
                                         retstsa-kyrgyzstan-sostoyalas-vstrecha-s-konsultantom-vsemirnogo-banka-po-
                                         proektu-programm/) . The in-country consultations were held on February 26, 2016,
                                         in Karakol, Issyk-kul Region.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         The ESMF includes Pest Management Plan.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies




                                                                    Page 7 of 8
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Sandra Broka,Mai Nguyen,Serhiy Osavolyuk
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Marianne Grosclaude (PMGR)          Date: 11-Apr-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
