INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC12753
,2   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Mar-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Kazakhstan                 Project ID:   P153496
Project Name:    Education Modernization Project (P153496)
Task Team        Dingyong Hou
Leader(s):
Estimated        21-Jan-2016                Estimated     30-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Primary education (50%), Secondary education (50%)
Theme(s):        Education for all (60%), Gender (20%), Education for the knowledge economy
(20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     120.00             Total Bank Financing:    80.00
Financing Gap:           20.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                         20.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development            80.00
Total                                                           100.00
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The development objective of the project is to enhance the quality of primary and secondary
education in Kazakhstan. The direct beneficiaries are about one million students, teachers and other
stakeholders in more than 4,000 rural and underserved urban schools.
C. Project Description
Aligned to the government's self-owned education program and informed by a strong body of


﻿analytical research, the project seeks to provide comprehensive and targeted support for system wide
results of enhanced learning outcome in support of the transition to a 12-year schooling model. In
particular the project will support system wide reforms to:
O
U* develop, pilot and roll out modem learning standards and a competence based curriculum for
grades 1-11; with aligned learning resources and ICT enabled technology;
 *    enhance teacher quality at entry and support professional development and pedagogical
practice of existing teachers; strengthen student assessment system capacity and quality of
assessment;
* enhance school accountability and autonomy, including school leadership and capacities
to effectively and efficiently manage resources;
*      build school and sector capacities for data driven decision making and use of data for
accountability and learning improvement and
*      ensure adequate distribution of learning resources to reduce disparity in learning outcomes
The project also seeks to adopt a result based financing approach to leverage system wide result of
enhanced learning outcomes while addressing more equitable provision of essential learning
resources to ensure a balance of the result focus and the effective production function in the learning
process.
The project will have three components.
Component One: Enhancing Learning Outcomes
This component aims to ensure that all students learn a curriculum that is based on modem
competency standards. Their learning would be facilitated by quality teachers with effective student
centered and active pedagogical practice. Their progress to master essential competencies would be
measured on a continuum and at the end of the schooling cycle. They would have equal access to
essential learning materials including ICT enabled resources aligned with the curriculum, with a
particular focus on the disadvantaged schools and groups. The focus would be on supporting:
1.1    Evaluation of the learning standards and curriculum for grades 1-4, development and pilot of
the standards and curriculum for grades 5-11 including development of textbooks and learning
a       materials and ICT enabled resources aligned to the curriculum.
1.2    Reform of teacher preparation, professional development and practice by a review of the
policy and practice in initial teacher education and recruitment at entry towards a strategy for reform.
Enhancing teacher development and practice through in-service training for upgrading qualifications
and on new teaching and learning strategies including the use of ICT enabled technology to deliver
the new curriculum. Particular attention would be given to teaching and learning strategies to address
the achievement gaps of boys in reading. Strengthening the support mechanism for continuous
pedagogical guidance through enhanced mentoring, classroom observations and school leadership
development.
1.3    Equitable provision of learning resources including textbooks, learning materials, teaching
equipment and ICT enabled resources to deliver the new standards and curriculum. This is a targeted
measure focused on the disadvantaged schools that face significant challenges in the provision of
learning resources to narrow the gaps in the distribution of these resources within the system.


﻿1.4    Strengthening the student assessment system and institutions. This aims to address the gaps
in assessment practice and capacity for enhanced assessment quality and effectiveness. It entails
building capacity for teachers and assessment professionals for formative assessment in classroom
through training and peer learning, introduction of enhancement to the UNT, and adoption of ICT
enabled technology to enhance the validity and reliability of the existing assessment instruments as
well as more effective use and dissemination of assessment results.
Component Two: Strengthening Governance
This component aims to ensure that schools are governed by a strong leadership and that resources
are accounted for with autonomy and participation of stakeholders in management and improvement
planning including a pilot of an enhanced per student financing model. It also aims to equip schools
and the system with an Education Management Information System that helps generate the
information on school and system performance and the use of that information for accountability to
government and stakeholders and for informing teaching and learning.
The component will focus on:
2.1    Enhancement of school leadership through training of school principals and Akimat officials;
mainstreaming of school boards with representation of parents and other stakeholders and adoption
of School Report Card to inform stakeholders on school budge, performance and school
improvement planning.
2.2    Capacity building for data driven decisions making. This aims at supporting establishment of
a school based Education Management Information System for accountability and learning
improvement; training of school heads, Akimat and MOES officials for use of EMIS and data to
generate and publish information for public dissemination.
Component Three: Supporting Citizen Engagement, Monitoring and Evaluation and Implementation
0
This component aims to engage and support stakeholders and citizens participation in project
preparation as well as building capacity for implementation and monitoring and evaluation of key
government reform initiatives and project results. It would focus on:
3.1    Supporting stakeholder participation through consultation and communications with
stakeholders during project preparation and implementation process and establishment of a grievance
redress system to handle public complaints and monitoring project implementation and evaluation of
project results through a NGO monitoring exercise and independent evaluation by a third party of
project results.
3.2    Evaluation of Government Reform Initiatives. This responds to government requests to
review the on-going reforms in three policy domains: (i) a review of the country's Secondary
Education Strategy on tracking following the 9th grade in light of a more viable strategy that would
enhance efficient pathways and transition for secondary graduates to access tertiary education and
decent job opportunities; (ii) a review of the existing Per Capita Funding formula and development
of a pilot plan of the revised model in two oblasts and (iii) a review of the current performance based
pay scheme for teachers towards a possible enhancement of the scheme.
3.3    Building capacity for project management and coordination through establishment and


﻿maintenance of a Project Implementation Unit with proper mix of skills to coordinate project
implementation with the oversight of the MOES and building in house technical capacity in key
functions to sustain and institutionalize the capacity within and beyond project life.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
N/A
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
N/A
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    No
OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
Pest Management OP 4.09     No
Physical Cultural Resources  No
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  No
BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No
Projects on International   No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Jun-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿The proposed project does not plan to finance any works or rehabilitation of school buildings that
would have any environmental impact. The proposed scope of activities would neither involve any
resettlement in any disputed land or waterways nor physical culturallt resources and indigenous
people. It therefore does not trigger safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01, 4.04, 4.36, 4.09, 4.10, 4.11,
4.12, 4.37, 7.50 and 7.60.
O
Further assessment of safeguard issues will be carried out during preparation and the ISDS will be
updated accordingly.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Dingyong Hou
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                    Date: 04-May-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Mario Cristian Aedo Inostroza (PMGR)  Date: 04-May-2015
Manager:


