                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                          Report No.: ISDSC15984

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Apr-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-May-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Vietnam                         Project ID:     P152232
                            Project Name:     Vietnam HCFC Phaseout Project Stage II (P152232)
                            Task Team         Qing Wang
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         07-Nov-2016                     Estimated       29-Sep-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEN02                           Lending         Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other industry (91%), Public administration- Industry and trade (9%)
                            Theme(s):         Pollution management and environmental health (47%), Climate change (47%),
                                              Environmental policies and institutions (6%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     12.98                   Total Bank Financing:          0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                   0.00
                              Montreal Protocol Investment Fund                                         12.98
                              Total                                                                     12.98
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           11. The project development objective is to reduce HCFC consumption in order to contribute to
                           Vietnam’s efforts to meet its 2020 HCFC consumption phase-out obligations under the Montreal
                           Protocol, as well as to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases in the manufacturing and use of
                           refrigeration and air-conditioning equipment.
                           C. Project Description
                         The proposed Stage II project is a direct continuation of the ongoing Stage I project and the project
                         duration is expected to be from 2017 to 2022. The funding is expected to be approved by the MLF
                         Executive Committee in 2016. The project consists of three proposed components described below.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: HCFC Consumption Reduction
                         AC sector. The project will finance incremental capital costs (ICC) needed for converting to
                         alternative technologies including new production equipment, new AC model performance testing,
                         and training for installing and servicing technicians, and incremental operating cost (IOC) based on
                         MLF financing guidelines at four enterprises which are eligible for MLF and consumed 176 MT of
                         HCFC-22 in 2014. After completion of conversion at the four enterprises, no HCFC-22 should be
                         used for AC production in the whole sector, i.e. about 251 MT of HCFC-22 presently used. The
                         estimated investment funding is about US$2 million. The potential low GWP alternatives to
                         HCFC-22 in the AC sector are HFC-32 with a GWP 675 or R-290 with a GWP of 5, however both
                         are flammable. In addition, EE financing will be explored during project preparation for supporting
                         the uptake of non-HCFC more energy efficient AC (such as EE regulations and awareness, energy
                         star labelling, technical assistance, demand-side initiatives, etc.).

                         Refrigeration sector. There is no single refrigerant which can replace HCFC-22, making the HCFC
                         phase-out in the refrigerant sector very challenging. The project will finance conversion of priority
                         industrial refrigerating systems where cost-effective and low GWP alternatives (e.g. ammonia,
                         hydrocarbons, HFC-32 etc.) are available, by providing ICC (system, component and process
                         redesign, new equipment, performance verification, safety training, etc.) and IOC for conversion at
                         about 30 enterprises which are eligible for MLF funding . The estimated cost to the project is about
                         US$ 1.5 million. In addition, EE financing for refrigeration manufacturing in conjunction with the
                         Vietnam Energy Efficiency Financing for Industrial Enterprises project (EE in end users) will be
                         explored during project preparation to offset the climate impacts of interim alternatives with high
                         GWP that may have to be used if low GWP alternatives are not yet available.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Servicing sector. The project will finance the following activities: training and certification in good
                         servicing and maintenance practices, provision of servicing tools to selected vocational training
                         centers to enable training in the handling of alternative flammable refrigerants, technical assistance
                         demonstration for 10 selected industrial refrigeration end users on HCFC leakage management, and
                         bilateral TA from Japan Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI) for using HFC-32 in the
                         AC sector. The estimated cost for these activities is US$1.7 million for a HCFC-22 phase-out impact
                         of 352 MT.

                         Foam sector. The project will finance ICC needed for foam production conversion to hydrocarbon,
                         methyl formate or HFO (hydrofluoroolefin) alternatives at about 40 enterprises eligible for funding.
                         In order to allow SMEs (consuming HCFC-141 less than 20MT) to convert to non-HCFC production
                         in a cost-effective way, the project will also finance upgrading of two or three system houses to be
                         competitively selected among existing foam producers or chemical suppliers that have established
                         the basic system house infrastructure. These system houses would supply non-HCFC pre-blended
                         polyol to SMEs. In addition, the project will finance conversion at an enterprise which uses
                         HCFC-22 for XPS foam production. The estimated investment funding request from MLF for the
                         sector is about US$6.6 million.

                         Component 2: Technical Assistance and Policy Actions
                         This component aims to support sector-wide technology and knowledge transfer, TA and exchange
                         of best practices, as well as to create a policy and market environment that will enable and sustain
                         sector transformation. TA activities focused on the refrigeration and AC manufacturing sectors will
                         include training workshops on sub-projects preparation, international and national technical
Public Disclosure Copy




                         consultant services, development of technical standards of alternatives, training for government
                         officials, training on safe use of alternatives, study tours on HCFC alternatives, a joint study on
                         integrating HCFC phase-out and EE improvement in the industrial refrigeration manufacturing and
                         food process sectors, TA on foaming formulation using non-HCFC pre-blended polyol for the system
                         houses, and others as needed. TA for the servicing sector is included in Component 1 as it results in
                         HCFC phase-out impact.

                         On policies, this component will cover the annual HCFC import quota issuance and the development
                         and issuance of sector-specific policy and regulations by project completion, including bans on local
                         production and import of HCFC-22 based ACs, ban on import and use of pre-blended HCFC-141b
                         polyol in foam production, and ban on installation of selected out-of-date HCFC-22 refrigeration
                         applications.

                         Component 3: Project Management
                         It is proposed that the PMU currently implementing the Stage I HCFC Phase-out Project continues in
                         this new project, including financial, procurement, and safeguard management as well as monitoring
                         and reporting. However, MONRE will formally announce establishment of the PMU for the Stage II
                         project. This component will finance hiring of PMU staff, project launch and completion workshops,
                         financial audits, annual HCFC consumption verification, public awareness activities, and incremental
                         operating cost.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project may involve HCFC conversion at about 80 enterprises in air-conditioning, refrigeration,
                         and foam manufacturing sectors around the country. A long list of potential participating beneficiary
                         enterprises in these sectors will be determined during project preparation. The final list of beneficiary
Public Disclosure Copy




                         enterprises will only be confirmed during the project implementation when preparing and appraising
                         sub-projects by the PMU. Ammonia, HFC-32 and hydrocarbons, which are flammable materials, are
                         the main alternatives to be adopted by the project. This could lead to safety issues for which proper
                         safety equipment and training should be put in place.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Department of Meteorology, Hydrology and Climate Change in MONRE hosts the National Ozone
                         Office (NOO) which acts as the focal point for MP implementation. The Stage I HCFC Phase-out
                         Project employs a project management unit (PMU), which works directly with the NOO and has
                         been facilitating and coordinating preparation of this Stage II HCFC project. It is expected that the
                         PMU currently implementing the Stage I HCFC Phase-out Project would continue in the new project,
                         including safeguard management, monitoring and reporting, but MONRE will formally name the
                         PMU. MONRE and the PMU are experienced with safeguard issues under the HCFC Stage I project.

                         Participating enterprises are also under supervision of the Department of Natural Resources and
                         Environment in each province, the Ministry/Department of Industry and Trade (for safe chemical use
                         and chemical import) and the Industrial Zone Management Board for those located in the industrial
                         zones or clusters.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Ha Thi Van Nguyen (GEN2A)
                           Van Trung Nguyen (GSU02)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment    Yes        The project will have a positive impact on the global
                           OP/BP 4.01                             environment by reducing the use of HCFCs, which
                                                                  are both ozone-depleting substances and greenhouse
                                                                  gases with a global warming potential (GWP)
                                                                  ranging from several hundred to several thousand
                                                                  times that of CO2.

                                                                  The project will include a series of investment
                                                                  activities in existing AC, refrigeration and foam
                                                                  manufacturers. No closure of these enterprises is
                                                                  expected due to the project. Most of these enterprises
                                                                  are located in industrial area, but some SMEs are
                                                                  located in residential area.

                                                                  The main environmental impacts, but manageable,
                                                                  could result from mishandling of some of the
                                                                  chemicals that are already used in AC, refrigeration
                                                                  and foam production and alternatives to replace
                                                                  HCFCs. The manufacturing process will involve
                                                                  potential occupational and health safety issues
                                                                  associated with flammable alternatives
                                                                  (hydrocarbons, HFC-32, ammonia). Therefore, OP
                                                                  4.01 is considered triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                  In foam sector, hydrocarbon technology is the
                                                                  preferred technology for enterprises with
                                                                  HCFC-141b consumption of more than 20 MT per
                                                                  year. Hydrocarbons has a GWP less than 25. Due to
                                                                  its flammability, safety requirements associated with
                                                                  hydrocarbons are important and should be in place.
                                                                  In the AC sector, the proposed alternative technology
                                                                  is HFC-32 with GWP of 675 (about 1/3 of HCFC-22
                                                                  to be replaced) or R-290 with a GWP of 5, however,
                                                                  both are flammable. Potential safety risks and fire
                                                                  hazards must be properly addressed. In the
                                                                  refrigeration sector, ammonia, hydrocarbons and
                                                                  HFC-32, are potential alternatives to HCFC-22.
                                                                  Ammonia is widely used for large distributed
                                                                  systems and large chillers. This refrigerant is an
                                                                  important option for many industrial refrigeration
                                                                  applications. However, ammonia is toxic and it has
                                                                  low flammability – appropriate safety precautions are
                                                            required.

                                                            For all project sites, a due diligence review on
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            occupational health and safety measures, fire and
                                                            exposure risk will be conducted and appropriate
                                                            emergency preparedness and response measures will
                                                            be described as identified in the World Bank Group
                                                            Environment, Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines.
                                                            Staff involved in the production, installation and
                                                            services will be trained as needed.

                                                            As sub-projects will only be confirmed from a long
                                                            list of potential enterprises in different sectors
                                                            through , subproject proposals preparation by
                                                            application enterprises and appraisal will be
                                                            prepared by the confirmed enterprises and appraised
                                                            by the PMU during project implementation, in order
                                                            to address the environment, health and safety issues
                                                            of sub-projects, it is proposed that an overall project
                                                            environmental management plan (EMP) will be
                                                            prepared before the project appraisal and an EMP
                                                            with site-specific mitigation measures for each sub-
                                                            project will be prepared as part of the subproject
                                                            proposal during the project implementation stage.
                                                            This is also why there is no confirmed subprojects
                                                            and specific safeguard instruments by appraisal. The
                                                            overall/generic EMP will be used as a sample for
                                                            preparing site-specific EMP. The procedures for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            undertaking Environmental, Health and Safety due
                                                            diligence review during project implementation for
                                                            participating enterprises will be spelled out in the
                                                            generic EMP.

                                                            All the participating enterprises must be in
                                                            compliance with national and local law and
                                                            regulations related to environment/ social/health and
                                                            safety protection.

                                                            The project activities will likely occur in the existing
                                                            facilities, even though flammable substances such as
                                                            ammonia, R-32 and hydrocarbons will be used,
                                                            which may create safety and occupational health
                                                            issues. However, these impacts are site specific and
                                                            can be mitigated with appropriate mitigation
                                                            measures. Therefore the project is proposed as
                                                            Environment Category B.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No   The project will not affect any protected areas,
                                                              known natural habitats, or established or proposed
                                                              critical natural habitats as all the project activities
                                                              will take place within the existing plant boundaries
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              either located industrial zone or residential area, thus
                                                              there is no impacts on natural habitat.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             No    There is no proposed investment involving forest
                                                              harvesting or forest management.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09        No    The project does not involve the procurement or use
                                                              of any pesticides or herbicides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources    No    The project will not adversely affect sites with
                         OP/BP 4.11                           archeological, paleontological, historical, religious,
                                                              or unique natural values.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No    All sub-projects will be implemented within existing
                         4.10                                 project enterprises or in industrial area, so there is no
                                                              IP group to be affected. Therefore, the project will
                                                              not trigger this policy.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   All sub-projects will be likely implemented within
                         BP 4.12                              project enterprises, so land related impact are not
                                                              expected. However, some enterprises, with small
                                                              establishments, are possibly relocated first to
                                                              industrial area, which probably trigger the policy.

                                                              As sub-projects will only be confirmed from a long
                                                              list of potential enterprises in different sectors and
                                                              subproject proposals will only be prepared by the
                                                              confirmed enterprises and appraised by the PMU
                                                              during project implementation, it is proposed that a
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              RPF will be prepared prior to appraisal to guide
                                                              handling of relocation and potential land issues if any
                                                              during preparation of the subproject proposals
                                                              (during the overall project implementation stage).

                                                              During project implementation, the TT will review
                                                              when and how the land was acquired or being
                                                              acquired for the Industrial Zone and the enterprise
                                                              relocation plan at the preparation stage of sub-
                                                              projects. For each sub-project which require
                                                              involuntary resettlement, if the land has been
                                                              acquired before the sub-grant agreement is signed, a
                                                              due diligence review of the land acquisition process
                                                              will be undertaken by the TT to confirm whether
                                                              there is any legacy issues. The procedures for
                                                              undertaking land due diligence review will be spelled
                                                              out in the RPF. An abbreviated RPs if applicable will
                                                              be prepared for subprojects (as part of the sub-project
                                                              proposals) to handle the relocation and potential land
                                                                                                                        issues.

                                                                                                                        The project will finance incremental capital cost
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        (providing new equipment and training) needed for
                                                                                                                        foam production conversion and refrigeration and
                                                                                                                        AC equipment production conversion to using more
                                                                                                                        environmentally sound chemicals, which will
                                                                                                                        contribute to enterprise competitiveness
                                                                                                                        improvement, therefore, it is not expected that the
                                                                                                                        project will cause potential retrenchment or
                                                                                                                        displacement of workers.

                                                                                                                        As no significant social issues outside resettlement
                                                                                                                        are expected due to the project implementation, it is
                                                                                                                        proposed that an annex for addressing any social
                                                                                                                        issues if identified will be included to the generic
                                                                                                                        EMP.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         There is no construction or rehabilitation of dams or
                                                                                                                        dykes.
                                 Projects on International      No                                                      The project does not have any impact on any
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   international waterway.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The project is not located in any disputed areas.
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Sep-2016
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The safeguard instrument: the overall project EMP and the Resettlement Plan Framework will be
                                      developed before the project appraisal. The site-specific EMP and the abbreviated RP (if
                                      applicable) will be prepared during project implementation prior to implementation of sub-
                                      projects. The overall project EMP and the RPF will be disclosed locally (in local language-
                                      Vietnamese) and in the Bank Infoshop prior to the appraisal mission.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Qing Wang
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                                                                                                      Date: 24-Apr-2016
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Iain G. Shuker (PMGR)                                                                                                  Date: 20-May-2016
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
