INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCIO49
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Mar-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Madagascar                 Project ID:   P149323
Project Name:    Social Safety Net Project (P149323)
Task Team        Andrea Vermehren
Leader(s):
Estimated        11-Mar-2015                Estimated     28-May-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSPDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Primary education (20%), Other non-bank financial intermediaries (10%),
Health (10%), Other social services (60%)
Theme(s):        Natural disaster management (15%), Social Safety Nets/Social Assistance &
Social Care Services (50%), Social Inclusion (10%), Education for all (15%),
Nutrition and food security (10%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      35.00             Total Bank Financing:    35.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                      35.00
Total                                                            35.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The Development Objective of the proposed Project is to improve access to income support and
primary education for selected extreme poor and vulnerable groups, and lay the foundation for a
social safety net system.
C. Project Description


﻿The project would be implemented over a 4.5 year period from August 2015 -February 2020 (to
allow for an impact evaluation). A Project Preparation Facility is proposed to ensure that first
payments for the expansion of the CCT program can be made in September 2015, just prior to the
new school year. Four components are included:
Component 1: Building a safety net for extreme poor families in selected rural areas
0
This component would provide Conditional Cash Transfers (CCT) of Ar. 20,000 per month (over a
three year period) to selected, extremely poor families with children 0-10 years of age, in poor
geographic regions of Madagascar. The geographic areas of intervention would be determined based
on their poverty status, on the availability of schools, student retention data and demographic criteria.
The cash transfers would consist of two elements: Each selected family would receive a base
payment of Ar. 10,000 per month to support the family's income. In addition, families with children
of primary school age (6-10 years) would receive for each child enrolled and attending school
regularly (80% of school days) Ar. 5,000, for up to two children in primary school. Thus, the highest
amount possible for any family to receive is Ar. 20,000 per month. In addition, families with primary
school children will receive a one-time payment of Ar. 20.000 in September of the first year they
enroll their children in primary schools to ensure that they can enroll their children. Payments would
be made bi-monthly through financial institutions where possible, to promote financial inclusion.
Families would be encouraged to access other services available in the community, for example the
community nutrition program implemented by the ONN. Collaboration between the project's
implementing agency FID and the Ministry of Education and ONN have already been defined
through a Memorandum of Understanding ("Convention") with each agency.
FID is presently in the process of preparing a CCT pilot whose first payment is scheduled for
September 2014 (just prior to the start of the new school year). The pilot includes the main elements
of a safety net including (i) targeting (in collaboration with INSTAT), (ii) enrolment (for information
about co-responsibilities of beneficiaries), (iii) payments (through financial sector), (iv) co-
responsibility monitoring (through social organizers and "lead mothers"), and (v) reconciliation
(adjustment of payments depending on compliance of beneficiary families with co-responsibilities).
The pilot is accompanied by a public information campaign that informs key stakeholders about the
program as well as the specific roles and responsibilities.
The results from the process evaluation of the CCT pilot will inform the roll-out of the CCT
program. Questions arise, for example, (i) whether the targeting process is efficient and cost-
effective, (ii) which payment modus (through micro-finance institutions or through mobile banking)
is better suited for the target group, (iii) whether it is feasible and necessary to monitor school
attendance regularly and for all students (or whether spot checks would be sufficient), and (iv) if
social accountability mechanisms are effectively working. Results from the evaluation should be
available prior to appraisal so that the project design can benefit from them.
Component 2: Strengthening of natural disaster resilience of affected poor communities
This component would provide a fast response mechanism for natural disasters based on FID's
experience in early recovery. It would provide financing for disaster response through Cash for Work
activities and selected rehabilitation of infrastr ucture in affected community. FID has been the main
government institution providing fast income and reconstruction support to affected communities.
Funding of up to US$6 million would be made available for the rehabilitation of bas ic infrastructure


﻿(e.g. schools) that would be rebuilt in a cyclone proof way, with designs developed by FID and the
Ministry of Education. In addition, quick income earning opportunities would be offered to the
poorest members of the affected communities through Cash for Work activities for clean-up and
rehabilitation activities, at a daily rate of Ar. 3,000 up to 45 days of work. 75 percent of the project
O
U       cost would be used for cash transfers, 15 percent for materials, and 10 percent for coordination, and
organization of the communities and technical supervision of the public works by NGOs. FID will
budget a certain amount for disaster response each year. In case that there are only minor disasters
during one year, the remaining funds can be used to rehabilitate the back log of damaged community
infrastructure that has been accumulated from past disasters.
Component 3: Building the institutional capacity for safety net administration, monitoring and
evaluation (
This component would provide the financing for the targeting system, establishing a beneficiary
registry, rolling out the electronic payment mechanisms for safety net beneficiaries, the strengthening
of FID's management information systems to be able to process the program, as well as the general
program administration including audits and social accountability mechanisms. It would also include
an impact evaluation of the CCT program (component 1), and provide technical assistance to the
larger social protection policy development agenda (e.g. development of a common targeting system,
promotion of coordination and policy dialogue).
Component 4: Building the institutional capacity of the Ministry of Population, Social Protection and
Gender for oversight, supervision and evaluation
This component would strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Population and Social Protection to
provide oversight and guidance to the CCT program. To this end, the Ministry's capacity to
supervise and evaluate the program would be enhanced including through the establishment of a
basic Management Information System connected to the FID's CCT system, the contracting of spot
checks/operational audits of the CCT program and the design and contracting of the CCT impact
evaluation.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented nation-wide precisely in selected poor geographic regions of
Madagascar. The geographic areas of intervention would be determined based on their poverty
status, on the availability of schools, student retention data and demographic criteria.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
FID has a good track record of complying with social and environmental safeguards. Support for
safeguards is provided effectively through the Bank's CO. The entire project has a particular focus
on women and youth as they are the direct beneficiaries of the CCT program, and also equally
benefit from the CfW modalities. CfW activities will focus on socioeconomic, environmental,
climate change related and disaster prevention activities.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSURR)
Marie Diop (GSURR)
Paul-Jean Feno (GENDR)


﻿II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment  Yes         The policy is triggered because of the project
OP/BP 4.01                               intended activities foreseen in component 2, which
will rehabilitate or rebuilt school infrastructure in a
cyclone proof way, with designs developed by FID
and the Ministry of Education, as well as rehabilitate
the back log of damaged community infrastructure
that has been accumulated from past disasters.
Because of the site specific nature of the project, and
its intended localized impacts, the Borrower will
prepare an ESMF, built from similar active projects
in Madagascar. Once ready, the ESMF will be
consulted upon and cleared by the Bank prior to its
public disclosure both in country and at the InfoShop
before appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No          The project is not being implemented in natural
habitats and does not affect them.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          The project does not involve forests or forestry and
does not affect them.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No          The project does not involve pest management.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes        It is unlikely that there are physical cultural resources
OP/BP 4.11                              in the project area, nevertheless, in the likelihood that
such an encounter occurs during project
implementation, provision of chance finds approach
is been embedded in the ESMF that borrower will
apply to adequately mitigate any potential adverse
impacts on these physical cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No          There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes       TThe Policy is triggered due to the foreseen activities
BP 4.12                                 in component 2 (rehabilitation and/or rebuilding of
school and other local infrastructures affected by the
cyclones), which may result in lanf acquisition
leading to involuntary resettlement and/or
restrictions of access to resources and livelihoods.
Given the unknown footprint of the project, the
Borrower will prepare an RPF to set forth the basic
principles and prerogatives to be followed once
details characteristics of the project sites are known.
Like the ESMF, the RPF will be consulted upon and
cleared by the Bank prior to its public disclosure
both in country and at the InfoShop before appraisal.


﻿Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     No            N/A
Projects on International     No            N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No           N/A
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 05-Jan-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
To be determined in consultation with the project Social and Environment Specialists, probably in
early to mid- December 2014.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Andrea Vermehren
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name:                                             Date:
Practice Manager/       Name:                                             Date:
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


