INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA14880
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Feb-2016
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Feb-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Liberia                    Project ID:  P154114
Project Name: Liberia Forest Sector Project (P154114)
Task Team       Paola Agostini,Neeta Hooda
Leader(s):
Estimated       17-Feb-2016                Estimated    30-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEN01                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Forestry (80%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%)
Theme(s):       Environmental policies and institutions (30%), Other environment and natural
resources management (30%), Climate change (20%), Biodi versity (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      37.50            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                    0.00
BioCarbon Technical Assistance Trust Fund                                  37.50
Total                                                                      37.50
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
Improved management of and increased benefit-sharing in targeted forest landscapes.
3. Project Description
As a project led by the Forest Development Authority (FDA) with cross-sectoral support from other
line ministries, bilateral partners, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and civil society
Page 1 of 13


﻿organizations (CSOs), the Liberia Forest Sector Project (LFSP) is designed to contribute to a
transformational change in the way in which Liberia's forest landscapes are managed and to increase
the sharing of benefits. Supporting this shift will be an emphasis on ensuring that these changes
deliver multiple benefits to host communities in terms of livelihood development, income generation
O
through forests and agriculture-based enterprises, and climate change mitigation (emissions
reductions) for sustainable forest management.
Progress towards the Project Development Objective (PDO) will be measured by indicators on:
(1) The management of forests according to defined criteria, which include benefits-sharing
mechanisms, existence of a management plan, demarcation of borders, gazettement of protected
areas (PAs), and legal approval of community forestry areas. The baseline for this indicator is
344,000 hectares (ha), constituted by several protected areas within the targeted forest landscapes.
The end-of-project target is 650,000 ha which includes existing and newly-gazetted protected areas
as well as areas under community forest management.
(2) People with increased monetary and non-monetary benefits as a result of the project. This is a
core sector indicator for forestry and includes forest-dependent people with benefits whether these
are monetary benefits, for instance royalties and fees, or non-monetary benefits. Non-monetary
benefits could include but are not necessarily limited to more access rights to forest to harvest non-
timber forest products. The end-of-project target for this indicator is 12,000 people.
(3) Participation in consultations on management of forests. This indicator measures the number
of people who have actively participated in consultations and the end-of-project target is 1,125
people. The results framework also includes the core indicator on direct beneficiaries which counts
the beneficiaries of project interventions and is pitched at the activity level. The end-of-project target
is similar to the indicator on people with monetary and non-monetary benefits, i.e. 12,000 people.
In addition, the LFSP represents a paradigm shift in forest resource management insofar as it
includes using climate finance as a catalyst for forest conservation and continued carbon
sequestration. The objective of this project is therefore to improve forest management, and increase
the sharing of benefits accrued through forest use in order to allow for the possibility of future
investments linked to carbon sequestration and results-based payments.
The project will finance technical assistance, works, goods, workshops, training, services, and
operational costs to support the implementation of the REDD+ strategy; focusing on investments for
early implementation of strategic land use options in targeted landscapes. The project will also
support the development of institutional capacities, which will strengthen the enabling environment
to sustain decentralized implementation of sustainable forest sector management, with the
engagement of local communities. As part of the enabling environment, the proposed project will
also include the implementation of a Measurement, Reporting and Verification (MRV) system to
track the country's forest cover and progress made in the reduction or removal of greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions over time.
During project preparation, the FDA commissioned a spatial analysis of potential priority areas for
REDD+ interventions to inform the selection of priority sites for engagement. The analysis covered
geographic, economic and social aspects of the three pre-selected landscapes (North West, North
Nimba, and South East), to help prioritize target areas for the project and optimize the impacts of
interventions for addressing drivers of deforestation and forest degradation. The analysis also aimed
Page 2 of 13


﻿to establish whether there are preferable sites elsewhere. The study used four main criteria: (i) value
for conservation, (ii) vulnerability to forest degradation, (iii) vulnerability to deforestation; and (iv)
viability for intervention. As a result the North West landscape (comprising Bomi, Lofa, Gharpolu,
and Grand Cape counties) was found to be effective at capturing the priority districts in this part of
O
Liberia. The North Nimba landscape does not contain any top-ranking districts in terms of average
threat and conservation value; but it is still strategic for the project. Considering the strong presence
of other partners in Nimba region, the project will not support community forestry activities in this
area but any relevant support on regulatory and institutional strengthening where key gaps are
identified can be supported. The boundary for South East landscape (South section of Grand Gedeh,
and Sinoe counties), as selected at the beginning of the study, was expanded to include blocks of
highly valuable and vulnerable forest. Further refining of the selection process for specific
interventions at the District level is being done during project preparation. Specifically, the LFSP
will support the following components:
Component 1. Strengthened Regulatory and Institutional Arrangements for Implementation of REDD
+ (US$8 million): This component will finance the technical assistance, works, goods, workshops,
and operational costs to support GoL needs for national reform and harmonization of the existing
legal regime and to strengthen institutional and professional capacities for improved management of
forest landscapes. The component will be divided in two subcomponents as follows:
1.1 .Institutional and professional development support will be provided to FDA and other key
agencies, at national and subnational levels, with an emphasis to building skills and knowledge,
systems and procedures, and regulatory and enforcement capabilities needed for more sustainable
and effective forest management. It is also envisaged that this component will include the
establishment of partnerships between the FDA and local service delivery providers (whether CBO/
CSOs, vocational training institutes, or small and medium enterprises) in order to augment
Government capabilities to engage and support local communities in their forest management
activities. Support will also be provided to the REDD+ coordination mechanisms established as part
of the REDD+ readiness process;
0
1.2. Support to the Government of Liberia in the process of relevant legal reform and effective
implementation of REDD+ related laws and policies and coordination with ongoing projects that are
addressing similar issues. This will focus on the Community Rights Law (CRL) ; the National Forest
a        Reform Law (2006); the Land Rights Policy (2013) the draft Mining Code and their relevant
regulations. Intermediate indicators measuring progress towards the short-term outcome of
strengthening regulatory arrangements include support to reforms as well as two indicators on award
of new logging concessions in general and in connection with Community Forest Management Areas
(CFMAs). Institutional strengthening indicators include training and institutional capacity building
and operational REDD+ management arrangements.
Component 2. Strengthened Capacity for Management of Targeted Forest Landscapes (US$23.8
million)
The component will finance technical assistance, works, goods, training and workshops, sub-projects
and operational costs for land use planning, conservation, community forestry, sustainable
agroforestry and forest management to support local communities and their organizations within the
targeted landscapes to improve the sustainable management and conservation of natural resources
and improve the economic and social benefits derived from them. The component will be divided
into four subcomponents: (i) Sub-component2. 1, Improved Land Use Planning, will support the
Page 3 of 13


﻿preparation of current land use map at the sub-national (for the targeted landscapes) and at the
national level. Together with results achieved and lessons learnt from the inclusive strategic planning
processes and land use planning at the community level (Component 2.3), a roadmap report to scale
up land use planning beyond the community level will be developed. The activities are aimed at
O
advancing an integrated landscape management approach for sustainable management of natural
resources and for carbon emissions scheme at landscape scale. Over time the products from these
activities will be useful for national GHG accounting from the land use (forestry and agriculture)
sector; (ii) subcomponent 2.2, Strengthened Management of Protected Areas of Targeted Forest
Landscapes, will support the enlargement, strengthened on-the-ground management and financing of
Liberia's protected area network, detailing adequate resources necessary to safeguard selected
existing and future protected areas within the targeted landscapes and complementing the support
received from other sources; (iii) Under subcomponent 2.3, Community Forestry in Targeted Forest
Landscapes, the project will support activities on a demand-driven basis to assist at least 40
communities to: (i) strengthen community governance and institutions to manage community forest
lands and common pool resources (in accordance with the CRL and the Land Rights Policy); (ii)
promote and support productive natural resources management investments; and (iii) improve
livelihoods by creating jobs opportunities, and improve income from the use of communities'
customary lands and forest resources, (iv) finally, under subcomponent 2.4 the project will
Strengthen the Capacity for Sustainable Agriculture by promoting sustainable agricultural practices
and reduce slash-and-burn agriculture in the targeted landscapes. Using a demand driven approach
and structured economic interest groups within the targeted communities in Grand Gedeh and Bomi
counties, agroforestry and food crop cultivation will be supported for farming households within the
communities.
Component 3. Forest Monitoring Information System (US$2.3 million)
This component will finance technical assistance, goods, workshops, and operational costs to
support, under Sub-Component 3.1 establishment and operation of a successfully tested and
operational national system for Measurement, Reporting and Verification (MRV), and, under sub-
component 3.2 the establishment of an information system for safeguards, as well as capacity
building of FDA and other implementing agencies on the use of information systems for safeguards..
The capacity building will include activities targeted both at the national level staff as well as
decentralized institutions working in the targeted landscapes. Subcomponent 3.1 will finance
a        technical assistance, goods, workshops, and operational costs for a functional and successfully tested
national MRV system building on an existing roadmap (See Annex 8), the results achieved by the
national REDD+ Readiness Program supported by the FCPF readiness grant and in coordination with
ongoing VPA support to FDA in the context of legality verification.. The MRV system will need to
comply with international best practice guidelines for operational data collection, synthesis, analysis,
and reporting, allowing for the monitoring, estimation, and accounting of carbon emissions and
removals of carbon in comparison to the projected reference scenario currently developed as part of
REDD+ Readiness under FPCF support. FDA together with LISGIS will have the primary
responsibility for monitoring information and reporting. Subcomponent 3.2 will finance the
operationalization and update of an information system on safeguards being designed with the
support of the FCPF . The LFSP will support the implementation in targeted landscapes of such
system covering the measures proposed in the REDD+ Strategy, monitoring compliance with the
World Bank Safeguard Policies (among other criteria and international best practice).
Component 4. Project Management, Monitoring and Communication (US$3.4 million)
Page 4 of 13


﻿Support will be provided through this component for FDA's day-to-day project implementation and
management including, procurement, financial management, M&E, preparation of annual work plans
and organization of audit reports. The component will provide support for office operating costs for
the existent FDA REDD+ Implementing Unit. The component will support the operationalization of
O
U         a Monitoring and Evaluation system that will report on the expected project's results, systematizing
the project's lessons learned. The project level M&E will be integrated into Liberia's M&E
Framework for the national REDD+ readiness process that has been designed to track readiness
progress and be able to report comprehensively at national and international level including to the
different donors and implementing partners supporting Liberia's REDD+ process. The component
will also support the implementation of a communication strategy to inform different and diverse
stakeholders about the project and its results, building on results achieved with FCPF support as well
as through other projects. The component will also provide resources for management and
supervision of the World Bank's social and environmental safeguards and functioning of the
grievance redress mechanism. Finally, the component will provide support for the preparation of the
Mid-term and Project Completion reports.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
LFSP will be a national-level project, particularly with respect to Components 1, 2.1, 3, and 4.
However, the project's site-specific interventions (under Components 2.2, 2.3, and 2.4) will be
within two broad Target Forest Landscapes (TFLs), which were selected based on a spatial analysis
of priority areas for REDD+ interventions conducted for the FDA during project preparation. Based
on this assessment, the project's Target Forest Landscapes will be (i) the Northwest TFL,
encompassing Bomi, Lofa, Gbarpulo, and Grand Cape Mount counties and (ii) the Southeast TFL,
encompassing Grand Gedeh, Sinoe, River Gee, and Grand Kru counties. On-the-ground protected
area investments under Component 2.2 are likely to involve the Sapo National Park, Lake Piso
Multiple Use Reserve, Wonegizi Nature Reserve, and Gola Forest National Park; pre-gazettement
studies are also planned for the Foya and Kpo Mountains Proposed Protected Areas (PPAs) in the
Northwest TFL and Grand Kru-River Gee, Gbi, and Senkwehn PPAs in the Southeast TFL. Specific
sites for project investments in Community Forests (Component 2.3) and smallholder agriculture
(Component 2.4) will be selected within the TFLs during project implementation. The main
beneficiaries of the LFSP will be the Liberian forest communities most directly dependent on forest
resources.
o         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Demba Balde (GSUO1)
George Campos Ledec (GENO 1)
Gloria Malia Mahama (GSUO 1)
Nicholas Meitiaki Soikan (GCCFL)
Robert A. Robelus (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         Although the project would be implemented within
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               environmentally and socially sensitive areas (Liberian
forests), project interventions are designed to be
environmentally very positive overall. None of the
planned project investments or activities are expected to
Page 5 of 13


﻿generate significant adverse environmental impacts.
Liberia's forests comprise the world's largest remaining
area of the biologically rich and unique Upper Guinean
Rainforest ecosystem. These forests face numerous threats
and challenges, including land use conflicts; uncertain
land and forest ownership; overlapping concessions for
mining and other non-forest land uses; the spread of large-
scale commercial agriculture (particularly oil palm);
smallholder agricultural expansion; illegal logging and
fuel-wood harvesting; and widespread bush-meat hunting
that is depleting the wildlife in many areas. This project
will therefore be situated in a context that poses many
environmental and social challenges and risks. However,
the project interventions themselves will be designed to
be beneficial and sustainable from an environmental and
social standpoint.
The project is expected to have environmental and social
impacts that are highly positive overall. Consistent with
the intent and approach of the REDD+ program, this
project seeks to reduce deforestation and forest
degradation within Liberia. It will do this by promoting
improved planning of forests and adjacent landscapes,
long-term conservation of protected forest areas, and
sustainable management of community forests and other
wooded landscapes. The project will finance a variety of
planning, capacity building, and on-the-ground
interventions to promote the conservation and sustainable
use of Liberian forests. The project will support
sustainable forest management and environmentally
compatible agricultural activities that are intended to
reduce the ongoing pressures for deforestation and forest
degradation. It will not finance any large-scale civil works
(such as roads) that could be environmentally
problematic.
From a social standpoint, the project is intended to benefit
forest-based communities by strengthening their capacity
to manage designated Community Forests, promoting
improved benefits-sharing from different types of forest-
based activities, and supporting the development of more
sustainable forest-based livelihoods.
This will be a nationwide project, with site-specific
investments that will be selected during project
implementation. Accordingly, an Environmental and
Page 6 of 13


﻿Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been
prepared and will be publicly disclosed before project
appraisal (in-country at publicly accessible locations and
through the Bank's InfoShop). There is also a Strategic
Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) of
Liberia's forested areas under preparation, with
completion expected no later than Year 1 of project
implementation. The SESA is expected to provide
detailed information that will facilitate land use planning
and other project-supported activities. Project
implementation will also include the establishment of
safeguards information systems, which will monitor
compliance with the World Bank Safeguard Policies,
among other criteria.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes          The project will affect natural habitats-native forests and
4.04                                  associated ecosystems-albeit in a positive manner. It is
designed to reduce ongoing patterns of loss and
degradation of natural habitats, notably forests. The
project's site-specific support for community forestry and
smallholder agriculture includes measures to avoid
promoting any further deforestation or forest degradation.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes          The project is intended to bring about positive changes in
the protection, management, and sustainable utilization of
Liberian forests. Community forestry activities will
adhere to the principles of sustainable forest management
specified in OP 4.36 (Para. 10).
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes           The final ESMF for LFSP will include a Pest
Management Plan (PMP) that closely resembles the PMP
for the ongoing Liberia Smallholder Tree Crop
Revitalization Support Project, since Component 2.4 of
LFSP will support many of the same activities. The PMP
for LFSP will also address the potential for limited pest
management activities in order to protect forest tree
nurseries under the community forestry Component 2.3.
The PMP strongly emphasizes integrated pest
management but recognizes that some pesticides are
likely to be used in the project, particularly to control
fungal and insect infestations of cocoa and coffee.
Physical Cultural        Yes          Liberians living around forested areas recognize various
Resources OP/BP 4.11                  physical cultural resources, including sacred forest areas
as well as individual sacred trees and bushes. The ESMF
provides criteria and procedures to ensure the appropriate
treatment of physical cultural resources; this includes
Chance Finds Procedures for (generally small-scale) civil
works contracts.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   No           Although the term "indigenous peoples" can have various
Page 7 of 13


﻿BP 4.10                              meanings in the Liberian context, the World Bank does
not consider any of Liberia's ethnic groups or rural
communities to meet the specific criteria of OP/BP 4.10.
Thus, the LFSP does not make separate provisions for any
Liberian communities based on ethnic background or
origin. Accordingly, all Liberians are to be treated equally
under the LFSP with respect to their ethnic background.
 Involuntary Resettlement Yes       OP 4.12 applies mainly to certain activities under
OP/BP 4.12                           Component 2.
Expansion of Liberia's protected areas network under
Component 2.2 is likely to involve some new restrictions
of access to natural resources (such as wood or bush-meat
harvest) in specific areas. In accordance with OP 4.12, a
Process Framework (PF) has been prepared to avoid or
minimize any adverse impacts upon local livelihoods and
to support the development of alternative livelihoods as
needed, on the lands already available to the affected
households or communities. The project will support the
preparation and implementation of follow-up action plans
to provide livelihoods support where needed, following
the criteria and procedures specified in the PF.
It will not be necessary to relocate villages or households
in order to establish new protected areas. The creation of
new protected areas would deal with established, pre-
existing human settlements through boundary adjustments
and internal park zoning, rather than by requiring their
relocation. This was also the approach used in the
previous World Bank-supported EXPAN Project in
Liberia.
Component 2.1 will support participatory land use
planning and zoning processes at the national and local
levels, aimed at improving natural resource management
and reducing carbon emissions attributable to
deforestation and forest degradation. This land use
planning is expected to improve decision-making with
respect to public investments and decisions concerning
future land use concessions and regulations. However,
this land use planning process is not intended to relocate
any existing villages, households, or businesses; nor does
it seek to prohibit or curtail ongoing agricultural or other
economic activities (outside of protected areas).
All project-supported civil works (such as construction of
office space, staff accommodations, and ranger posts) will
Page 8 of 13


﻿be on government, public, or voluntarily donated
community lands. This will be verified through the
environmental and social screening mechanism specified
in the ESMF, before any civil works commence.
Safety of Dams OP/BP     No           There are no dams involved in the project.
4.37
Projects on International  No         The project would not take water from, or otherwise
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                  affect, international waterways.
Projects in Disputed     No           There are no disputed areas involved in the project as
Areas OP/BP 7.60                      defined in OP 7.60.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is designed to reduce deforestation and forest degradation and to increase benefits-
sharing from forest resources, without generating significant adverse environmental or social
impacts. The main safeguards-related issues associated with the project's site-specific investments
include (i) the need to ensure that community forestry activities are sustainable from an
environmental (including silvicultural) standpoint and consistent with the requirements of the
World Bank's Forests Policy (OP 4.36, Para. 10); (ii) ensuring that support for improving
smallholder agriculture provides an alternative to further deforestation, rather than promoting any
additional forest clearing; and (iii) providing appropriate livelihoods-related support to
communities whose access to natural resources within protected areas might be restricted as a
result of project activities. The measures for addressing these impacts are specified in the ESMF
and Process Framework, which have been prepared in a highly participatory manner. In addition,
all civil works will be screened for environmental and social risks and, if needed, follow-up
O
)           safeguards instruments will be prepared and implemented before any works commence. Project
design is also benefiting from the safeguards-related due diligence taking place under existing
REDD+ preparation activities, including the ongoing Strategic Environmental and Social
Assessment (SESA) study.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The project's long-term environmental and social impacts are expected to be highly positive
overall, with reduced deforestation and forest degradation and increased benefits-sharing from
forest resources.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Project design has included the selection of alternatives that serve to minimize any adverse
environmental or social impacts. For example, the project will support improved smallholder
agriculture and agro-forestry systems that provide a viable alternative to more extensive forest
clearing, while declining to support out-grower schemes involving extensive monocultures of oil
palm, rubber, or other crops. Also, the resettlement of villages and households will be avoided in
the course of establishing new protected areas through careful boundary delineation and internal
park zoning.
Page 9 of 13


﻿4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The ESMF and PF describe the environmental and social risks associated with the project, along
with recommended mitigation measures. These safeguards instruments describe the criteria and
procedures that the project should follow to help ensure compliance with the World Bank's, as
well as national, environmental and social standards. The ESMF indicates the environmental and
social screening, formal environmental approval, and permitting requirements for project-
supported investments, particularly in community forestry and smallholder agriculture. It also
identifies the institutional roles and responsibilities, capacity building, and budget requirements to
effectively implement these measures.
FDA will be the main implementer of this project, in collaboration with other agencies including
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Land Commission (LC), and Ministry of
Agriculture. The EPA will have the lead role in verifying the project's compliance with World
Bank and Liberian environmental requirements, including through the Safeguards Information
System (SIS) under Component 3.2. The project will support one or more (as needed)
environmental and social safeguards specialist(s) to oversee safeguards compliance, including
ensuring that (i) Community Forest Management Plans adhere to the sustainability principles
specified in the World Bank's Forests Policy (OP 4.36, Para. 10); (ii) smallholder agriculture
support does not involve increased deforestation, respects land titles and customary boundaries,
and follows environmentally sound pest management and agronomic practices; (iii) timely
livelihoods support will be provided when needed to people affected by the restriction of access to
natural resources within project-supported protected areas; and (iv) the project's Safeguards
Information System (SIS) functions effectively as intended.
The project's design emphasizes inclusive participation, tailored livelihoods support, workable
benefits-sharing arrangements, capacity building on conflict resolution, and a robust Grievance
Redress Mechanism.
O
FDA and EPA both have experience in addressing environmental and social safeguards issues
through previous World Bank-supported projects. Nonetheless, the project provides for substantial
safeguards-related capacity-building, including training workshops and the production of guidance
reports and toolkits. A high priority will be safeguards-related training for FDA regional and
*           county officers (including the staff responsible for reviewing and approving Community Forest
Management Plans); EPA Environmental Inspectors to support safeguards implementation; and
non-governmental forestry and agricultural service providers.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
To prepare the ESMF and PF, various stakeholders were consulted. A major meeting was held in
Kakata, Margibi County which brought together over 40 participants from multiple Counties
including Superintendents, traditional leaders, women's groups, and others to discuss the LFSP and
the environmental and social implications of the project. The project also benefits from extensive
SESA meetings with communities in the Counties hosting the protected areas. Under the REDD+
readiness process, a robust stakeholder mapping was conducted, with participatory structures
developed at both the local and national levels. A national-level REDD+ technical working group
exists, comprising Government agencies, local and international CSOs, the private sector,
traditional leaders, and other interest groups. The REDD+ Technical Working Group was
consulted during the preparation of the ESMF and Process Framework.
Page 10 of 13


﻿One of the specific lessons gathered during project design is the need for continued and ongoing
consultation and community engagement which should go beyond awareness raising. The LFSP
will include a stakeholder engagement plan and will build on and complement the community
O
engagement process promoted by other projects, including the REDD+ readiness process
supported by the FCPF.
Project implementation will provide periodic opportunities for citizen engagement to provide
feedback on project effectiveness and outcomes.
The ESMF, PF, and any follow-up safeguards documents prepared during implementation will be
made available to project-affected groups, local NGOs, and the public at large as required by the
laws of Liberia and World Bank safeguard policies.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              26-Jan-2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                           09-Feb-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Liberia                                                  26-Jan-2016
Comments: It was disclosed during the forest definition workshop in Voinjama, Lofa country, in
Liberia.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              16-Nov-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           09-Feb-2016
Q)        "In country" Disclosure
Liberia                                                  26-Jan-2016
O
Comments: It was disclosed during the forest definition workshop in Voinjama, Lofa country, in
Liberia.
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                              16-Nov-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           05-Feb-2016
"In country" Disclosure
Liberia                                                  26-Jan-2016
Comments: It was disclosed during the forest definition workshop in Voinjama, Lofa country, in
Liberia.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Page 11 of 13


﻿C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]   NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]   NA [ X]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Is a separate PMP required?                             Yes[   ] No[X]       NA [   ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?           Yes [  ] No [X]     TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [ X] No [ ] TBD [ ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
800 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues  Yes[X] No[  ]  NA[  ]
and constraints been carried out?
Page 12 of 13


﻿Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes[X]   No[       NA
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes[   No[X]     NA
does it include provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Paola Agostini,Neeta Hooda
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)             Date: 10-Feb-2016
O
Practice Manager/      Name: Magda Lovei (PMGR)                   Date: 10-Feb-2016
Manager:
Page 13 of 13


