                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA19940
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Dec-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Dec-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                             Project ID:    P154623
                            Project Name:      China: Gansu Technical and Vocational Education and Training Project
                                               (P154623)
                            Task Team          Liping Xiao
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       27-Dec-2016                 Estimated     03-Jul-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GED02                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       144.52           Total Bank Financing:    120.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   24.52
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     120.00
                              Total                                                                                     144.52
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to improve the quality and relevance of Project schools in
                           Gansu and strengthen the school andindustry linkage.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project will support the reform of the TVET sector in Gansu province which is in line with
                           provincial and national policies like 2016-2020 development plans, the Medium to Long-term
                           Education and Talent Development Plans (2010-2020), and the new Skills Development Policy.


                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         These plans give priority to workforce development in China➢❨ s Western region, provide more
                         support to poor regions, enhance capacity for provision of a skilled workforce, and encourage
                         innovations in governance. The project is consistent with Outcome 2.2 of Strategic Theme Two
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ➢❨ Promoting More Inclusive Development➢❨ of the World Bank Group➢❨ s China CPS for
                         FY2013-16 which was approved by the Board on November 6, 2012. The project will also contribute
                         to the achievement of the twin goals of reducing poverty and boosting shared prosperity. By
                         developing model schools serving a primarily rural population, the project will improve
                         employability of the poor by delivering pertinent and high-quality skills training. Both China➢❨ s
                         and international experience show that better education is instrumental for poverty reduction, and a
                         skilled workforce is vital to economic growth and productivity increases.

                         The proposed project design builds on international experience of developing demand-driven TVET
                         systems, and also on the World Bank➢❨ s knowledge and experience working in China and
                         elsewhere both within the education sector and specifically in the TVET sub-sector. The proposed
                         project follows a similar conceptual framework and design as the TVET Projects in other provinces.
                         In addition to component 2 on school level reform, the project highlighted the system level reform at
                         the provincial level.

                         The project will have three main components: (i) strengthen the demand-driven TVET system; (ii)
                         strengthen TVET delivery through comprehensive school reforms; and (iii) project management and
                         monitoring and evaluation. TVET governance will be enhanced and shifted to demand-driven
                         through piloted Skills Council, coordination, and policy making. School level reforms will improve
                         the quality, relevance of TVET provision in selected project schools through a set of innovations
                         centering around school-industry linkage and competence-based teaching and learning. Project
                         management will be improved through capacity building, knowledge sharing and monitoring and
                         evaluation.

                         This project will be implemented by the Provincial Management Office (PMO) situated in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Management Committee of TVET Park under the Gansu Department of Education (GDoE). The
                         project location and schools were chosen by the GDoE to pilot a set of school-based reforms for
                         skills development. Two of the largest project schools have been recently merged from smaller
                         schools and the newly consolidated campuses are located in the TVET Park in the Lanzhou New
                         District (LND) and being able to take advantage of the abundant employment opportunities offered
                         by the industrial parks in the LND. Gansu Senior Technical School of Mechanics is located at
                         Tianshui, offering technical training in mechanics, electronic and engineering as a provincial key
                         TVET college. Lanzhou University of Arts and Science is located at Lanzhou, consisting of Gansu
                         Art School, TVET colleges and undergraduate school. The selected schools serve the key pillars of
                         local economy including energy, chemical engineering, mechanics, tourism and other modern
                         services.

                         The total investment cost of the project will be US$144.52 million, of which US$120 million is
                         financed through the World Bank loan while US$24.52 million is financed by project schools and
                         GDoE. The project will cover a period of five years.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project schools located in the Lanzhou and Tianshui City in Gansu Province. The project will
                         include four project schools, namely: Gansu Vocational College of Energy & Chemical Industry,
                         Gansu Finance & Trade Vocational College, Lanzhou University of Arts and Science, and Gansu


                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                         Senior Technical School of Mechanics. Lanzhou belongs to the temperate continental climate, the
                         annual average temperature of 10.3 ➢❬❫, the average annual sunshine hours is 2446 hours, frost-free
                         period of 180 days, the average annual rainfall of 327 mm, mainly concentrated in the June to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         September. For Tianshui City, the average annual rainfall of 574 mm, the average annual sunshine
                         hours are 2100 hours. It has mild climate and four distinct seasons.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Yiren Feng (GEN2A)
                         6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental               Yes           The proposed project will finance some new school
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     buildings. The civil works of each school basically
                                                                   comprise of buildings of 5 or 6 stories, with the
                                                                   construction areas ranges from 6100m2 to 58013m2
                                                                   respectively in each school. Such buildings will be located
                                                                   on existing land on campus and no land acquisition or
                                                                   resettlement is involved. The project will have very
                                                                   limited adverse impacts during the construction and
                                                                   operation phase. The negative environmental impacts
                                                                   include ambient air, water, noise, solid wastes, and safety
                                                                   of the public and workers. These negative impacts will be
                                                                   limited, short-term, temporary and site-specific. During
                                                                   the operational stage, main environmental impacts are
                                                                   expected from domestic waste management. The project
                                                                   is classified as Category B due to the potential impacts
                                                                   that are small scale and limited to the site. An
                                                                   Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) was
                                                                   prepared for the civil works of the four schools to cover
                                                                   the environmental management activities of the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP      No            The civil works of the project are within the existing
                         4.04                                      campuses; sites visit confirmed that the project will not
                                                                   affect any natural habitats or critical natural habitats as
                                                                   defined under the policy.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36          No            Project activities will not affect forest areas; it will not
                                                                   involve any logging or planting activities in forest areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No                The project will not procure pesticides or increase use of
                                                                   pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural           No            The civil works of the project are all within the existing
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11                      campuses, the EA team conducted the survey and
                                                                   confirmed there are no physical cultural resources as
                                                                   defined by the OP4.11. However, the chance finding
                                                                   procedure was included in the ESMP, and the relevant
                                                                   clauses will be included in all construction contracts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/      No            Based on social screening conducted during social
                         BP 4.10                                   assessment, the project will not trigger OP4.10 since all
                                                                   four project schools (with three in Lanzhou City, and one
                                                                   in Tianshui City), are not located in the areas with
                                                                   concentrated ethnic minorities, and the minority students


                                                                     Page 3 of 7
                                                                       in four project schools account for less than 4% of student
                                                                       population.
                            Involuntary Resettlement No                According to screening conducted among all four project
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.12                                 schools, the proposed infrastructure improvement
                                                                       activities will be carried out within the existing campus of
                                                                       project schools with no new land acquisition. Among
                                                                       them, two are located in TVET Park in Lanzhou New
                                                                       District, one is urban area of Tianshui City, and one in
                                                                       urban area of Lanzhou City.
                                                                       For two schools located in new TVET Park, due diligence
                                                                       review was conducted by the third party, and found that
                                                                       land acquisition for two new schools had been occurred
                                                                       before the Bank➢❨ s Identification Mission and in
                                                                       compliance with national laws and local regulations and
                                                                       consistent with the objectives of OP 4.12.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation
                            4.37                                       of any dams as defined under this policy.
                            Projects on International   No             The project is not located in any international waterways
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       as defined under the policy.
                            Projects in Disputed        No             The project is not located in any known disputed areas as
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                           defined under the policy.
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              OP4.01 Environmental Assessment.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The proposed project will finance the construction of new school buildings for additional training
                              space and skills training. All planned civil works will be built on existing land within the campus
                              of the four project schools. The project is classified as Category B by considering the type,
                              location, sensitivity, and scale of the proposed project, and the potential environmental and social
                              impacts. The project will have very limited adverse impacts during the construction and operation
                              phase. The negative environmental impacts include ambient air, water, noise, solid wastes, and
                              safety of the public and workers. These negative impacts will be limited, short-term, temporary
                              and site-specific. During the operational stage, main environmental impacts are expected from
                              domestic waste management.

                              The Indigenous People Policy (OP4.10) is not triggered, since based on social screening conducted
                              during social assessment, all four project schools (with three in Lanzhou City, and one in Tianshui
                              City), are not located in the areas with concentrated ethnic minorities, and the minority students in
                              four project schools account for less than 4 percent of student population.

                              The Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP4.12) is not triggered, since according to screening
                              conducted among all four project schools, the proposed infrastructure improvement activities will
                              be carried out within the existing campus of project schools with no new land acquisition. Among
                              them, two are located in TVET Park in Lanzhou New District, one is urban area of Tianshui City,
                              and one in urban area of Lanzhou City. For two schools located in new TVET Park, since land


                                                                         Page 4 of 7
                           acquisition was completed recently prior to the Bank involvement, due diligence review was
                           conducted by the third party, and found that land acquisition for two new schools had been
                           occurred before the Bank➢❨ s Identification Mission and in compliance with national laws and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           local regulations and consistent with the objectives of OP 4.12 with no problems reported.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           This project will play a significant role in improving the quality and relevance of Gansu vocational
                           education, which will have great benefits for the project schools, teachers and students, and also
                           for the industries in Gansu. After the implementation of the project, schools➢❨ infrastructure will
                           be significantly improved; the capacity of teaching and learning and school management will be
                           improved; students➢❨ skills and employability will be increased. As results, the Gansu TVET
                           system will be improved and local economy and industry will be promoted by higher skilled
                           workforce. As the project serves a primarily rural population (78 percent of students coming from
                           rural areas and 74% from poor households), the project will contribute to poverty reduction in
                           Gansu by increased employment and higher income of graduates.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The ESMP was selected as the environmental instrument due to the nature of the project. The
                           ESMP was prepared based on national norms, practice proven in other World Bank financed
                           projects and the practice recommended in Environmental Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines. It
                           specifies each aspect of environmental management during the whole project cycle, including but
                           not limited to, site preparation, construction dust management, air pollution control, noise impact
                           control, water pollution control, waste management, and public and workers➢❨ health and safety.
                           The environmental sensitive sites of each project school have been identified and assessed with the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           specific mitigation measures incorporated into the project design, construction and operation phase
                           respectively, especially the route of the transportation vehicles in each project school has been
                           carefully designed to avoid or minimize the potential impacts on the public within the schools. It
                           also includes the institutional arrangement, environmental monitoring plan, environmental
                           protection investment cost estimate, the training and capacity building, reporting and supervision
                           arrangements for the implementation phase of the project. Proper implementation of the mitigation
                           measures required by the project will minimize the impacts to an acceptable level, or eliminate
                           them entirely. The ESMP was reviewed by the World Bank safeguards team and found to be
                           satisfactory. The ESMP will be included in the bidding documents and the corresponding
                           contracts.

                           The World Bank has supported several projects in Gansu Province; this is the first investment
                           project in education and vocational training. The project will be managed by the Provincial Project
                           Management Office (PMO) established under Gansu Department of Education. The Bank
                           assessment indicates that the borrower has reasonable capacity to conduct construction and project
                           implementation consistent with the ESMP. The PMO is staffed with 6 fulltime staff; one staff will
                           be responsible for safeguard-related work. The Bank➢❨ s safeguards specialists will provide
                           further training on safeguards during the project implementation phase.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                           During the project preparation, the project schools, PMO, environmental and social consultants
                           carried out public consultation and information disclosure through posters, questionnaire survey,
                           interviews and public meetings in project cities. The key stakeholdersinclude staffs and students of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the schools, communities nearby, and local relevant government agencies. Public opinions were
                           incorporated into the project design and safeguard reports including ESMP, SA and DDR
                           properly. Prior to project appraisal, the ESMP was disclosed locally on August 24, 2016 and at the
                           World Bank Infoshop on November 1, 2016; and both SA and DDR were also disclosed locally on
                           October 21, 2016 and at the World Bank Infoshop on November 28, 2016.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      25-Nov-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   28-Nov-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            21-Oct-2016
                           Comments: The ESMP was disclosed locally on August 24, 2016. The DDR and SA were
                                         disclosed locally on October 21, 2016.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated    Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?




                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Liping Xiao
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Josefo Tuyor (SA)                            Date: 14-Dec-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Harry Anthony Patrinos (PMGR)               Date: 14-Dec-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 7 of 7
