                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSR16687
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Mar-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Brazil                                       Project ID:           P121495
                            Project Name:       Tocantins Integrated Sustainable Regional Development (P121495)
                            Task Team           Satoshi Ogita
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           12-Jan-2012                                  Estimated   26-Jul-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GTI04                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:             Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (80%), Sub-national government
                                                administration (15%), Public administration- Education (3%), Public
                                                administration- Transportation (1%), General transportation sector (1%)
                            Theme:              Rural services and infrastructure (81%), Environmental policies and institutions
                                                (9%), Other public sector governance (7%), Other ru ral development (3%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                         No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       375.00           Total Bank Financing:                                       300.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                              75.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                300.00
                              Total                                                                                                375.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The objective of the Project is to foster improved effectiveness of road transport and enhanced


                                                                                 Page 1 of 16
                         efficiency of selected public services, in support of the Borrower’s integrated and territorially
                         balanced development agenda.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The objective of the Project is to foster improved effectiveness of road transport and enhanced
                         efficiency of selected public services, in support of the Borrower’s integrated and territorially
                         balanced development agenda.
                         3. Project Description
                         The Project, Projeto de Desenvolvimento Regional Integrado Sustentável (PDRIS), will support the
                         State development agenda – through a US$ 300.7 million operation supported by a US$300 million
                         Bank loan - that aims at contributing to improved competitiveness and regional integration, social
                         inclusion and environmental sustainability. The Project consists of the following parts (see also
                         Annex 2 of the PAD):

                         Component 1 – Improving effectiveness of rural transport (Estimated cost US$240.1 million of
                         which US$240 million will be financed by the Bank loan)

                         Provision of support to improve accessibility of the Borrower’s remote populations and, at the same
                         time, foster regional economic integration and support the Borrower's competitiveness and social
                         inclusion agendas, through the carrying out of the following activities:

                         1.1.     Improving transport conditions on the municipal roads (US$44 million). Improvement of
                         accessibility of rural population to employment opportunities, services and resources and markets by
                         the elimination of critical spots on selected municipal feeder roads with the total extension of
                         5,500km through, inter alia, the design, construction and supervision of concrete hydraulic structures
                         (bridges and culverts) of municipal feeder roads, all to ensure year round traffic (the Municipal Road
                         Subprojects).
                         1.2.     Rehabilitating the Borrower’s paved network through performance based contracts (US$160
Public Disclosure Copy




                         million). Improvement of transport conditions on the Borrower's paved roads through the carrying
                         out of: (a) a set of performance based CREMA Contracts on about 1,500 kilometers of selected
                         Borrower-managed paved roads (the State Road Rehabilitation Subprojects I); (b) performance-based
                         CREMA Contracts in selected Borrower-managed paved roads in accordance with criteria acceptable
                         to the Bank (the State Road Rehabilitation Subprojects II); and (c) complementary road works to
                         reduce road accidents on the Borrower's paved roads (the State Road Rehabilitation Subprojects III).
                         1.3.     Improving road and transport safety conditions on Borrower’s unpaved roads (US$29
                         million). Improvement of connectivity and transport safety conditions on the Borrower’s unpaved
                         roads, through, inter alia (i) the elimination of about 20 critical spots on unpaved feeder roads
                         through the design, replacement and supervision of concrete hydraulic structures of selected deficient
                         infrastructures; and (ii) design, surfacing and supervision of approximately 50 km of unpaved road
                         sections to close the network and facilitate access to the national trunk network (the State Road
                         Improvement Subprojects).
                         1.4.     Transport management capacity institutional strengthening (US$7.1 million). Improvement
                         of the Borrower’s capacity in transport planning and management, logistics and safety (all under
                         terms of reference acceptable to the Bank), through the provision of goods, consultants’ services,
                         Non-consulting Services and training for institutional strengthening of DERTINS in the following
                         areas: (i) transportation planning and logistics management, (ii) road safety, and (iii) social and
                         environmental management.



                                                                       Page 2 of 16
                         Component 2 – Enhanced efficiency of public services (Estimated cost US$51.85 million of which
                         US$51.25 million financed by the Bank loan)
                         Provision of support for institutional strengthening, through the provision of goods, works, Training,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Non-consulting and consultants’ services, through the carrying out of the following activities:

                         2.1.      Modernization of the Borrower’s administration. Provision of support to the SEPLAN (US
                         $25.39 million) to improve public services efficiency (all under terms of reference acceptable to the
                         Bank) through, inter alia (i) the introduction of results-based management methodology, (ii) a de-
                         concentration of Borrower’s administrative services to its regions, for purposes of strengthening the
                         municipalities’ management capacities, (iii) the improvement of environmentally and socially
                         sustainable land use planning processes and natural resource management policies; and (iv) the
                         improvement of service delivery to users as well as work conditions for the Borrower’s civil servants
                         by carrying out rehabilitation and/or construction activities of public premises and/or facilities in
                         accordance with the criteria set forth in the Operational Manual.
                         2.2.      Fostered local and regional development. Provision of support to SEAGRO, Ruraltins,
                         SEMARH, and SEDETUR (US$8.06 million), through the carrying out of pilot activities aimed
                         towards the promotion of rural businesses and the creation of opportunities to attract sustainable
                         investments in selected Borrower’s regions (all under terms of reference acceptable to the Bank),
                         which activities consist of, inter alia (i) the promotion of a more efficient agribusiness sector with
                         social and gender inclusiveness, as well as environmental and economic sustainability in the
                         Borrower’s territory, by fostering increased productivity and better access to markets for subsistence
                         production and small and medium producers, and attracting sustainable investments while fostering
                         environment sustainability, (ii) the preparation of a renewable energy policy for the Borrower, and
                         (iii) the development of ecotourism in the Borrower’s territory.
                         2.3.      Improvement of environmental management. Provision of support to SEMARH and
                         Naturatins (US$14.4 million) to improve environmental management (all under terms of reference
                         acceptable to the Bank) through, inter alia (i) the improvement of the Borrower’s environmental
                         licensing system and its monitoring and enforcement activities (excluding any enforcement police-
                         type activity), and its water rights registration system, (ii) (A) the carrying out of studies on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         evaluation of the need for new public policies for the conservation and sustainable use of natural
                         resources and development of biodiversity, and if applicable as determined by the results of said
                         studies, the development of regulatory mechanisms and technical instruments for the conservation
                         and sustainable use of natural resources and development of biodiversity; and (B) the carrying out of
                         pilot activities in support of areas mentioned in (A) herein to be selected in accordance with criteria
                         acceptable to the Bank;, and (iii) (A) the carrying out of studies on the evaluation of the need for new
                         public policies in water management, and if applicable as determined by the results of said studies,
                         the development of regulatory mechanisms and technical instruments for a more sustainable use of
                         water; and (B) the carrying out of pilot activities in support of the area mentioned in (A) herein to be
                         selected in accordance with criteria acceptable to the Bank.
                         2.4.      Improvement of quality, relevance and returns in the education system. Provision of support
                         to SEDUC (US$ 4 million) to improve quality in the Borrower’s education system in a pilot set of
                         selected Borrower’s municipalities with high vulnerability (all under terms of reference acceptable to
                         the Bank), through, inter alia: (i) supporting the selected municipalities in providing quality early
                         child development, (ii) increasing quality of education through identifying strengths and weaknesses
                         in the quality of teaching and providing targeted training to ameliorate weaknesses, and (iii)
                         improving the relevance and returns to schooling through supplementary courses in upper secondary
                         schools and improved education materials.

                         Component 3 – Project Management (Estimated cost US$8 million of which US$8 million financed

                                                                      Page 3 of 16
                         by the Bank loan)
                         Provision of support for Project management in connection with the implementation and supervision
                         of the Project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         For Component 1 – Rural Transport, the project interventions will be located in the 72 municipalities
                         of Western Tocantins, for Sub-Component 1.1; and across the state territory for Sub-Component 1.2
                         and 1.3. Only for the Sub-Component 1.2 – rehabilitation works, the borrower has already identified
                         a set of interventions in seven feeder corridors of the paved State road sections with a total length of
                         1,500 km (R1 and R7, program first phase; and R2 to R6, program second phase). The
                         Environmental and Social Impact Assessment screened all seven corridors identified for
                         rehabilitation and confirmed that as of November 2011, the proposed civil works can proceed
                         without any need to acquire land or displace any physical assets. In addition, none of the identified
                         road sections are located in areas occupied or claimed by indigenous peoples. For subcomponents 1.1
                         and 1.3, the precise location of the investments is not yet known.

                         Sub-Component 1.1 will also operate in up to six indigenous lands located in the western sector of
                         the state. These are likely to include the Terra Indígena Xambioá, Terra Indígena Funil, Terra
                         Indígena Utaria Wyhyna/Iròdu Iràna, Terra Indígena Iñawébohona , Terra Indígena Zerente, and
                         Reserva Indígena Krahó-Kanela. These areas are governed by federal legislation and will require
                         additional permits before civil works can proceed. The national indigenous agency (FUNAI) is
                         assisting with consultations in indigenous areas, such that indigenous peoples will select their own
                         priority road works for implementation.

                         All the proposed interventions are in existing municipal and state roads, no opening of new roads.

                         For Component 2 – Public Services, the project interventions will be in North Extension (three
                         municipalities of Bico do Papagaio region: Colinas, Nova Olinda e Wanderlândia), and also
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Southeast Jalapão and Cantão regions.
                         With an integrated and sustainable regional development focus, the project has statewide relevance
                         addressing improved effectiveness of road transport and enhanced efficiency of selected public
                         services in support of the State of Tocantins’ integrated and territorially balanced development
                         agenda.

                         The Project does not entail any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible negative impacts.
                         It has statewide relevance addressing improved effectiveness of road transport and enhanced
                         efficiency of selected public services in support of an integrated and territorially balanced
                         development of the State of Tocantins. As key benefit, the Project is expected to contribute to
                         increased economic production through increased viability, notably in agriculture, where more land
                         would be used for production, though in relatively limited extension, as a result of improved
                         accessibility, and increased productivity, thanks to lower costs of production. Potential limited direct
                         impacts on land use could be experienced, but most of the proposed investments will take place on
                         roads that pass through existing farming areas that have already been consolidated in the state.
                         Additionally, while the State already has a sound protected area policy framework and monitoring
                         capacity, the environment management of road works under the Project will be supervised by
                         independent consulting companies, following best practices inherited from other Projects transport in
                         Brazil.



                                                                      Page 4 of 16
                         While most direct impacts on environment from the projects are expected to be limited in time and
                         localized near the interventions sites, cumulative impact with potential pressure on environment
                         might result from the regional economic growth expected as an outcome of the Project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Notwithstanding, the Project will encompass a wide environmental institutional strengthening
                         building on the successes of the previous operation expected to breed sustainability in the State
                         economic growth, in areas such as: biodiversity protection, sustainable land use management,
                         environmental monitoring strengthening, sustainable hydrologic resources management.

                         The Project supported cutting edge innovative practices in environment and social management: On
                         the environment, the Project supported the setting up of the State environment policy and regulatory
                         framework in biodiversity protection, land use management, environment monitoring and licensing,
                         and water resource management and initiated the implementation in operational terms of some of
                         those policies. This translated in an impressive number of studies and institutional strengthening
                         activities and allowed the initial development of cutting edge practices such as: ecological corridors,
                         integrated management strategies for water particularly in semi-desert areas, a number of watershed
                         masterplans and orientations for basin com mittees, studies on land cover and fauna and flora, studies
                         for 16 new protected areas, etc.. The Project activities in environment have been further supported by
                         the recent Sustainable Cerrado GEF Initiative (P091827/TF096766). On the social front, the previous
                         Project has fostered empowerment of rural poor populations through original participatory
                         mechanisms both to incentive peoples’ reflection on the municipal development agenda and to
                         concretize initial actions through the execution of works on municipal road accesses following
                         priorities determined by the populations. Those works have concretely improved accessibility to
                         employment opportunities, schools, and services (including social services) for some of the poorest
                         in Tocantins. The Project also supported specific pilot activities to support inclusiveness by, for
                         example, fostering support to particular fragile and remote populations such as Quilombolas,
                         fostering the development of new activities such as ecotourism in remote municipalities with
                         potential, etc. Finally, an impact evaluation has been undertaken in the Project to better assess the
                         Project outcome for the main direct and indirect beneficiaries and, while the evaluation was
                         underway at the time of preparation, initial results showed a positive feedback from the targeted
Public Disclosure Copy




                         populations and overall positive outcome of Project activities. The proposed project intends on
                         capitalizing on such successful experiences.

                         At the regional and local level, experience shows that, while rural road improvements directly
                         contribute to foster local economic growth by improving access to jobs and markets, positive impacts
                         also lay on the social side. Indeed, improved rural transport contributes to improved access to schools
                         and health facilities, which, in turn, contribute to increasing productivity and income of the rural
                         population, with an important impact on reducing poverty and improving well-being. Improvements
                         on the municipal road networks are expected to contribute to increase agricultural and livestock
                         production and productivity in the road’s area of influence.

                         From Component 1, the proposed interventions in the municipal road networks will contribute to
                         improve access to schools and health facilities in several regions of the State. All the proposed
                         interventions are on existing municipal and state roads, with no opening of new roads. There are a
                         number of notable benefits expected from carrying out works on existing roads, with direct actions
                         improving road safety, elimination of dangerous and critical spots, improving traffic conditions. In
                         addition, positive social benefits are expected from investments in the education sector, as well as
                         other technical assistance activities to improve environmental management.

                         While some of the proposed activities will operate in sensitive environmental and social contexts, the

                                                                      Page 5 of 16
                         participatory mechanisms envisioned in the decision process for investments at municipal level might
                         contribute to better address the management of those social and environmental issues. Some studies
                         prepared by the SoT, also supported by the World Bank under the previous project, indicate that the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         improvement of road circulation should not significantly change the spatial pattern of conversion of
                         native vegetation in the state. The proposed investments will take place on road sections that traverse
                         existing farming areas which had already been consolidated in the state, and thus are expected to
                         increase productivity and occupation of lands which are already in use. In parallel, other studies were
                         performed by the SoT, such as the EEZ - Ecological-Economic Zoning and by the implementation of
                         Management Plans for Protected Areas. The demarcation of protected areas has proven to be an
                         effective tool in curbing deforestation. Some studies have also demonstrated that deforestation was
                         significantly lowered inside Conservation Units (UCs) than outside those areas, reinforcing the clear
                         effect that protected areas have for preventing deforestation. Still, existing (or in preparation)
                         environmental management plans for conservations units in Tocantins indicate the need for
                         strengthening of state institutions, especially NATURATINS, to promote continuous and more
                         efficiently actions.

                         The Borrower has addressed safeguard policy issues by conducting an Environmental and Social
                         Impact Assessment (ESIA). An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was
                         also prepared to outline the set of guidelines, procedures and criteria to be used for screening
                         activities and ensure that such activities will not cause any potential large scale, significant and/or
                         irreversible negative environmental and social impacts. Specific Environmental Management Plans
                         (EMP) for works identified at appraisal have been prepared accordingly to the ESMF.

                         In order to effectively minimize or mitigate the above potential impacts, the ESIA has developed
                         screening procedures, mandatory Action Plans and institutional strengthening measures. The ESIA
                         identified for each proposed Component and Sub-Component the type of interventions expected,
                         with a description of technical issues (design, project, dimension and needs), as well as, for each one,
                         an environmental screening. Four different types of interventions have been identified, three for
                         Component 1: (i) elimination of critical spots on unpaved roads, at the local and state level; (ii)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         rehabilitation works (CREMA); (iii) surfacing unpaved state roads; and one for Component 2; (iv)
                         fostered local and regional development.

                         Gender: positive impact is expected for specific activities as detailed in the Project description.
                         Impacts on gender will be evaluated through surveys, as mentioned in Monitoring and Evaluation
                         section of the PAD.

                         The most commonly expected negative impacts would arise from the construction phase under
                         Component 1, which includes works interventions mostly within the rights of way of existing roads,
                         with no opening of new roads. Impacts from these interventions are expected to be limited, transitory
                         and of short duration. In this sense, the social and environmental risks associated with this project are
                         limited due to the nature of the proposed interventions, which will mostly take place within the
                         existing rights-of-way of the road and in sites associated with road projects.

                         The ESMF specifies guidelines and procedures to be followed by the construction contractors,
                         covering aspects such as location of construction camps, clearance of vegetation, noise, traffic
                         control, safety signaling, disposal of construction debris and waste material to be incorporated in the
                         bidding documents for civil works, among others. Compliance with the practices outlined in the
                         Project Operational Manual will be a contractual obligation of the contractors.



                                                                       Page 6 of 16
                           To better address issues that arise from the ESIA, the Borrower prepared a set of mandatory
                           Implementation Manuals to be applied for all four types of interventions: Works Environmental
                           Manual (Annex 5 of the ESIA); Social Communication Plan (Annex 6 of the ESIA), Environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Education and Social Responsibility Plan (Annex 7 of the ESIA), and also a Monitoring and
                           Supervision Plan (Annex 9 of the ESIA). The ESIA report comprises three main parts: (i) Part A: an
                           Environmental and Social Assessment, (ii) Part B: an Environmental Management Plan; and, (iii)
                           Part C: an Institutional Strengthening Program to support demands coming from the project. Finally,
                           the Borrower incorporated in the EISA a Right of Way management framework (Annex 8 of the
                           ESIA). This framework will result in specific programs aimed at improving the management of the
                           use of the state’s roads’ right of way. The ESIA (final draft) was submitted to the Bank (December
                           14, 2011), and has been disseminated in the Infoshop and on the Borrower’s web site (www.seinfra.
                           to.gov.br) (January 17, 2012).
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Marcio Cerqueira Batitucci (GEN04)
                           Soraya Simao Melgaco (GSURR)

                            6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental               Yes
                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      Yes
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          Yes
                            Pest Management OP 4.09     Yes
                            Physical Cultural           Yes
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      Yes
Public Disclosure Copy




                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    Yes
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        Yes
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The Project does not entail any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible negative
                              impacts. It has statewide relevance addressing improved effectiveness of road transport and
                              enhanced efficiency of selected public services in support of an integrated and territorially
                              balanced development of the State of Tocantins. As key benefit, the Project is expected to


                                                                         Page 7 of 16
                         contribute to increased economic production through increased viability, notably in agriculture,
                         where more land would be used for production, though in relatively limited extension, as a result
                         of improved accessibility, and increased productivity, thanks to lower costs of production.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Potential limited direct impacts on land use could be experienced, but most of the proposed
                         investments will take place on roads that pass through existing farming areas that have already
                         been consolidated in the state. Additionally, while the State already has a sound protected area
                         policy framework and monitoring capacity, the environment management of road works under the
                         Project will be supervised by independent consulting companies, following best practices inherited
                         from other Projects transport in Brazil.

                         While most direct impacts on environment from the projects are expected to be limited in time and
                         localized near the interventions sites, cumulative impact with potential pressure on environment
                         might result from the regional economic growth expected as an outcome of the Project.
                         Notwithstanding, the Project will encompass a wide environmental institutional strengthening
                         building on the successes of the previous operation expected to breed sustainability in the State
                         economic growth, in areas such as: biodiversity protection, sustainable land use management,
                         environmental monitoring strengthening, sustainable hydrologic resources management.

                         While some of the proposed activities will operate in sensitive environmental and social contexts,
                         the participatory mechanisms envisioned in the decision process for investments at municipal level
                         might contribute to better address the management of those social and environmental issues. Some
                         studies prepared by the SoT, also supported by the World Bank under the previous project,
                         indicate that the improvement of road circulation should not significantly change the spatial
                         pattern of conversion of native vegetation in the state. The proposed investments will take place on
                         road sections that traverse existing farming areas which had already been consolidated in the state,
                         and thus are expected to increase productivity and occupation of lands which are already in use. In
                         parallel, other studies were performed by the SoT, such as the EEZ - Ecological-Economic Zoning
                         and by the implementation of Management Plans for Protected Areas. The demarcation of
                         protected areas has proven to be an effective tool in curbing deforestation. Some studies have also
Public Disclosure Copy




                         demonstrated that deforestation was significantly lowered inside Conservation Units (UCs) than
                         outside those areas, reinforcing the clear effect that protected areas have for preventing
                         deforestation. Still, existing (or in preparation) environmental management plans for conservations
                         units in Tocantins indicate the need for strengthening of state institutions, especially
                         NATURATINS, to promote continuous and more efficiently actions.

                         In light of these recognized opportunities and risks, an integrated Environmental and Social
                         Impact Assessment (ESIA) was conducted and an Environmental and Social Management
                         Framework (ESMF) has been prepared. The ESIA and ESMF provide both a thorough assessment
                         of the Project’s social and environmental opportunities and challenges and detailed mitigation
                         measures to be undertaken in the event that any particular risks cannot be avoided. The ESIA
                         included screening of the seven feeder corridors of the paved state road sections (total of 1,500
                         km) identified for rehabilitation through subcomponent 1.2 during the first year of project
                         implementation. As all proposed civil works under subcomponent 1.2 will take place within the
                         existing roadway or road right of way, these will proceed without any need to acquire land or
                         displace any physical assets. In addition, none of these specific road sections identified for
                         rehabilitation are located in areas occupied or claimed by indigenous peoples.

                         In order to effectively minimize or mitigate these potential impacts, the ESIA and ESMF have
                         developed screening procedures, mandatory Action Plans and institutional strengthening measures.

                                                                   Page 8 of 16
                         The ESIA/ESMF identified for each proposed Component and Sub-Component the type of
                         interventions expected, with a description of technical issues (design, project, dimension and
                         needs), as well as, for each one, an environmental screening. Four different types of interventions
Public Disclosure Copy




                         have been identified, three for Component 1: (i) elimination of critical spots on unpaved roads, at
                         the local and state level; (ii) rehabilitation works (CREMA); (iii) surfacing unpaved state roads;
                         and one for Component 2; (iv) fostered local and regional development.

                         The most commonly expected negative impacts would arise from the construction phase under
                         Component 1, which includes works interventions mostly within rights of way of existing roads,
                         although these impacts are expected to be small, transitory and of short duration. In this sense, the
                         social and environmental risks associated with this project are limited due to the nature of the
                         proposed interventions, which will mostly take place within the existing rights-of-way of the road
                         and in sites associated with road projects.

                         The ESMF specifies guidelines and procedures to be followed by the construction contractors,
                         covering aspects such as location of construction camps, clearance of vegetation, noise, traffic
                         control, safety signaling, disposal of construction debris and waste material to be incorporated in
                         the bidding documents for civil works, among others. Compliance with the practices outlined in
                         the Project Operational Manual will be a contractual obligation of the contractors.

                         To better address issues that arise from the ESIA, the Borrower prepared a set of mandatory
                         Implementation Manuals to be applied for all four types of interventions: Works Environmental
                         Manual (Annex 5 of the ESIA); Social Communication Plan (Annex 6 of the ESIA),
                         Environmental Education and Social Responsibility Plan (Annex 7 of the ESIA), and also a
                         Monitoring and Supervision Plan (Annex 9 of the ESIA). The ESIA report comprises three main
                         parts: (i) Part A: an Environmental and Social Assessment, (ii) Part B: an Environmental
                         Management Plan; and, (iii) Part C: an Institutional Strengthening Program to support demands
                         coming from the project. Finally, the Borrower incorporated in the EISA a Right of Way
                         management framework (Annex 8 of the ESIA). This framework will result in specific programs
Public Disclosure Copy




                         aimed at improving the management of the use of the state’s roads’ right of way. The ESIA (final
                         draft) was submitted to the Bank (December 14, 2011), and has been disseminated in the Infoshop
                         and on the Borrower’s web site (www.seinfra.to.gov.br) (January 17, 2012).

                         Current implementation status of safeguard instruments and measures

                         The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and the Environmental and Social
                         Management Framework (ESMF), which were prepared during the preparation of the Project,
                         provided: (i) a comprehensive environmental management plan, and (ii) a set of mandatory
                         implementation manuals to be applied to all types of interventions. These plan and manuals
                         include environmental control measures for each activity and serve as the main instruments to
                         address environmental issues.

                         While no large-scale, significant and/or irreversible negative social and environmental impact was
                         observed during supervision missions, some minor issues have been identified at some specific
                         locations.

                         In the environmental aspect, some sites of constructions of new bridges and culverts on municipal
                         feeder roads had local impacts on streams and riparian vegetation. In addition, rehabilitation of
                         state roads caused similar impacts although these were limited within right of way. The

                                                                    Page 9 of 16
                          environmental management plan and measures identified by the Borrowers and the team aims at
                          protecting streams, rivers and riparian vegetation and preventing slopes from erosions during the
                          rainy season. The remedy works done by the contractors are satisfactory.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          In the social aspect, some potential risk of road safety to local population is identified at several
                          locations where road sections to be rehabilitated by the Project pass through villages. The state
                          road agency is currently preparing countermeasures to mitigate road accident risk. In addition, the
                          road agency will improve the framework of right of way management to ensure road safety for
                          local communities along road sections under the Project. The proposed restructuring will add
                          specific activities on physical road safety improvement to facilitate the countermeasures.
                          Regarding the feeder road improvements in the indigenous areas, the SEPLAN completed
                          participatory consultations and prepared the indigenous peoples plans in the two areas out of three
                          under the Project.

                          The institutional change of the SoT in 2015 does not affect the implementation of the safeguard
                          instruments and plans since these were practically changes only in names of several beneficiary
                          agencies. The PIU in SEPLAN remains responsible for ensuring that all Bank safeguards triggered
                          by the Project and providing support to the beneficiary agencies on the preparation of specific
                          social assessments, public consultations and preparation of resettlement / indigenous peoples
                          plans, whenever they may be required. Accordingly, no change in the capacity of the
                          implementing agencies has been observed during project implementation.

                           Considering the above, the team confirmed that the safeguard category remains “B - Partial
                           Assessment” and the original safeguard instruments are still valid. No revision is necessary to
                           enhance management of environmental risks and impacts provided close monitoring by the team
                           continues through frequent supervisions. In particular, the team ensures that the road agency
                           conducts adequate environmental and social supervisions on road works so that the borrower and
                           the team have enough information to guarantee satisfactory safeguard compliances.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             The Project does not entail any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible negative
                           impacts. It has statewide relevance addressing improved effectiveness of road transport and
                           enhanced efficiency of selected public services in support of an integrated and territorially
                           balanced development of the State of Tocantins. As key benefit, the Project is expected to
                           contribute to increased economic production through increased viability, notably in agriculture,
                           where more land would be used for production, though in relatively limited extension, as a result
                           of improved accessibility and increased productivity, thanks to lower costs of production. Potential
                           limited direct impacts on land use could be experienced, but most of the proposed investments will
                           take place on roads that pass through existing farming areas that have already been consolidated in
                           the state. Additionally, while the State already has a sound protected area policy framework and
                           monitoring capacity, the environment management of road works under the Project will be
                           supervised by independent consulting companies, following best practices inherited from other
                           Projects transport in Brazil.

                          While most direct impacts on environment from the projects are expected to be limited in time and
                          localized near the interventions sites, cumulative impact with potential pressure on environment
                          might result from the regional economic growth expected as an outcome of the Project.
                          Notwithstanding, the Project will encompass a wide environmental institutional strengthening


                                                                    Page 10 of 16
                          building on the successes of the previous operation expected to breed sustainability in the State
                          economic growth, in areas such as: biodiversity protection, sustainable land use management,
                          environmental monitoring strengthening, sustainable hydrologic resources management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Mitigation measures will be fostered under the Project activities aiming at mainstreaming
                           environmental management in the State and improving land use management. Moreover, positive
                           impacts are expected to result from improvements in drainage slopes, retaining walls and other
                           structures related to the works in regard to the prevention of erosive processes and sediment
                           carriage to water resources. Road works in areas located near indigenous lands may lead to
                           increased economic activities that could, over the long term, generate some cumulative social and
                           environmental impacts. These will be minimized, mitigated and/or compensated through the
                           screening, consultation, and various risk management programs included in the ESMF.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            Not applicable as no significant adverse impacts are foreseen for the project as designed.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            The specific measures taken by the Borrower to address each of the safeguard issues are lengthily
                           detailed in the above table 6.

                          The Borrower’s institutional capacity for safeguard issues management is considered adequate.
                          The Bank team assessed the capacity of the State, including the implementing agency and
                          partners. Tocantins has benefited from continued Bank support in the environmental area since the
                          early 1990's. Initial support aimed at establishing and strengthening the State's capacity for natural
                          resources and environmental management capacity (under the Natural Resources Policy Project-
                          P006565/1994 and the Second State Highway Management Project-P006555). Support in this area
                          continued under the Tocantins Sustainable Regional Development Project (P060573), which has a
                          specific environmental component (US$ 6 million as per PAD) supporting environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                          management, land use planning, biodiversity protection and water resources management which
                          were implemented successfully. Support in the biodiversity protection, land use planning and
                          management and management of water resources will be furthered under the Tocantins sub-project
                          under the Sustainable Cerrado Initiative (P091827).

                          Although the Project executing agencies have experience with World Bank safeguards policies
                          and instruments from previous Bank financed operation, many of these did not require any land
                          acquisition, nor did they operate in indigenous areas. For these reasons, the Project has sought to
                          strengthen measures and systems already in place, such as: Environmental and Social Screening
                          requirements, independent environmental and social supervision contracts, public consultation and
                          participatory decision-making processes, and gender disaggregated social impact assessments,
                          among others. Capacity building for safeguards management has also been an instrumental part of
                          project preparation, for example workshops were conducted on involuntary resettlement and
                          indigenous peoples issues during preparation missions in October and December 2011.

                          The PIU will be responsible for ensuring that all Bank safeguards triggered by the Project are
                          complied with and that all works under implementation apply the ESMF, RPF and IPPF. The PIU
                          will also provide support to the beneficiary agencies on the preparation of specific social
                          assessments, public consultations and preparation of resettlement / indigenous peoples plans,
                          whenever they may be required. To do this, the PIU has hired a qualified social specialist to

                                                                    Page 11 of 16
                           support project implementation. The Bank team will also continue to work closely with State
                           counterparts to ensure adequate adherence to all Brazilian and Bank social and environmental
                           standards.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The approach for identifying and managing environmental and social impacts and risks under the
                           Project is considered adequate. The Environmental Assessment safeguard is mandatory to all sub-
                           projects that may potentially have an environmental and social impact. Most of the other
                           safeguards policies have been triggered on a precautionary basis. The Borrower has addressed
                           safeguard policy issues by preparing a satisfactory Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                           (ESIA), an Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Environmental
                           Management Plans (EMP) for works identified at appraisal requiring particular mitigation
                           activities in accordance with the set of guidelines, procedures and criteria for screening activities
                           and to ensure that the Project will not cause any potential large scale, significant and/or
                           irreversible negative environmental and social impacts.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The Project benefited from ample consultations with representatives from local institutions and
                           the civil society held across the State during preparation, both at concept (3 consultations in SoT
                           regions over the course of 2010) and preparation stages (five consultations in SoT regions both on
                           ToR and outputs of the ESIA) and specifically included representatives of Indigenous Peoples,
                           local residents and municipal authorities, private sector producers, public service providers,
                           NGOs, etc. The ESIA reports that the principal concerns of participants included questions about
                           the overall value of investments, the geographic and technical scope of operations to be supported,
                           the formula for municipal allocations, the prioritization process for municipal works, the
                           implementation calendar, etc. These comments and suggestions were recorded in consultation
                           reports detailing responses provided and attesting to the overall endorsement given to the Project’s
                           objectives, components and safeguards instruments.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Borrower also prepared a Public Consultation Manual that describes the consultation process
                           required to prioritize municipal roads investments, and covers the objectives, methodology, and
                           resources required. All the works under the municipal road improvement component will be
                           prioritized and decided on a participatory basis, upon completion of a first set of participatory
                           processes to define the municipal development agenda in an objective to foster greater
                           transparency, accountability and public engagement in municipal affairs. Subsequently,
                           participants will decide on a list of roads to be improved, ranked in order of priority, in
                           conjunction with the development strategy previously discussed. The national indigenous agency
                           (FUNAI) will assist with consultations with indigenous peoples, such that these communities can
                           select their own priority road works for implementation. Although the surfacing subcomponent is
                           expected to be relatively small, a public consultation will be conducted before the beginning of
                           each surfacing subproject with beneficiary communities, nearby towns and road users.

                           The Borrower has also developed a technical note for management of state road rights of ways
                           (ROW). This note provides guidance on how the State road agency (DERTINS) will monitor
                           occupations and other unauthorized uses of road side areas. The main recommendations include
                           the need to sensitize occupants to the potential dangers due to proximity to the road way, and to
                           coordinate these outreach campaigns with municipal authorities and other government agencies
                           required to design and implement sustainable solutions with the ROW occupants. These tasks will
                           be facilitated through the activities included in the Project’s Social Communications Plan.


                                                                     Page 12 of 16
                           Finally, to handle any eventual requests for information or grievances regarding Project activities,
                           the State of Tocantins already has a well-developed system for addressing grievances through the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           intervention of an independent third party, via the State Public Attorney Office. Beyond this, an
                           Ombudsperson linked to the PIU will be set up. SEPLAN will prepare an Ombuds Manual
                           defining timeline and document standards for the handling of public communications. The
                           Ombudsperson will receive and channel suggestions and concerns voiced by the public to the
                           responsible authorities. The Ombudsperson will receive communications through a telephone
                           “hot-line”, advertised on signs posted at all work sites. Comments and questions will also be
                           received through email and the Borrower’s website . The Ombudsperson will ensure that adequate
                           and timely replies are provided to the public. These data will further be analyzed in the Progress
                           Reports, so as to identify any key issues or problems to be addressed during project
                           implementation. These data will be analyzed in quarterly Monitoring Reports, and may also be
                           used by the State Public Attorney Office in the treatment of disputes at the state level, wherever
                           such measures are found to be necessary.

                           All documents from the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), including the final
                           report and related frameworks and plans are available to the public on the Borrower’s website:
                           http://www.seplan.to.gov.br/seplan/br/
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        22-Nov-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     22-Dec-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Brazil                                                             12-Jan-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        14-Dec-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     22-Dec-2011
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Brazil                                                             12-Jan-2012
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        21-Dec-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     22-Dec-2011
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Brazil                                                             12-Jan-2012
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        14-Dec-2011


                                                                     Page 13 of 16
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   22-Dec-2011
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Brazil                                                           12-Jan-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
Public Disclosure Copy




                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?




                                                                     Page 14 of 16
                             Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [     ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                             Have dam safety plans been prepared?                              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                             Bank?
                             Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Satoshi Ogita
                            Approved By


                                                                      Page 15 of 16
                         Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Svend Jensby (SA)                   Date: 18-Mar-2016
                         Practice Manager/     Name: Gregoire Francois Gauthier (PMGR)   Date: 18-Mar-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Page 16 of 16
