INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC12187
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Jun-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        China                      Project ID:   P152959
Project Name:   Reduction and Phaseout of PFOS in Priority Sectors (P 152959)
Task Team       Viraj Vithoontien,Solvita Klapare
Leader(s):
Estimated       01-Aug-2016                Estimated     22-Dec-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GENDR                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
GEF Focal Area:  Persistent Organic Pollutants
Sector(s):      Other industry (90%), Central government administration (10%)
Theme(s):       Pollution management and environmental health (60%), Environmental policies
and institutions (20%), Other environment and natural re sources management
(20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     169.55            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
Borrower                                                       145.30
Global Environment Facility (GEF)                               24.25
Total                                                          169.55
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to reduce consumption and production of PFOS in selected
industry sectors and enterprises.
C. Project Description


﻿The proposed project will carried out through four major components described below. While it is
expected that GEF resources will be secured in order to finance part of PFOS reduction in the PFOS
production facilities and in industries consuming PFOS, significant co-financing would have to be
contributed by the industries. It is therefore unlikely to confirm all beneficiary enterprises that will
participate in Components 1 and 2 at the project preparation stage. Beneficiary enterprises could only
be determined during implementation when clarity on alternatives, financial and regulatory
incentives is more evident.
Component 1. PFOS production reduction (total cost US$44.7 mil, of which GEF US$6.2 mil). This
component will target PFOSF producers, as well as downstream producers of PFOS related
chemicals and applications. The Project will provide technology transfer to assist producers to
develop, convert, and register non-POPs alternatives. The Project will introduce cleaner production
as BAT/BEP for existing PFOS production and for new non-PFOS production facilities, and support
closure of redundant PFOSF and PFOS-related chemical production facilities. The potential
beneficiaries are twelve PFOSF producers and about 15 producers of PFOS-related chemicals.
Component 2. Reduction of PFOS use (total cost US$113.2 mil, of which GEF US$13.3 mil). The
project will target to reduce/eliminate PFOS use in the metal plating, pesticide, and fire-fighting
foam production facilities. The potential beneficiaries will be selected from 6,000 chromium metal
plating enterprises, a few pesticide manufactures and 15 producers of fire-fighting foam containing
PFOS surfactant. Technical and financial assistance to support activities ranging from introduction of
new chemicals and manufacturing processes, demonstration of BAT/BEP, conversion of existing
facilities, training of workers, promotion of non-PFOS products will be rendered to the participating
enterprises.
Component 3. Regulatory Framework (total cost US$6.3 mil, of which GEF US$ 2.1 mil). This
component will support the relevant authorities to strengthen policies and regulations to monitor
production and use of PFOS. It includes, among others, registration of PFOS use, import and export
control, update discharge/waste water standards to include PFOS, setting up thresholds for PFOS
)       concentration in products, capacity for screening, accreditation, and appraisal of proposed
alternatives for POPs-like characteristics. The Project will also support a design of options for
certification/eco-labelling of non-PFOS products, and awareness raising activities.
Component 4. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (total cost US$ 5.35 mil, of which
GEF US$2.65 mil). This component will support costs associated with day-to-day project
management and implementation including procurement, financial management, and environmental
and social safeguards functions to be carried out by FECO. The Project will also finance incremental
cost in relation to coordination and collaboration with other government agencies, non-government
agencies, and the private sector. FECO and the Customs Department will develop a monitoring
import/export system for PFOS and PFOS related chemicals. A monitoring system to preempt any
diversion of PFOS from acceptable use to other banned applications will be developed. Annual
evaluations of the reduction in PFOS use and release which will be carried out by FECO in
collaboration with the local Environmental Protection Bureaus (EPBs) will be financed by this
component.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Most PFOS producers and producers of PFOS secondary products are located in Jiangsu Province in


﻿the southeastern part of China and Hubei Province in the southern part of China. Both provinces
have temperate climate conditions with annual precipitation around 1000 mm.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Foreign Economic Cooperation Office (FECO) of the Ministry of Environmental Protection
(MEP) will be the national implementing agency for the project. It has worked with the WB to
prepare and implement a number of POPs projects financed by the GEF in recent years. As most of
these POPs projects are category A, FECO has accumulated experiences and capacity of managing
a      projects with a good record in managing environmental and social safeguards issues. However, the
potential beneficiary enterprises have little knowledge and experience with the WB safeguard
policies and requirements.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Meixiang Zhou (GSURR)
Xin Ren (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project will involve demonstration and pilot
OP/BP 4.01                              activities to reduce production and use of
perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS), a family of
chemicals that are toxic, extremely persistent and
likely to be carcinogenic to humans. Moreover, the
industries to be targeted by the project, i.e. chemical
industry and metal plating, are heavily polluting and
energy/resource intensive. Overall, the
environmental impacts and risks of the project are
significant and highly complex. As per the WB
safeguard policy, a category A is thus proposed.
It is still uncertain whether any beneficiary
enterprises could be identified prior to the project
appraisal. Some producers or users may decide not to
participate in the Project as they could shift their
activities to allowed applications that are not subject
to any control under the Stockholm Convention. For
metal plating applications for which alternatives are
expected to result in higher production costs, they
may decide to take action only when the phase-out
deadline is approaching. Moreover, there are a large
number of enterprises producing and using PFOS
that are potential beneficiaries of the Project, a
substantial number of them will be identified during
implementation. Therefore, a framework approach
has to be adopted.
An Environment and Social Management


﻿Framework (ESMF) will provide guidance to the
selection process, the evaluation of environmental
and social risks as well as the proposed measures to
manage those risks. The ESMF will include
description of each sector/production line involved,
their major pollutions and associated environmental
issues/risks (e.g. disposal of the replaced materials).
The Bank team will work out the ESMF details (e.g.
sequencing, conditionality, and etc.) with the client
during preparation process.
Social risks and impacts may be livelihoods loss or
land acquisition from enterprise production line
closure or relocation, or impacts on project enterprise
employees' job security, local residents in project
sites. For example, as a result of possible relocation
of a few PFOS enterprises, they may cause a small
number ofjob changes or job losses, local Chinese
labor laws and regulations will be followed to ensure
appropriate compensation and livelihood restoration
for affected workers. In case of 20 or more
employees to be laid off at one time by a project
enterprise, a separate employee resettlement plan
should be prepared by the enterprise and submitted to
the Bank team for prior review before actual layoff
of staff of the related enterprise be undertaken. Such
a plan should be in compliance with both the Chinese
government labor regulations and Bank safeguards
policy requirements. In case, the project involves any
closure or relocation of the existing facilities, social
impacts on livelihoods and employees' job security,
social management instruments will be included in
the ESMF.
As most physical activities of the project will be in
existing facilities, environmental audit is the
instrument to evaluate the facility/operation's
compliance with applicable regulations, standards
and requirements, including the relevant WB/IFC's
Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines.
For the gaps and risks identified, mitigation measures
will be developed together with monitoring
arrangement in the form of an Environmental
management Plan (EMP). For site closure and
remediation supported under Component 1,
environmental site assessment (ESA) is needed in
lieu of environmental audit. All audits/ESAs will


﻿result in an Environmental Management Plan (EMP)
with mitigation measures, supervising and
monitoring arrangement to address issues/gaps
identified. Terms of Reference (TOR) for
environmental audit, EMP and ESA will be prepared
as annexes to the ESMF.
In addition, the project will introduce cleaner
production (CP) as BAT/BEP for existing
production. Therefore, a CP audit of production
processes (i.e., PFOS production and metal plating)
is recommended. It can be conducted as part of the
environmental audit process although their focuses
are different. Experiences gained through CP audits
can also contribute to the development of CP
guidance under Component 3. TOR for the CP audit
will also be annexed to the ESMF. The ESMF will
serve as an umbrella to cover all safeguard
instruments (audits/ESAs) and it will provide
guidance on how each instrument should be
employed.
In case beneficiary enterprises are identified during
preparation, an environmental audit (including CP
audit, if applicable) or site assessment will be carried
out. These reports will form part of the appraisal
package and also as examples for other enterprises to
be identified during implementation. These
environmental audits /site assessment will serve as
one of the pre-conditions, based on which candidate
enterprise will be selected for the GEF support.
Before the project appraisal, the ESMF and its
annexes need to be publicly disclosed and consulted
at least twice as per the WB requirement for category
A. The same requirements apply to environmental
audits (including CP audit), EMPs and/or ESAs that
are to be prepared and carried out by the enterprises.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No           The project will take place mostly within existing
facilities. If relocation to new facilities is required, it
is expected that new location will be in the urban
areas where there is basic infrastructure to support
industry. Therefore, it does not affect any natural
habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No           Not applicable.
Pest Management OP 4.09      TBD         The project will support use of alternative pest


﻿control agents to replace PFOS-based insecticides.
However, more information on project activities is
needed in order to determine if this OP is triggered.
Physical Cultural Resources   No           Most, if not all, project activities will take place
OP/BP 4.11                                 within existing facilities. If relocation to new
facilities is required, it is expected that new location
will be in the urban areas where there is basic
infrastructure to support industry. Therefore, it does
not affect any physical cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      No           The targeted industries are located in urban areas
4.10                                       where it is unlikely to have any presence of
indigenous peoples by the criteria of the Bank IP
term. In case enterprises have to relocate to new
areas, they are expected to move to industrial parks
within urban or semi-urban areas since the industry
needs basic infrastructure support. Such areas are
unlikely to have any issues related to indigenous
people either.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  TBD          Most of the project activities will be carried out
BP 4.12                                    within existing facilities with no need for additional
land. This policy might be triggered as some
enterprises that are currently located in residential
areas may want to produce non-PFOS alternatives.
However, in some provinces establishment of new
chemical processes in facilities located in residential
areas will not be allowed. Therefore, they would
have to move to a new location which is usually an
existing industrial park. In addition, the project will
support closure of redundant facilities, including
support for site remediation associated with previous
production of PFOS. As previously mentioned, it is
uncertain whether any beneficiary enterprises would
be determined prior to appraisal and if so, it is
expected that a substantial number of them would
still be determined during project implementation.
Hence a social part of the ESMF which includes
resettlement policy framework will be prepared.
The Client will prepare the following social
safeguards instruments for Bank review and will
disclose them before commencing appraisal or
during project implementation:
Documents to be prepared if there is any land
acquisition or resettlement identified prior to
appraisal and during implementation: Resettlement
Action Plans (RAPs), or social safeguards


﻿instruments including due diligence review of recent
land acquired as new location of the project
beneficiary enterprise will be prepared according to
the Bank safeguards policy as and when required.
A professional consultant on social safeguards and
broad social development should be hired to work on
the social aspect for the project preparation. With its
assistance, an RPF to be included in the ESMF will
be prepared in both English and Chinese and
disclosed to the public before project appraisal.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           Not applicable
Projects on International    No           Not applicable
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         Not applicable
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 02-May-2016
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The safeguard instrument, Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and any
additional safeguards instruments as determined by the due diligence review of the Project team's
Environment and Social Safeguards Specialists, will be developed before appraisal. For
beneficiary enterprises identified during project preparation, specific Environmental Management
Plan (EMP) and RAP for beneficiary enterprises will be prepared prior to appraisal. The ESMF
U          and any additional required safeguards instruments will be disclosed locally (in local language-
Chinese) and in the Bank's Infoshop prior to the appraisal mission.
8 IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Viraj Vithoontien,Solvita Klapare
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                        Date: 25-Jun-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: lain G. Shuker (PMGR)                     Date: 25-Jun-2015
Manager:
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


