                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC15770

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Apr-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Belize                           Project ID:      P152415
                            Project Name:      Belize FCPF REDD Readiness Preparation (P152415)
                            Task Team          Enos E. Esikuri,Keiko Ashida Tao
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          31-Dec-2020
                            Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEN04

                            Sector(s):        Forestry (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          4.08                 Total Bank Financing:          0.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.28
                              Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility                      3.80
                              Total                                                                         4.08
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to assist Belize in carrying out Readiness Preparation through
                           a participatory and inclusive process in order to strengthen their capacity to participate in future
                           REDD+ carbon payment transactions.
                           C. Project Description
                           The R-PP of Belize identifies a broad set of activities aimed at strengthening the technical and
                           institutional capacities for Belize to participate in a future REDD+ mechanism. Among these, the
                         activities to be financed by the FCPF REDD+ Readiness Preparation grant (Project) were selected
                         jointly with the GOB, key stakeholders including indigenous peoples, and in coordination with other
                         donors such as the German Agency for International Cooperation (GIZ). Key criteria for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         consideration include: (i) activities needed to strengthen the immediate institutional capacity of the
                         GOB to conduct participatory and consultation processes for REDD+; (ii) fundamental Readiness
                         activities for which Belize had specific financial needs, not covered by other sources of financing;
                         (iii) a discrete set of activities that would generate a specific outcome; and (iv) activities that are
                         aligned with those of other sources of financing and the government, and that could serve to
                         strengthen the achievement of the project objective. The Project would be financed by a US$3.80
                         million FCPF Readiness grant and US$0.283 million in-kind counterpart financing by the GOB. In
                         addition, the Project would be supported by parallel financing from complementary investments,
                         including the REDD/CCAD-GIZ Regional Program for Belize and the Management and Protection
                         of Key Biodiversity Areas (KBAs) Project (WB/P130474/TF016773). The proposed Project
                         contemplates the following five components:

                         Component 1: REDD+ Organization Framework, Consultation and Grievance Redress. This
                         component will support: (1.1) Establishing and operationalizing of: (a) a multi-stakeholder
                         participatory platform for REDD+ implementation, and (b) a REDD+ coordination unit (R+CU)
                         within MAFFESCC to coordinate the implementation of Readiness Preparation Activities; (1.2)
                         Designing and carrying out of: (a) a communications and information dissemination strategy at the
                         national level, and (b) the Stakeholder Consultation and Participation Plan at the national level; and
                         (1.3) Designing and operationalizing or, if applicable, strengthening existing feedback, grievance and
                         redress mechanisms to meet the needs of people who might be affected by REDD+.

                         Component 2: Preparation of REDD+ Strategy. This component will support: (2.1) Identifying and
                         analyzing the main direct and indirect causes of deforestation and forest degradation in the Belizean
                         territory; (2.2) Assessing land tenure, natural resource rights and land use patterns as part of Belize’s
                         Integrated Planning Framework for Land and Resource Management with a particular focus on
                         Indigenous Peoples, both at the local and national levels; (2.3) Designing of: (a) effective strategic
Public Disclosure Copy




                         options for REDD+, including the mainstreaming of REDD+ into different sectors of the economy;
                         and (b) an implementation framework for REDD+; (2.4) Preparation of a Strategic Environmental
                         and Social Assessment (SESA) Work Plan and carrying out of SESA in accordance with the terms of
                         such Work Plan, including diagnostic studies to assess the key risks of the strategic options under
                         Component 2.3(a) above; and (2.5) Preparation of an environmental and social management
                         framework (ESMF), including, if applicable, an Indigenous Planning Peoples Framework (IPPF), a
                         Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and a Process Framework (RP), all in accordance with the
                         World Bank’s Safeguards Policies.

                         Component 3: Development of a National Forest Reference Emission Level and a Forest Reference
                         Level. This component will support designing a national reference emissions level for the forest
                         sector in the Belizean territory through (3.1) designing and establishing a reference scenario model;
                         and (3.2) developing reference models.

                         Component 4: Design of National Forest Monitoring and Safeguards Systems. This component will
                         support designing and implementing at the national level: (4.1) a forest monitoring system for the
                         measuring, reporting, and verification (MRV) of greenhouse gases (GHGs) emission reductions; and
                         (4.2) an information system for non-carbon benefits from REDD+ activities, safeguards and
                         governance in relation to REDD+.
                           Component 5: Design of Monitoring and Evaluation Framework. This component will support
                           designing and implementing a framework to monitor and evaluate the Readiness Preparation
                           Activities under Components 1 through 4 above.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The Project would cover the forested areas extending throughout the country. Forests comprise two
                           large, unified blocks of intact virgin forest that are likely to be the last strongholds for species that
                           require large, undisturbed areas for their long-term survival. Much of the terrestrial area of Belize
                           represents a significant portion of the Mesoamerican Biological Corridor, which stretches from
                           Mexico to Panamá. These forests provide important habitat for Belize’s high level of terrestrial
                           biodiversity as well as essential natural resources for livelihoods of the poorer rural population. In
                           order to protect this unique forest and outstanding biodiversity, Belize has 103 protected areas (PAs)
                           covering 35.8% of the country’s total land area. Forest cover in Belize has continued to decrease
                           from 72.90% in 1989 to 60.3% in 2014 and is predicted to continue to do so. Main anthropogenic
                           threats to the forests include the expansion of agriculture, housing, and tourism development. Also
                           damaging are illegal logging, looting of archeological sites, hunting, and poaching, in some areas by
                           communities from across the national border. Furthermore, the highest poverty levels tend to occur in
                           forested areas with the highest (e.g., South and West of Belize) or lowest (e.g., North and East of
                           Belize) levels of biodiversity, thus presenting critical poverty-environment challenges (for example
                           with encroachment and enforcement issues).
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Ministry of Economic Development, Petroleum, Investment, Trade and Commerce (MEDPITC)
                           will lead and coordinate the REDD+ initiative in the country by ensuring that national development
                           plans and strategies are mainstreamed and that REDD+ will be considered at a macro level. The
                           Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, Fisheries, the Environment, Sustainable Development and Climate
                           Change (MAFFESDCC) with the fiduciary assistance of the Protected Areas Conservation Trust
                           (PACT) will be responsible for the implementation of the Project activities. A REDD+ Coordination
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Unit (R+CU) will be established and housed under MAFFESDCC. This Unit will include an
                           Environmental Specialist (consultant) and a Social Specialist (consultant) who will support the SESA
                           process and preparation of the SESA and the ESMF reports. These two specialists will also ensure
                           compliance with the World Bank social and environmental operational policies applicable to this
                           project. MAFFESDCC and PACT are currently implementing several projects with the Bank and are
                           familiar with the Bank's environmental and social operational policies. In addition, training on the
                           Bank's social and environmental safeguards will be carried out to strengthen the capacity of
                           MAFFESDCC and PACT as necessary.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Arelia Jacive Lopez Castaneda (GSU04)
                           Raul Tolmos (GEN04)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment          Yes            This project is classified as a Category B project.
                           OP/BP 4.01                                       Since the explicit goal of the National REDD+
                                                                            Strategy is to promote the reduction in rates of
                                                                            deforestation and degradation by rewarding measures
                                                             to protect and conserve forests, the environmental
                                                             impacts of the REDD+ strategy are expected to be
                                                             mostly positive. As forest cover improves, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             associated benefits will increase. Not only as a sink
                                                             for carbon but also for the many environmental
                                                             services forests provide such as watershed
                                                             protection, provision of important habitats,
                                                             sustainable source of NTFP and other forest based
                                                             livelihoods. The REDD+ strategy itself would not
                                                             finance the harvesting or conversion of forests so
                                                             there is little to no direct adverse impact associated
                                                             with activities planned as part of the strategic
                                                             options. However, there might be some safety and
                                                             health risks and impacts involved in the
                                                             implementation of REDD+ strategic options. The
                                                             principal economy-wide risk from REDD+ would
                                                             arise in the event that the strategic options fail to
                                                             achieve their objectives thereby creating unexpected
                                                             indirect adverse impacts through the unintended
                                                             creation of incentives to clear forests for other
                                                             purposes. This could occur, for example, if lack of
                                                             land tenure security were to undermine commitment
                                                             to maintain land under forest cover for long time
                                                             periods. For these reasons, and due to the critical
                                                             nature of strategic options and choices being
                                                             considered, OP 4.01 will be applicable to the
                                                             proposed activities. The principal output to document
                                                             the environmental benefits and risks of the National
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             REDD+ Strategy will be the Strategic Environmental
                                                             and Social Assessment (SESA). SESA will assess
                                                             key social and environmental potential risks and
                                                             impacts associated with REDD+, and the country
                                                             will prepare an Environmental and Social
                                                             Management Framework (ESMF) to screen, manage
                                                             and mitigate any potential environmental and social
                                                             risks and impacts during the implementation phase.
                                                             A SESA report will be also prepared.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   Given that the REDD+ strategy will likely work both
                                                             within existing protected areas as well as other forest
                                                             habitats of varying significance, OP 4.04 will apply.
                                                             If the REDD+ strategic options are successful, the
                                                             impacts on critical forest habitats and biodiversity
                                                             are expected to be positive. Nevertheless, SESA will
                                                             evaluate the potential risks and impacts associated
                                                             with strategic options on forest habitats within
                                                             protected areas as well as other sensitive forest
                                                             habitats under private or communal control. During
                                                             the formulation of the REDD+ strategy and
                                                             throughout its implementation consultations will be
                                                             carried out with key stakeholders to identify potential
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             issues of concern associated with natural habitats and
                                                             their constituent ecological function, flora and fauna
                                                             species and genetic resources pool. During the
                                                             implementation phase monitoring activities will be
                                                             established to ensure that critical and non-critical
                                                             natural habitats are not adversely affected. The
                                                             ESMF will include procedures, principles and
                                                             provisions to assess and mitigate possible impacts
                                                             prior to any actions being undertaken on the ground.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   Due to the importance of REDD+ as part of Belize’s
                                                             long term forest and natural resources management
                                                             programs and due to the importance forests play in
                                                             the livelihoods of many communities, this policy will
                                                             apply. Development and implementation of a
                                                             National REDD+ Strategy and corresponding
                                                             strategic options will require successful
                                                             implementation of actions consisting of, for instance,
                                                             recovering of degraded forest lands, introduction of
                                                             sound forest management plans, the establishment
                                                             and maintenance of PAs, and the development of a
                                                             national forest fire response team, among others. The
                                                             National REDD+ strategy itself would not finance
                                                             the harvesting or conversion of forests. It is expected
                                                             that the REDD+ strategy would promote the use of
                                                             third-party forest certification.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes   It is likely that the National REDD+ Strategy would
                                                             finance or lead to an increased use of pesticides or
                                                             other agricultural chemicals. For instance, it is
                                                             conceivable that some forest management practices
                                                             used in the promotion of agro-forestry systems or in
                                                             restoration of abandoned agricultural lands could
                                                             utilize pesticides. The SESA will evaluate the
                                                             potential for such use of chemicals in forest
                                                             management and agro-forestry systems and
                                                             appropriate guidelines and instruments would be
                                                             defined in the ESMF. Based on the above, the policy
                                                             will be triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources   Yes   Given the existence of Mayan sites in Belize’s forest
                         OP/BP 4.11                          areas targeted in the National REDD+ Strategy, this
                                                             policy will be triggered. Moreover, some forests or
                                                             landscapes concerned by the National REDD+
                                                             Strategy have historical or cultural significance such
                                                             as spirit forests, sacred valleys or other features of
                                                             the natural landscape. Policy implications will be
                                                              assessed as part of the SESA. The ESMF will include
                                                              specific provisions and guidelines to assess the
                                                              possibility of such impacts prior to any activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              being undertaken on the ground.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       Yes   This policy is triggered as there are Indigenous
                         4.10                                 peoples living in the project area. During the Bank’s
                                                              due diligence process, there were several meetings
                                                              with the Maya leaders of the 39 communities in
                                                              southern Belize in order to share information about
                                                              the FCPF process and hear their comments and
                                                              concerns. Specific inputs regarding activities to be
                                                              financed by the FCPF grant that are intended for
                                                              their benefit or in which they have a material interest
                                                              were gathered during a technical mission in July
                                                              2015 and incorporated into the project design and
                                                              reflected in the budget. A follow up meeting to share
                                                              how their inputs were incorporated was held by the
                                                              Forest Department in October 2015. A consultation
                                                              protocol has been submitted by the TAA and will be
                                                              validated and updated if necessary during the first 6
                                                              months of project implementation. This protocol will
                                                              be used exclusively for any participation and
                                                              consultation with the Maya and will be incorporated
                                                              into the consultation plan for the National REDD+
                                                              Strategy that is also being financed by this grant. In
                                                              addition, the Maya will be key stakeholders for the
                                                              SESA process and will play an important role in both
                                                              the analytical work that concerns their land as well as
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              providing feedback throughout the readiness process.
                                                              An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework will be
                                                              prepared as part of the ESMF.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   This policy is triggered as several of the strategic
                         BP 4.12                              options currently under consideration may impact
                                                              access and use of natural resources in protected
                                                              areas. A study on land tenure and land use will be
                                                              undertaken as part of the SESA process and forest
                                                              land users and owners will be consulted regarding
                                                              the strategic options. Depending upon the results of
                                                              the SESA process, a stand-alone Process Framework
                                                              will be prepared or screening guidance will be
                                                              included in the ESMF prepared for the R-package. A
                                                              Process Framework will be prepared as part of the
                                                              ESMF to address potential impacts from access
                                                              restrictions. The SESA will assess potential impacts
                                                              from investment options identified under the REDD+
                                                              Strategy in terms of involuntary taking of land, and if
                                                                                                                        necessary a Resettlement Policy Framework should
                                                                                                                        be prepared as part of the ESMF.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         This policy is not triggered as the project will neither
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        support the construction or rehabilitation of dams nor
                                                                                                                        will it support other investments which rely on
                                                                                                                        services of existing dams.
                                 Projects on International                                   No                         This policy is not triggered as the project will not
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   finance activities involving the use or potential
                                                                                                                        pollution of international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ Yes                                                     This policy is applicable to the Grant because of the
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                longstanding territorial dispute between Belize and
                                                                                                                        Guatemala. Given that Readiness Preparation
                                                                                                                        Activities will occur on a national scale and the
                                                                                                                        program area will comprise all of the country’s
                                                                                                                        districts, some of them will almost inevitably take
                                                                                                                        place or be found in geographical areas within the
                                                                                                                        general area known to be in dispute. In line with OP/
                                                                                                                        BP 7.60, The Grant does not prejudice the position of
                                                                                                                        either the Bank or the two countries involved. It is
                                                                                                                        emphasized that by supporting the Readiness
                                                                                                                        Preparation Activities, the World Bank does not
                                                                                                                        intend to make any judgment on the legal or other
                                                                                                                        status of the territories concerned or to prejudice the
                                                                                                                        final determination of the parties’ claims. The memo
                                                                                                                        to Managing Director and the letter to Executive
                                                                                                                        Director for Guatemala are being processed pursuant
                                                                                                                        to the provisions of OP/BP 7.60.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Apr-2016
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The appraisal ISDS is not required for this grant and the target date is to be disregarded.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Enos E. Esikuri,Keiko Ashida Tao
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)                                                                                                 Date: 13-Apr-2016
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Raul Ivan Alfaro Pelico (PMGR)                                                                                         Date: 13-Apr-2016
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
