                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC1149

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Nov-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-Dec-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Cameroon                        Project ID:      P151155
                            Project Name:      PFM for Service Delivery Reform Project (P151155)
                            Task Team          Kolie Ousmane Maurice Megnan,Abel Paul Basile Bove,Sidy Diop
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          20-Mar-2017                     Estimated        18-Sep-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GGO26                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     20.00                     Total Bank Financing:        20.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 20.00
                              Total                                                                       20.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to enhance effectiveness and efficiency of public spending and
                           related statistical informationin selected sectors in Cameroon.

                           The project will specifically target (i) public investment management in the context of the
                           implementation of the 2007 Public Finance Management Act and the procurement reform; and (ii)
                           national statistical system. In addition toMin. of Finance, Min. of Economy and Min. of
                           Procurement, the project will focus on implementation with line ministries of Basic Education,
                           Health, and Agriculture. The project is designed to be flexible and responsive to emerging
                           opportunities to support public sector management effectiveness and efficiency by applying problem-
                         driven iterative adaptation in the management of the project and setting contingency financing of
                         unplanned activities relevant to the PDO and other activities.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project has five strategically linked and mutually reinforcing components in three selected areas
                         (program-budgeting, public investment management, public procurement and statistics) within the
                         wider context of the on-going and incremental modernization of Cameroon public sector
                         management. The Program-budgeting component will be supported by increased statistics capacity
                         (component 4) while supporting improved public investment management (component 2). The
                         Procurement component (component 3) will directly support Public Investment Management
                         (component 2), the latter contributing to enhancing both the preparation process and execution. The
                         Statistics component (component. 4) would indirectly support overall planning (component 1) by
                         enhancing the quality of basic population, macroeconomic and socioeconomic data, and directly
                         supporting program budgeting by improving program indicators and M&E system. The components
                         are building synergies with the AfDB➢❨ s PFM project negotiated mid-July 2016 and IDA
                         operations in Health (P156679, HSPRP 2016-2021).

                         Component 1: Consolidating the program budgeting reform in selected sectors (US$ 5 million)
                         This component aims to translate program-budgeting into reality in some selected sectors, all the way
                         from planning to oversight under the leadership of the MINFI. To this end, the component will first
                         consolidate the budget reform process at the two leading ministries (finance and economy, planning
                         and regional development), and second solve public financial management issues that impede
                         adequate implementation of program-budgets in MINESEC and MINSANTE.
                         (a)      Strengthening program-budgeting: the sub-component will provide support to: (i) redesign
                         programs in (budget/activities classifications, scope of the program, program indicators, management
                         accounting, inclusion of payroll management in programs, etc.), (ii) ensure harmonization of multi-
                         year management of investment projects (including management of recurrent costs) and three-year
                         program budgeting, (iii) provide hands-on-support to Program Managers/Directors of Financial
                         Affairs and other staff involved in the design and the implementation of the programs, and (iv) adopt
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and implement a ministerial management charter.
                         (b)      Enhancing programs➢❨ execution and monitoring system: this sub-component will support
                         the (i) definition and implementation of processes consolidating information collection, clarifying
                         roles and responsibility with regards to field monitoring and evaluation (M&E) from the local to the
                         central level, (ii) redesign and implementation of PFM year-end processes (format of reporting,
                         financial management closing process activities, procedures for unused budget allocations for
                         investment projects); (iii) development of procedures for the management of fixed assets financed
                         through public investment; (iv) revise execution reporting to adapt it to multi-year execution; and (v)
                         set up of the BOOST database recently developed with World Bank support to ensure it is updated
                         and used for program monitoring.
                         (c)      Deploying new payroll management: this sub-component will support the deployment of the
                         recently developed integrated HR/payroll management system (SIGIPES II) in MINESEC and
                         MINSANTE. This will require the completion of the on-going update of the HR database for the
                         selected ministries, acquisition of additional IT equipment and training of the respective units in
                         charge of HR/payroll in these ministries including change management support. Finally, the project
                         will support the use of SIGIPES II for HR analysis and strategic planning according to the programs.

                         Component 2: Improving public investment execution in selected sectors (US$ 5 million)
                         This component aims to address some key bottlenecks in the maturation, programming, budgeting,
                         and execution monitoring processes of public investment activities. The Ministries of Secondary
                         Education (MINESEC) and Health (MINSANTE) will be major beneficiaries of this component to
                         be implemented under the leadership of the MINEPAT. This component will likely consist of three
                         sub-components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (a)       Strengthening Public Investment Budget programming: the sub-component will provide
                         support to enhance the PIB preparation process by: (i) defining and implementing public investment
                         activities, in particular project preparation and selection (policy note/decree/order on a new PIM
                         cycle ; aligning sector strategies, MTEF, program-budgets and Local Development Plans;
                         stocktaking of existing investment projects to identify projects to be supported from appraisal to
                         selection), (ii) establishing an e-tracking for preparation processes and pilot performance contracting
                         for the Cellules PBBS of MINESEC and MINSANTE and of MINEPAT/Direction de la
                         Programmation to gain in effectiveness and efficiency in preparation processes, and (iii) providing
                         additional resources to the Preparation Fund (Fonds de Maturation) to strengthen project appraisal
                         capacity (for MINESEC/MINSANTE specifically).
                         (b)       Enhancing Public Investment Budget execution monitoring: the sub-component will include
                         support to: (i) optimize the articulation between the participatory CLS (trimestral reporting) and the
                         deconcentrated administration (monthly reporting); (ii) facilitate data consolidation by the
                         MINEPAT/Sous-Direction du Suivi du BIP from district and regional levels and MINFI/DGT
                         through web-based solutions and performance contracting of deconcentrated levels (regional and
                         district levels); (iii) enhance data dissemination on PIB to include further details than mere Journal
                         des Projets but also contract document and level of physical and financial execution on trimestral
                         basis; and (iv) undertake a social experiment aiming at stimulating PIB execution monitoring by
                         grassroots civil society in two districts in two regions to be determined through two years active
                         information and capacity-building of grassroots associations (village development committees,
                         cooperatives, women associations, youth associations, tontines/revolving fund, etc.) with control
                         groups.
                         (c)       Strengthening the management of public investment projects financed by international and
                         bilateral donors: this sub-component will support (i) development of decree and guidelines
                         describing the processes for compensation/resettlement including processing lead time at each steps,
                         and (ii) capacity-building of the Directorate of International Cooperation in project management
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (including FM-tax issues, M&E, and procurement).

                         Component 3: Strengthening the performance of the public procurement system and developing
                         capacity for better service delivery (US$ 7 million)
                         The purpose of this component is to improve the performance of the public procurement system by
                         improving the efficiency, effectiveness, and value-for-money. The component, to be jointly
                         implemented by ARMP and MINMAP, is designed to respond to demands for addressing key
                         obstacles to performance. It is structured around four inter-linked sub-components that will enhance
                         the competency of procurement staff, expand the capacity of core institutions to carry out their
                         functions, and enable officials to monitor and improve key performance indicators. Work undertaken
                         within the component will complement and inform on-going efforts, supported by AfDB, developing
                         comprehensive strategies for improving the procurement system. The four sub-components are:
                         (a)      Strengthening the competencies of public officials responsible for public procurement. This
                         sub-component will include training of procurement staff in MINMAP, ARMP, and up to two pilot
                         ministries. Training will be complemented by the creation of a system for tracking staff learning and
                         expertise, and the development of competency requirements for officials involved in procurement
                         transactions. A strategy will be produced for eventual professionalization of the procurement
                         function. The project will support the implementation of a national capacity building strategy for
                         public procurement upon its adoption.
                         (b)      Enhancing the capacity of organizations in the procurement system to carry out their
                         functions: This sub-component will support enhanced clarity in the rules regarding procurement
                         processes used in MINMAP and other executing agencies, and the creation of materials to guide staff
                         in following the required procedures. The extent of compliance with rules will be monitored through
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the creation of processes and platforms, including electronic tracking systems, and the analysis of the
                         collected data.
                         (c)     Streamlining the procurement regulatory framework: This subcomponent will support
                         implementation of a new Procurement Code and/or Central Purchasing Unit upon adoption by the
                         Government.
                         (d)     Improving the management and monitoring of procurement performance: This
                         subcomponent will define public procurement performance indicators and a mechanism for gathering
                         and analyzing performance data. It will introduce mechanisms to orient the system towards better
                         performance including, but not limited performance contracts, and greater community participation
                         in oversight, where appropriate.

                         Component 4: Strengthening the country➢❨ s statistical system (US$ 10 million)
                         The purpose of this component is to improve the national statistical system in order to produce
                         regular and reliable economic and social population statistics, and in-depth analysis. Robust statistics
                         are a pre-requisite to evidence-based policy-making and policy results➢❨ monitoring. This
                         component would consist of three sub-components:
                         (a)      Improvement of poverty related data by providing technical assistance and financing to (i)
                         the design, data collection and analysis of the fifth national household survey (ECAM 5) with a
                         particular focus on northern regions rural areas and gender issues (agricultural income, shocks, and
                         vulnerability, gender etc.), (ii) data collection of the fourth population census, and (iii) analysis of the
                         complementary household survey (ECAM 4).
                         (b)      Strengthening the national accounts production by: (i) providing technical assistance to
                         improve the quarterly national accounts methodology and (ii) establishing a methodology and
                         baseline to better reflect the regional cross-border trade.
                         (c)      Enhancing statistical data dissemination and the archiving system by: (i) providing technical
Public Disclosure Copy




                         assistance and financing to improve archiving procedures and build the capacity of the INS archiving
                         department; and (ii) setting up the IT network and equipment in the new INS headquarters and the 10
                         regional agencies to facilitate data treatment, sharing, archiving and public dissemination.

                         Component 5: Project coordination (US$ 3 million)
                         This purpose of this component is to support the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) in coordinating
                         and managing the implementation of the Project. Activities would include:
                         (a)       Management support (US$1m), such as (i) developing annual work programs and
                         procurement plans; (ii) ensuring proper fiduciary management and monitoring; (iii) coordinating
                         technical work and support to the technical units within the relevant Ministries; (iv) monitoring and
                         reporting on project➢❨ s implementation; and (v) implementing the Problem-Driven Iterative
                         Adaptation (PDIA) approach into project management to ensure close monitoring, stakeholders➢❨
                         ownership and project➢❨ s adaptation.
                         (b)       Contingency Fund (US$2m): the contingency fund will enable the PCU to be flexible and
                         highly responsive to emerging opportunities to support initiatives increasing public sector
                         management effectiveness and efficiency. The component may finance scale-up of existing activities,
                         pilots, technical assistance or cross-cutting analytical studies, for example related to (i) the
                         integration of CEMAC PFM Directives into Cameroon law, (ii) a new PFM modernization plan, (iii)
                         a PEFA, and (iv) the technical specifications of the Integrated Finance Management Information
                         System (IFMIS). The use of the Contingency Funds would be subject to prior validation by the
                           World Bank and the Steering Committee.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           N/A

                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           N/A

                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Erik Reed (GEN07)
                           Kristyna Bishop (GSU01)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment       No         As a Category ?C? project, which by its nature does
                           OP/BP 4.01                                not have any environmental safeguard issues, the
                                                                     Bank?s environmental safeguard policies are not
                                                                     triggered.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No         As a Category ?C? project, which by its nature does
                                                                     not have any environmental safeguard issues, the
                                                                     Bank?s environmental safeguard policies are not
                                                                     triggered.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36             No         As a Category ?C? project, which by its nature does
                                                                     not have any environmental safeguard issues, the
                                                                     Bank?s environmental safeguard policies are not
                                                                     triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Pest Management OP 4.09        No         As a Category ?C? project, which by its nature does
                                                                     not have any environmental safeguard issues, the
                                                                     Bank?s environmental safeguard policies are not
                                                                     triggered.
                           Physical Cultural Resources    No         As a Category ?C? project, which by its nature does
                           OP/BP 4.11                                not have any environmental safeguard issues, the
                                                                     Bank?s environmental safeguard policies are not
                                                                     triggered.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No         As a Category ?C? project, which by its nature does
                           4.10                                      not have any environmental safeguard issues, the
                                                                     Bank?s environmental safeguard policies are not
                                                                     triggered.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/   No         As a Category ?C? project, which by its nature does
                           BP 4.12                                   not have any environmental safeguard issues, the
                                                                     Bank?s environmental safeguard policies are not
                                                                     triggered.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No         As a Category ?C? project, which by its nature does
                                                                     not have any environmental safeguard issues, the
                                                                                                                        Bank?s environmental safeguard policies are not
                                                                                                                        triggered.
                                 Projects on International                                   No                         As a Category ?C? project, which by its nature does
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   not have any environmental safeguard issues, the
                                                                                                                        Bank?s environmental safeguard policies are not
                                                                                                                        triggered.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      As a Category ?C? project, which by its nature does
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                not have any environmental safeguard issues, the
                                                                                                                        Bank?s environmental safeguard policies are not
                                                                                                                        triggered.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Dec-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      As a Category 'C' project, which by its nature does not have any environmental safeguard issues,
                                      the Bank's environmental safeguard policies are not triggered.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Kolie Ousmane Maurice Megnan,Abel Paul Basile Bove,Sidy
                                                                                                   Diop
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor:                             Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)                                                                        Date: 01-Dec-2016
                                 Practice Manager/                               Name: Chiara Bronchi (PMGR)                                                                       Date: 01-Dec-2016
                                 Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
