INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC 12607
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Jun-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Bangladesh                 Project ID:   P154577
Project Name:   College Education Development Project (P 154577)
Task Team       Yoko Nagashima,Md. Mokhlesur Rahman
Leader(s):
Estimated       07-Dec-2015                Estimated     07-Jul-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDDR                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Tertiary education (95%), Public administration- Education (5%)
Theme(s):       Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     130.00            Total Bank Financing:  100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              30.00
International Development Association (IDA)                    100.00
Total                                                          130.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to strengthen the quality and relevance of college education,
and strengthen the governance and management of the college education subsector.
C. Project Description
The proposed Project would aim at improving the quality and relevance of college education and
strengthening governance and management of the college education subsector through a set of
selective initiatives. The need of the subsector is significant. As a first support to the subsector, the


﻿Project will take a prudent, selective and progressive approach and focus on activities which can
bring visible benefits to the subsector.
The Project would be financed through a US$100 million Credit from the International Development
O
Q)      Association (IDA), using an Investment Project Financing (IPF) lending instrument. It would be
implemented over a four year period. It would support the development of the college subsector
through three Components: (i) Component 1: Improving the Quality and Relevance of College
Education; (ii) Component 2: Strengthening the Governance and Management of the College
Education Subsector; and (iii) Enhancing System Management. Components 1 and 3 would follow
transaction-based disbursement while Component 2 would use a Results-Based Financing (RBF)
modality to support the implementation of the Government's subsector reforms to strengthen the
governance and management of college education. Disbursements would be made to the Ministry of
Finance upon achievement of pre-specified results, as measured by Disbursement Linked Indicators
(DLIs). Disbursement would be made against selected (eligible) key budget line items of Department
of Secondary and Higher Education (DSHE)/Ministry of Education (MoE).
Component 1: Improving the Quality and Relevance of College Education (estimated cost US$65
million)
The objective of this component is to improve the quality and relevance of college education under
the National University (NU). Two sub-components would support the achievement of this objective:
(i) Sub-component 1.1: Improving the quality and relevance of teaching-learning in colleges; and (ii)
Sub-component 1.2: Strengthening teaching capacity and management in colleges.
Sub-component 1.1:  Improving the quality and relevance of teaching-learning through
Institutional Development Grants (estimated cost US$55 million)
The proposed Institutional Development Grant (IDG) program would support the implementation of
Institutional Development Plans (IDP) in each participating institution under the following windows:
(i) Window 1: Upgrading and modernizing basic teaching-learning facilities of colleges; (ii) Window
2: Improving the connectivity through existing Bangladesh Research and Education Network
(BdREN); (iii) Window 3: Development of soft skills programs and industry-linkages; and (iv)
Window 4: Institutional self-assessments for quality assurance.
The proposed competitive Grant program will be voluntary. The colleges will be grouped according
to their characteristics and will participate based on eligibility criteria. An Operations Manual will be
developed to assist colleges for preparing and implementing their IDP. The design will benefit from
the experience of the IDA-financed Higher Education Quality Enhancement Project (HEQEP) in
Bangladesh.
Sub-component 1.2:  Strengthening teaching capacity and management in colleges (estimated cost
US$10 million)
The objective of this sub-component is to bring qualitative improvements in teaching and
management in the college subsector. This objective would be achieved through support for: (i)
training of trainers; (ii) teacher training; and (iii) capacity building of NU and college management
staff. The Project will also support the development of training contents and materials. Distance
learning through online platforms with international and national training providers will also be
developed to reach the large number of beneficiaries.


﻿Component 2: Strengthening the Governance and Management of the College Education Subsector
(estimated amount US$25 million)
O
U       The objective of this component is to strengthen the governance and management of the college
education subsector, using a RBF modality. The Component would support the implementation of
the following interventions at the national, NU and participating institution levels: (i) development of
a Strategic Plan for the college subsector with adoption of system-wide reforms in phases at the
national level and development of institutional strategic plans and annual performance reports at the
institutional level; (ii) devolution of central NU campus functions to its regional campuses to
improve its performance and to strengthen the accountability mechanism; and (iii) improvement of
teacher management system (including both recruitment and staff development) through filling the
teacher vacancies of public colleges and establishment of an appropriate teachers selection
commission for the private college teachers.
The main rationale for using a RBF approach for Component 2 is to place more focus on results
rather than inputs and to provide incentives to the Government in implementing a set of key sector-
wide reforms to strengthen the governance and management of the college education subsector at the
national and institutional levels. The design of project interventions and DLIs will be further
reviewed and finalized during project preparation.
Component 3: Enhancing System Management (estimated cost US$10 million)
The objectives of this component are to ensure sufficient system capacity for the implementation of
policy interventions and effective project management in achieving its PDO. These objectives would
be met through two subcomponents: (i) Project Management and Communication; and (ii)
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E).
Sub-component 3.1: Project Management and Communication (estimated cost US$6 million)
The objective of this sub-component is to ensure sufficient capacity for implementation of policy
interventions and various activities and dissemination of information. This sub-component would
support project management, including establishment of a Project Implementation Unit (PIU),
specific capacity building and technical assistance necessary for project implementation and
a      communication and information dissemination.
Sub-component 3.2: Monitoring and Evaluation (estimated cost US$4 million)
The objective of this sub-component is to build an effective M&E system. This subcomponent would
support M&E activities, including necessary surveys, assessments and validation of outputs, and
analytical studies to strengthen the knowledge on the subsector. The monitoring of reform activities
would be carried out by respective departments of NU with the support of the M&E unit of the PIU.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented nationwide in selected public and private colleges providing
education at the tertiary level. The National University (NU) is the largest provider of tertiary
education, accounting for over 70 percent of all tertiary enrollments in over 1,700 affiliated colleges
across all 64 districts in Bangladesh. The participating institutions will have to go through screening
mechanism before becoming eligible for financing for any of the subprojects. Therefore, the exact
location of the subprojects will be known only during the implementation of the project. It has been


﻿agreed that any infrastructure development and/or refurbishment/extension of existing infrastructure
will only be carried out within the current premises of the colleges and educational institutions.
Public lands if used will be screened to ensure that the lands are encumbrance free and squatters,
leasing farmers, share-croppers etc. are not affected by the project. No land acquisition or
O
U       displacement of people (either physical or economic) will be permissible under the project. The
project is expected to include colleges, which will benefit the ethnic and vulnerable communities. A
Social Impact Assessment (incorporating a focus on gender responsiveness) and an SMF containing
Small, Ethnic and Vulnerable Communities Development Framework (SEVCF) and a Gender Action
Plan (GAP) will be prepared by MoE/DSHE and the NU for the project. The SMF will focus on
gender and inclusion aspects especially.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The responsible ministry -MoE has experience in implementing World Bank project and familiar
with safeguard requirement. Two out of five proposed implementing agencies - University Grant
Commission (UGC) and DSHE are familiar with the World Bank safeguard policies and
requirement. They have gained reasonable experience in implementing Higher Education Quality
Enhancement Project (HEQEP) and Secondary Education Quality and Access Enhancement Project
(SEQAEP). However, other three proposed implementing agencies, Nongovernment Teacher
Registration and Certification Authority (NTRCA), NU and National Academy for Educational
Management (NAEM) do not have any prior experience in World Bank safeguard policies. The
capacity of the implementing agencies will be strengthen with adequate training and provision of
consultants.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Ferdous Jahan (GEEDR)
Sabah Moyeen (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The activities identified under the Project are
OP/BP4.01predominantly technical assistance in nature
(development of soft skills, institutional self-
assessment skills etc.), with only small scale civil
works components or infrastructure development
activities. The proposed project may finance
rehabilitation/renovation/refurbishment of existing
building, classrooms, science and computer
laboratories facilities. The proposed project will also
upgrade sanitation facilities as well as ensuring safe
water and electricity. These activities can generate
some amount of demolition waste, solid and liquid
waste, electronic waste etc. The limited nature of
environmental impacts arising from these small scale
construction activities will trigger OP/BP 4.01
requiring environmental assessment. Since the
physical intervention and detail design of the
infrastructure is not known at this stage, and may not


﻿be known at appraisal, an Environmental
Management Framework (EMF) will be prepared.
The EMF will provide the procedure for subproject-
level environmental screening/assessment and
environmental management.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
Pest Management OP 4.09     No
Physical Cultural Resources  No
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    Yes         This project will cover colleges all over the country
4.10                                    including areas where small ethnic and vulnerable
communities live. Thus, the project will trigger OP
4.10. An SMF containing Small, Ethnic and
Vulnerable Communities Development Framework
(SEVCF) and a Gender Action Plan (GAP) will be
prepared by the MOE/DSHE and NU for the project.
It is important to mention that the project is not
expected to cause any adverse impact on indigenous
people. The Framework will focus on gender and
inclusion aspects, and will provide guidelines to
engage in effective consultation with small and
ethnic minorities communities in general and
students and teachers in particular to maximize the
likelihood of achieving the project's PDO for the
said communities. The project will not have any
impacts on indigenous people, their lands, culture,
livelihood or way of life in any way.
Additionally the SMF will contain guidelines for
carrying out a brief social assessment for sub-
components to ensure that the project benefits all
students and teachers irrespective of their gender and
ethnic identity. The SMF will provide guidelines for
stakeholder identification, consultation and
communication strategy, inclusion and gender
mainstreaming, etc. It will also contain institutional
arrangements and roles and responsibilities of people
who will implement the SMF, guidelines for a
grievance redress mechanism, disclosure policies of
the World Bank, and budget for the implementation
of the SMF.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/ No         The project will not finance any civil works or


﻿BP 4.12                                    activities that are expected to trigger either OP 4.12
Involuntary Resettlement. No land acquisition,
displacement of people or communities from private
or public lands or any negative impacts on
livelihoods will be permissible under the project as
mentioned above. Any infrastructure development
and/or refurbishment/extension of existing
infrastructure will only be carried out within the
current premises of the colleges and educational
institutions. Public lands if used will be screened to
ensure that the lands are encumbrance free and
squatters, leasing farmers, share-croppers etc. are not
affected by the project. No land acquisition or
displacement of people (either physical or economic)
will be permissible under the project. The project
will develop a social management framework (SMF)
which will provide guidelines for carrying out a
social screening to ensure the above impacts are not
triggered.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No
Projects on International     No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Dec-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
An Environmental Management Framework will be prepared by August 31st, 2015 to describe the
process of environmental screening for small-scale civil works and other necessary up-gradation.
The Social Management Framework (SMF) will also be prepared by August 31st, 2015. SMF will
include IPF and GAP.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Yoko Nagashima,Md. Mokhlesur Rahman
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                  Date: 16-Jun-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Keiko Miwa (PMGR)                         Date: 18-Jun-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


