                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSR13248
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-May-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-May-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Egypt, Arab Republic of                      Project ID:           P117745
                            Project Name:       EGYPT-Farm-level Irrigation Modernization (P117745)
                            Task Team           Bekele Debele Negewo
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           27-Sep-2010                                  Estimated   14-Dec-2010
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GWA05                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:           Irrigation and drainage (95%), Agricultural extension and research (5%)
                            Theme:            Rural services and infrastructure (97%), Other rural development (3%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:         180.00                Total Bank Financing:       100.00
                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                                Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                              30.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                100.00
                              FRANCE French Agency for Development                                                                  50.00
                              Total                                                                                                180.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The project development objective is to increase agricultural profitability and improve equity in
                           access to higher-quality water for around 140,000 small-scale
                           farmers on 200,000 feddans (80,000 hectares) in the command areas of Mahmoudia,


                                                                                 Page 1 of 11
                         Manaifa and Meet Yazid located in the Nile Delta. This would be conducted specif
                         ically in areas where upstream irrigation improvement interventions, both physic
                         al and institutional, have occurred and are fully functional. These objectives w
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ould be achieved through both structural improvements and a strengthening of far
                         mer support services. The project#s success would be measured by the following i
                         ndicators:

                          a) Increased agricultural output in LE per feddan (relative to baseline and non-project neighboring
                         comparison areas);
                          b) Reduced agricultural operating costs in LE per feddan (relative to baseline and non-project
                         neighboring comparison areas);
                          c) Difference in yields between farmers at the tail-end and head-reach of quaternary canals reduced
                         (relative to baseline and non-project neighboring comparison                                    areas);
                          d) Improved quality of irrigation water (in terms of biological oxygen demand, fecal coliform,
                         dissolved oxygen, salinity) used by farmers, especially those at                                  the
                         tail-end of marwas (relative to baseline and non-project neighboring compari
                         son areas); and
                          e) Increased number of active Marwa Committees.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The project development objective is to increase agricultural profitability and improve equity in
                         access to higher-quality water for around 140,000 small-scale
                         farmers on 200,000 feddans (80,000 hectares) in the command areas of Mahmoudia,
                         Manaifa and Meet Yazid located in the Nile Delta. This would be conducted specif
                         ically in areas where upstream irrigation improvement interventions, both physic
                         al and institutional, have occurred and are fully functional. These objectives w
                         ould be achieved through both structural improvements and a strengthening of far
                         mer support services. The project#s success would be measured by the following i
                         ndicators:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          a) Increased agricultural output in LE per feddan (relative to baseline and non-project neighboring
                         comparison areas);
                          b) Reduced agricultural operating costs in LE per feddan (relative to baseline and non-project
                         neighboring comparison areas);
                          c) Difference in yields between farmers at the tail-end and head-reach of quaternary canals reduced
                         (relative to baseline and non-project neighboring comparison                                    areas);
                          d) Improved quality of irrigation water (in terms of biological oxygen demand, fecal coliform,
                         dissolved oxygen, salinity) used by farmers, especially those at                                  the
                         tail-end of marwas (relative to baseline and non-project neighboring compari
                         son areas); and
                          e) Increased number of active Marwa Committees.
                         3. Project Description
                         The project comprises two components and has an estimated baseline cost of US$151.7 million. The
                         estimated total cost is US$165.8 million including physical and price contingency allowances. The
                         components with their estimated baseline costs are outlined below.

                         Component 1: Marwa and Farm-Level Irrigation Improvements (approximately US$130.7 million).
                         Component 1 supports marwa and farm-level irrigation modernization in the command areas of


                                                                      Page 2 of 11
                         Mahmoudia, Manaifa and Meet Yazid. In these locations, branch canal and mesqa improvements
                         have been carried out or are currently ongoing, and mesqa water user associations (WUAs) have
                         been formed for sustainable O&M and irrigation management. Component 1 would provide
Public Disclosure Copy




                         financing for the following activities: (i) marwa and off-farm improvements comprising various pipe
                         and hydrant systems, open channels and small gated outlets, with options designed and implemented
                         in accordance with farmer needs and agreement; mesqa pump stations and associated fittings will
                         also be upgraded and new valves provided for off-take into the marwas as needed; (ii) change of
                         approximately 85 percent of the mesqa pump stations from diesel pumps to electric ones and
                         installation of dedicated rural electric-power grids; (iii) farm-level improvements such as laser land-
                         leveling, reshaping field drains, soil improvements, flexible hose systems, and gated pipes; (iv)
                         establishment of workshops for use and maintenance of mesqa and marwa-level works and land
                         improvement activities; and (v) field surveys, designs, and construction supervision and
                         management.

                         Component 2: Farm-level Technology Development and Dissemination (approximately US$ 12.6
                         million). Component 2 aims to enhance farmer knowledge and uptake of improved irrigation and
                         associated land improvement and crop production technologies in parallel with and in support of the
                         marwa-level irrigation modernization carried out under Component 1. The component would
                         include: i) demonstrations of marwa-level and on-farm irrigation improvements, associated land
                         improvement measures, and agronomic practices, including those appropriate for horticultural crops;
                         (ii) training of lead farmers, extension staff, public sector service providers such as workshops for
                         installation and repair of irrigation infrastructure, project implementation and administration staff,
                         and senior management and policy level officials; (iii) improved farmer awareness and knowledge
                         through farmer exchange visits, information publication and mass media broadcasting, and improved
                         and increased outreach of the Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation#s (MALR's) interactive
                         web-based extension information networks, the Rural and Agricultural Development Communication
                         Network (RADCON) and the Virtual Extension and Research Communication Network (VERCON);
                         (iv) improved extension delivery including field allowances, transportation, minor equipment and
                         facility improvement; (v) pilots and studies to support development of future field-level irrigation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         improvement; and (vi) implementation support.

                         Component 2 activities would be carried out in close interaction with participating farmers and the
                         private sector. The component would pilot an improved extension model that could be monitored
                         and transferred to other regions in support of the national program for irrigation modernization. This
                         would include greater private sector participation among lead farmers and local contractors,
                         increased opportunities for farmer-to-farmer learning, enhanced farmer access to information and
                         feedback through the interactive information networks, and improved capacity of extension staff to
                         respond to farmer demand through training in both technical and facilitation skills. The proposed
                         extension, demonstration and training activities are expected to accelerate the process of adoption of
                         new technologies such as improved varieties, proper fertilization, use of manure/compost and IPM,
                         resulting in increases in productivity. The greater security of water delivery and more equitable water
                         distribution coupled with demonstrations of horticultural crop production is also likely to encourage
                         the production of riskier but higher value crops such as fruits and vegetables.

                         Component 2 would also strengthen relevant MALR agencies and organizations (this includes
                         EALIP, Marwa Committees, WUAs, and agricultural cooperatives) responsible for implementation
                         through training programs and support for the development of an improved information and
                         monitoring system (MIS). The component would also encompass project management, with support
                         for EALIP to take responsibility for procurement, financial management and monitoring and

                                                                      Page 3 of 11
                         evaluation (M&E). Component 2 wou ld build capacity within EALIP both to manage its own
                         program and to undertake their required responsibilities through training, support for surveys and
                         impact assessments and logistical support.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The FIMP's first phase focuses on 200,000 feddans in 3 sub-basins:
                         1. Mahmoudia: northern edge of West Delta;
                         2. El Wasat: in Middle Delta, a sub-area of the Meet-Yazid command area;
                         3. Manaifa: Northern edge of Middle Delta, immediately south of Lake Burulus.

                         The 3 aforementioned main sub-basins almost overlap with the same boundaries of the ongoing
                         Integrated Irrigation Improvement and Management Project (IIIMP); whereas in terms of a spatial
                         focus, FIMP focuses on modernizing the quaternary-canal and on-farm subsystems of IIIMP. Thus,
                         as far as the safeguards policies concern, FIMP is deemed a sub-set of IIIMP.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Amal Nabil Faltas Bastorous (GSU05)
                         Chaogang Wang (GSU05)
                         Mariana T. Felicio (GSU05)
                         Mohammad Farouk Ibrahim Kandeel (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP     No
                          4.04
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36         No
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Pest Management OP 4.09    Yes
                          Physical Cultural          No
                          Resources OP/BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/     No
                          BP 4.10
                          Involuntary Resettlement   Yes            The Ministerial Decree No. 564 covers compensation for
                          OP/BP 4.12                                damaged crops due to irrigation and drainage. A
                                                                    committee responsible for valuation and compensation
                                                                    enforces that payment is made through the contracting
                                                                    company to all farmers within one month of the damage.
                                                                    The project currently compensates farmers for crop
                                                                    damage associated with irrigation and drainage, not
                                                                    installation of medium and low voltage electricity poles.
                                                                    While in the majority of cases electricity poles are being
                                                                    installed in the 'right of way', this has not always been the
                                                                    case and cannot be guaranteed. The plots of land that
                                                                    poles have been implanted are small in measurement (120
                                                                    cm x 120 cm x 2 m depth or smaller) and do not impede



                                                                     Page 4 of 11
                                                              the cultivation of the land. The ownership of the land
                                                              under the poles never ceases to be the farmer➢❨ s and the
                                                              installation of the pole only causes restriction on the use
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              in a way that is considered to be ➢❨ temporarily➢❨ used.
                                                              Therefore, compensation for the actual land cannot be
                                                              granted by the Government because there is no permanent
                                                              land taking in the process. Therefore, the compensation
                                                              calculation is made based on the loss of crops that the
                                                              farmer will encounter as a result of the imposed restriction
                                                              on this small area of land. While small, the plot of land
                                                              that is in ➢❨ temporary➢❨ use cannot be used for crop
                                                              harvesting during this period. In the context of the
                                                              project, ➢❨ temporary➢❨ is defined as a 20 year period
                                                              as this is the lifetime of the project. Compensation is
                                                              therefore calculated for two seasons of crop damage and
                                                              multiplied by 20 years (the life time of the project), in
                                                              addition to 200% of inflation rate and is determined based
                                                              on the potential use of land that would be/could be
                                                              cultivated but is not being cultivated due to
                                                              ➢❨ temporary➢❨ occupation but not due to transfer of
                                                              ownership or expropriation. For these reasons, it is
                                                              recommended that OP 4.12 be triggered and the client
                                                              proceed to prepare a Resettlement Action Plan to ensure
                                                              fair and systematic compensation be paid to all affected
                                                              farmers. However, given the lack of knowledge of the
                                                              exact alignment of the electric lines and locations of the
                                                              poles, the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was
                                                              recommended to be prepared, requiring preparation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              site-specific RAP when the exact locations are known.
                                                              Additionally, it is recommended that a clause in the
                                                              electricity contracts that stipulates that farmers who
                                                              experience crop damage and/or private land taking will be
                                                              compensated at replacement value and withhold payment
                                                              to contractor until payment is completed. The PMU will
                                                              need to closely monitor the compensation process for
                                                              electricity contracts as this is not clear in the Egyptian
                                                              Law and differs from the process followed for irrigation
                                                              and drainage.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   Yes
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                                                               Page 5 of 11
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                           Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                             No major safeguard issues/impacts are expected. However, OP 4.01 on Environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Assessment has been triggered because (small-scale) irrigation/drainage projects may be
                           associated with some environmental and social impacts such as changes in soil salinity or impacts
                           from small-scale civil works. The modernization of on-farm irrigation will lead to more efficient
                           and productive use of irrigation water, as well as to increased yields. Irrigation technology
                           development and dissemination and the development of Marwa Committees and the strengthening
                           of local farmer organizations will further improve overall water and land management at the local
                           level. OP 4.09 on Pest Management and OP 7.50 on International Waters have also been triggered
                           as described in Section 2 below.

                          The EIA/EMP confirmed that FIMP is classified as Category B, given that no significant,
                          irreversible or long-term adverse environmental impacts are anticipated
                          and that any identified adverse impacts can be effectively addressed through appropriate
                          preventive actions or mitigation measures. These and other environmental issues were examined
                          during the EIA/EMP. Some other issues emerged during implementation. Some of the old pump
                          stations that would be rehabilitated includes asbestos roofs that would be removed and disposed
                          off safely, and some resettlement issues were also identified (as indicated below), therefore a
                          modified version of the ESMP has been prepared including measures to adequately handle those
                          issues. The ESMP was necessary given the inclusion of social aspects that could be handled by the
                          EMP.

                          OP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources is not triggered. OP 4.11 applies when projects involve
                          "significant excavations, demolition and movement of earth, flooding or other environmental
                          changes" or if the project is located "in, or in the vicinity of, a physical cultural resource site
                          recognized by the government". The FIMP does not involve significant excavations as
                          modernizing the marwas will require trenches of about 1 meter in depth, and the areas in question
Public Disclosure Copy




                          are not considered physical cultural resource sites. Nevertheless, measures will be put in place for
                          any #chance finds# that may be encountered during project implementation, by including
                          appropriate provisions in the contractors bidding documents for civil works. In such cases, actions
                          taken by the contractor will be in compliance with GoE as well as World Bank requirements (thus
                          replicating the IIIMP and other ongoing WB-supported operations in Egypt, where such provisions
                          have been accepted by the WB).

                          OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement is triggered. This Project is likely to have social impacts
                          such as permanent land acquisition for the base of medium and low-voltage electricity poles,
                          temporary land occupation by contractors➢❨ equipment and material (poles, cables and wiring),
                          and socio-economic loss during installation of poles causing crop damage by tractors as well as
                          impacts on encroachers within the ROW by losing part of the illegal planted land. The lands that
                          will be needed permanently for the sitting of electric poles is obtained by accepting approach from
                          the farmers. Details of the above impacts is elaborated below:
                          a) The project will finance the installation a total of 11,603 low and 6,978 medium poles. An
                          average area of land of about 2 square meters will be needed for the sitting of both poles (0.64 sq.
                          meter low + 1.44 sq. meter medium). According to the final design, about 30% of the low voltage
                          poles (3,481 poles) will be installed on private land and 100% of the medium voltage poles will be
                          installed on private land. Therefore, the total amount of land required for the low poles will be
                          about 2,230 sq. meter and for medium poles will be about 10,050 sq. meter;


                                                                    Page 6 of 11
                         b) There might be temporary land use during the implementation stage by contractors;
                         c) Tractors will pass through agriculture land resulting in damage for the crops, trees and the loss
                         of income of farmers; and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         d) There may be impacts on encroachers' crops planted on the ROW.

                         The PMU is currently trying to assess whether any land loss and/or crop loss has already taken
                         place and whether they were already affected by the installation of the electricity poles under the
                         current implementation of the project. A census is underway to make this determination and based
                         on the outcome the team will begin a completion audit to identify PAPs and compensate them.
                         The existing grievance redress system will be strengthened and publicly disseminated widely.

                         OP 7.50 on International Waters is triggered. However FIMP will not adversely change the
                         quantity or quality of water flows to the other riparian countries, and will not be adversely affected
                         by the other riparian's possible water use. This determination has been made on the basis of the
                         assessment carried out during t he preparation of the proposed Project, including the Project
                         Environmental Assessment and supporting documentation. Based on the nature of the project and
                         in compliance with OP 7.50, the review of the project has concluded that while the OP is
                         applicable in this case, notification of riparians is not mandated.

                         Indeed, the proposed Project will rehabilitate existing irrigation schemes and does not include any
                         investments to upgrade the capacity of the upstream supply infrastructure (secondary canals, main
                         canals and/or main pumping stations). Replacing existing earthen field ditches with buried PVC
                         pipes and laser-land leveling is expected to reduce irrigation water conveyance loses. Buried PVC
                         pipes will reduce water borne bacteria and parasites. Egypt is the farthest downstream Nile
                         riparian and the target command areas are in the farthest downstream (northernmost) area of the
                         country. Therefore the project will not affect the quality or quantity of water flows to the other
                         riparians and it is not expected to be adversely affected by the other riparian's possible water use.

                         OP 4.09 on Pest Management is triggered. However, FIMP will neither procure pesticides nor aim
Public Disclosure Copy




                         at a horizontal expansion of irrigation lands. The project could result in intensifying crop
                         production in terms of vertical expansion (likely up to 20% to 30%), which could lead to
                         increasing the residual pesticide/fertilizer concentrations in some FIMP areas by up to 20%.
                         However, the resulting concentrations would still be well below the permissible WHO/GOE
                         standards. The base line data taken from Mahmoudia area indicated that the present concentration
                         of the pesticide residues in off-farm irrigation canals is way lower than their permissible WHO/
                         GOE norms. Also the EA tested the crop tissues (shoots and roots) in the 3 FIMP command areas
                         and found sufficient contents of micro and macro nutrients, and hence the EA concluded that the
                         pesticide residues in the on-farm irrigation water have been below the WHO standards.

                         During FIMP implementation, SWERI will figure out if these residuals will approach their
                         permissible norms in any specific FIMP site (in the irrigation water, soil or crop tissues), and the
                         EMP would strictly apply the ongoing integrated pest management practices further facilitated by
                         the extension activities introduced by FIMP. Regulation of pesticide application is already an
                         ongoing policy of MALR, and the success of enforcing this policy has been observed in the
                         general long-term downward trend in misusing pesticides throughout the latest two decades.
                         Further details are provided in Annex 10 of the PAD.

                         Likely component-specific and location-specific impact: While for most tail-enders the FIMP
                         would reduce soil salinity (due to reducing fresh-water shortage and/or helping to replace the

                                                                    Page 7 of 11
                           unregulated reuse of drainage), front-end farmers who used to flood their lands with water may
                           encounter reduced on-farm water application to an extent which raises salinity and concentration
                           of other water-quality parameters unsuitable for horticultural crops (component 2). However,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           generally, FIMP farm-level technologies are designed to provide better field distribution of water.
                           Mitigation measures such as applying irrigation water with some extra leaching fraction, improved
                           drainage, and use of gypsum, can all be facilitated by the technology switch offered by FIMP,
                           hence reducing salinity as needed. Also horticulture activities should be implemented only in
                           suitable areas following water/soil quality testing.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            The overall environmental and social impacts of FIMP are expected to be very positive
                           (Components 1 and 2 will overall help improve water management in the Delta).
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            Egypt has a reasonably good legal and regulatory framework related to environmental and social
                           protection, including requirements for environmental assessments and mitigation.

                          The EIA/EMP has been prepared by SWERI, which will house the Environmental Management
                          Unit (EMU) for FIMP. The EMP also builds on the ongoing IIIMP-ESMP that has been
                          developed by MWRI. Details are provided in Annex 10 of the PAD. The EMP has been modified
                          during implementation to reflect issues that were later identified, including the asbestos waste with
                          respect to old pumping houses and resettlement issues with respect to project affected persons. As
                          such, the ESMP was developed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          The RPF has also been prepared by the project given the triggering of OP4.12. Site specific
                          Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or Abbreviated RAP as appropriate will be prepared at a later
                          stage when exact alignment of the electric lines and poles are known.

                           SWERI will be responsible for providing guidance and technical monitoring for implementing the
                           ESMP, whereas managing the day-to-day ESMP activities will be a shared responsibility between
                           MALR/EALIP and SWERI (depending on the type and scale of the prevention/mitigation
                           activity). Details are provided in Annex 10 of the PAD.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Consultation: The project draws on the experience of previous projects (IIP, IIIMP) with regard
                           to farmer consultations which are carried out through Water User
                           Associations. A socio-economic study recently being carried out by GIZ in a pilot area where
                           marwa improvements have been implemented, as well as an ongoing social study on women and
                           men tenants and agricultural workers are both contributing to strengthened consultations with
                           farmers and local stakeholders through interviews and a variety of focus group discussions.
                           Finally, a 12-step Marwa improvement process is detailed in the PAD which includes
                           consultations and the establishment of Marwa Committees. Consultation records have also been
                           provided in the EIA/EMP during project preparation, as ten farmer representatives (farmer
                           cooperatives) in the project's 3 command areas were interviewed about their views on: the best


                                                                     Page 8 of 11
                           option to improve the marwa; the expected benefits from the project; and the EIA results, RPF and
                           EMP-related prevention and mitigation actions. The participants' feedback was positive on these 3
                           aspects.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Disclosure: The EIA/EMP has been disclosed on the website of SWERI and has been made
                           available at MALR's regional offices in FIMP governorates, and the Arabic version of its
                           executive summary has been shared with farmer representatives (through MALR's extension
                           agency) in FIMP's three command areas. The modified ESMP and RPF have also been disclosed
                           locally at the PMU and FIMP governorate offices in both Beheira and Kafr el Sheikh.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        30-Jun-2010
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     11-Aug-2010
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Egypt, Arab Republic of                                            07-Jul-2010
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        24-Apr-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     02-May-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Egypt, Arab Republic of                                            25-Apr-2016
                           Comments: The RPF has been disclosed at PMU office in Cairo as well as in PMU Governorate
                                         offices in Beheira and Kafr el Sheikh. Moreover, the revised ESIA/ESMP has been
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         disclosed in all PMU offices and at SWERI webiste.
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        30-Jun-2010
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     11-Aug-2010
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?

                                                                    Page 9 of 11
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?
                          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                          the project legal documents?


                                                                     Page 10 of 11
                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Bekele Debele Negewo
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nina Chee (SA)                  Date: 05-May-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Steven N. Schonberger (PMGR)   Date: 05-May-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               Page 11 of 11
