The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Electricity Supply Reliability Project (P116748)




                          Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                      Restructuring Stage


         Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Apr-2017| Report No: ISDSR22011




                          Regional Vice President:    Cyril E Muller
                                 Country Director:    Mercy Miyang Tembon
                   Senior Global Practice Director:   Riccardo Puliti
                      Practice Manager/Manager:       Sameer Shukla
                               Task Team Leader:      Artur Kochnakyan, Abdulaziz Faghi
           The World Bank                                                                                   RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Electricity Supply Reliability Project (P116748)




                                                               .


I. BASIC INFORMATION

1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

Project ID                                                         Project Name
P116748                                                            Electricity Supply Reliability Project
Task Team Leader(s)                                                Country
Artur Kochnakyan                                                   Armenia
Approval Date                                                      Environmental Category
26-May-2011                                                        Partial Assessment (B)
Managing Unit                                                      Is this a Repeater project?
GEE03

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

Total Project Cost                                                 Total Financing
    0.00                                                           0.00
Financing Gap
    0.00

Financing Source                                                                                                 Amount
Total                                                                                                               0.00

2. PROJECT INFORMATION

    Current Project Development Objective
    The project development objective is to increase the reliability and capacity of the transmission network.



.
        The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Electricity Supply Reliability Project (P116748)



1. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

The project consists of the following:

Part A: Strengthening of the power transmission network

A.1.   Provision of works, goods, and technical assistance for the replacement of an existing power
       transmission line from the Hrazdan Thermal Power Plant to Shinuhayr substation and the existing
       power transmission line Lalvar-Noyemberyan, including compensation and grievance mechanisms for
       land acquisition and resettlement.

A.2.   Provision of works, goods, and technical assistance for (i) the rehabilitation and extension of
       Haghtanak electrical sub-station, and (ii) the rehabilitation of Charentsavan-3, Vanadzor-1, and Zovuny
       electrical sub-stations.

Part B: Technical Assistance

       Provision of goods, technical assistance, Training, and Operating Costs, to HVEN to strengthen its
       capacity in: operation and maintenance of power transmission assets, technical supervision, planning,
       procurement, financial management, and project management.
.

3. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
   KNOWN)
The existing OTLs from Hrazdan TPP to Shinuhayr substation has a total length of around 230 km and runs
along a northwest-southeast trending axis through Armenia. The physical environment along the existing
corridor is not particularly sensitive or vulnerable. The land is mostly used for grazing or cultivated. There are
also residential areas, land under commercial and manufacturing activities, and transport infrastructure. The
transmission line corridor traverses the buffer zone of Lake Sevan National Reserve. The protected status of
this area was established after the original transmission line had been constructed. The existing 25km Lalvar-
Noyemberyan OTLs will be replaced with new OTLs running within the corridor, with some deviations by in
some parts required in order to avoid settlements and sensitive natural receptors. OTLs will run across a
complex terrain, including grass-plains, valleys, canyons, steep forested slopes, and Debed River. In several
locations, the OTLs over-span deep gorges with villages located on the bottom, which will not be affected by
construction and operation of OTLs, however the project will require land acquisition for tower foundat.
Haghtanak substation is located in the capital city of Yerevan, in a sparsely populated area. The substation
territory is fenced. It is accessible by a road, which passes nearby the facility. Most of the land around the
substation is not in use. It carries next to no vegetation. Some of the land to the north of the substation is
being cultivated. There is an industrial facility to the east of the substation. Charentsavan-3 substation is
located in the Kotayk marz (region), near the city of Charentsavan. The substation territory is fenced. It is
accessible by a local road, which passes nearby the facility. Some of the land around the substation is used by
the local farmers primarily for cattle grazing and crop growing. Rehabilitation works will not impact adjacent
land users or owners. Vanadzor-1 substation is located in the Lori marz (region), in the city of Vanadzor. The
       The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Electricity Supply Reliability Project (P116748)



substation territory is fenced. It neighbors with the premises of a chemical plant, which is currently out of
service. The rehabilitation will not impact any land users. Zovuny substation is located on the northern
border of the city of Yerevan. The territory is fully fenced and the substation has an access road. The
construction will not impact one small private land plot adjacent to the substation.



4. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Name                                                       Unit
Sarah G. Michael                                           ECCSC
Jennifer Shkabatur                                         GSU03
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
5. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED


 Safeguard Policies                          Triggered            Explanation

                                                                  The     project     activities     would     generate
                                                                  environmental and social impacts. To address
                                                                  them, the Borrower prepared site-specific EMPs,
                                                                  which specify all necessary mitigation and
                                                                  monitoring activities.
                                                                  Draft EMP for Zovuny substation was approved
                                                                  and publicly consulted. The draft EMP for Zovuny
Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                                  substation was subsequently disclosed on HVEN's
                                                                  website (May 26, 2017) and at World Bank's
                                                                  external website (May 26, 2017). The final version
                                                                  of the EMP will be re-disclosed on HVEN's and WB
                                                                  external websites by June 30, 2017 after review
                                                                  and incorporation of comments from the World
                                                                  Bank.
                                                                  Hrazdan TPP-Shinuhayr OTL runs though the
                                                                  buffer zone of Lake Sevan National Reserve. There
                                                                  are certain land use restrictions in this buffer zone,
                                                                  which are intended to protect of Lake Sevan
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)              Yes
                                                                  watershed area through protection of rivers. The
                                                                  EMP includes appropriate mitigation measures,
                                                                  including turbidity control, spill prevention, habitat
                                                                  preservation and biodiversity protection.

Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                       No                   This policy is not triggered.
       The World Bank                                                                     RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Electricity Supply Reliability Project (P116748)



                                                          Pesticides will not be applied for vegetation
                                                          control in substation or any other purpose related
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                    No
                                                          to the construction or operation phases of the
                                                          project.
                                                          Armenia is rich in physical cultural resources (PCR)
                                                          and a screening assessment identified several
                                                          areas and sites of cultural relevance along the
                                                          corridors of OTLs. Chance finds of PCR could result
                                                          from the installation of new foundations for the
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes
                                                          towers, especially in the bypass areas, or from the
                                                          construction of access roads and temporary works.
                                                          Thus, a thorough PCR assessment and a PCR
                                                          management plan, including chance find
                                                          procedures, have been included into the ESIA.

Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)            No           N/A.

                                                          Acquisition of private land plots is required to
                                                          construct tower foundations and access roads,
                                                          along with the possibility that residential
                                                          structures close to the transmission line may have
                                                          to be moved. HVEN has been and will continue
                                                          conducting the land acquisition as per RAPs, which
                                                          were approved by the World Bank.

                                                          As of May 1, 2017, six RAPs have been developed
                                                          covering sections of the OTL from Hrazdan TPP to
                                                          Shinuhayr substation in line with requirements of
                                                          the RPF. Implementation of the four RAPs was
                                                          completed and HVEN hired an external monitoring
                                                          consultant to prepare compliance reports, which
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)      Yes          were      reviewed    by     the     World     Bank.
                                                          Implementation of the remaining RAPs is on-going,
                                                          and they need to be updated in order to address
                                                          inconsistencies between cadastral maps and
                                                          actual land ownership. The updated RAPs are
                                                          expected to be submitted for World Bank review
                                                          by June, 2017. In total, 475 plots owned, rented or
                                                          illegally used by 651 households are expected to
                                                          be acquired under the project. As of May 1, 2017,
                                                          437 plots have already been acquired and the
                                                          acquisition of remaining 38 plots is in process.

                                                          During the implementation of the works on OTL
                                                          sections from Hrazdan TPP to Shinuhayr
                                                          substation, it was found that construction works
       The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Electricity Supply Reliability Project (P116748)



                                                                   started on some land plots before affected people
                                                                   had been fully compensated. Construction works
                                                                   on that particular locations were suspended until
                                                                   the compensation is paid in full. The process is
                                                                   being monitored by the external monitoring
                                                                   agency and the result will be reported in the RAP
                                                                   completion report for approval by the Bank. HVEN
                                                                   has already hired a new social safeguards
                                                                   specialist to conduct a continuous monitoring of
                                                                   the situation on the ground and ensure that
                                                                   similar issues would not occur in future.

                                                                   No involuntary taking of land is needed for
                                                                   rehabilitation of Zovuny substation.
                                                                   The project implementation does not include any
                                                                   works on dams and no part of the project-
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                No
                                                                   supported infrastructure depends in its operation
                                                                   on any existing dam.
                                                                   The project activities will not use and not
Projects on International Waterways (OP)                           influence, in any manner, any national or
                                             No
(BP 7.50)                                                          international surface waters and groundwater
                                                                   resources.

                                                                   The project does not include any activities in
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)    No
                                                                   disputed areas.

KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A. SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
   potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
   The restructured project is not expected to have significant irreversible social or environmental impacts and,
   therefore, is classified as environmental Category B. The original project scope included: (a) replacement of two
   existing (OTLs) closely following the existing corridor; and (b) rehabilitation of three substations. Rehabilitation of
   Zovuny substation is proposed to be added to the project.

   Many of the long term environmental impacts have already occurred and will not be significantly influenced by
   rehabilitation. Incremental permanent impacts will be restricted to relatively minor segments where new bypasses
   are planned. Physical environment along the existing OTL corridors is not particularly sensitive or vulnerable to
   impacts from construction and operation of OTLs. HVEN ensures that its contractors follow good construction
   practices.

   As observed from the operation of the present OTLs, once in operation, the OTLs would leave the surrounding
   environment relatively undisturbed. Temporary access roads have been mostly re-vegetated by natural attenuation;
      The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
      Electricity Supply Reliability Project (P116748)



  the OTL is no restriction to agriculture, horticulture, animal grazing or wildlife migration; and Lake Sevan Park is not
  impacted in any way by existing line. Due to the mostly grassy, sparse vegetation along the line corridor, only minor
  forest management is required, and no herbicides are used to control vegetation. Due to the proximity to the
  existing line, no impact on avian fauna beyond the already existing, is expected.

  The physical environment in and around the substations, including Zovuny, is significantly transformed and not
  vulnerable to any expected impacts. Out of all types of works to be undertaken at Haghtanak, Charentsavan-3, and
  Zovuny substations, relatively higher risks are associated with the replacement of small buildings within the land
  plots allocated for these substation, and the replacement main transformers (MTRs). Replacement of the existing
  small operational buildings will generate some demolition waste, which will have to be disposed in environmentally
  decent manner; while the replacement of MTRs will generate some hazardous waste. So the main challenges will be
  to ensure that the used transformer oils are not recycled in an informal manner, but are rather handed over to
  specialized entities for deactivation and safe recycling. Upgrading of Vanadzor-1 substation has fewer potential
  impacts given that its operational building will not be replaced.



2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  Operation of the rehabilitated substations will imply periodic replacement of MTR oil and unless undertaken in an
  environmentally sound manner, that may cause pollution of the environment and impact on human health.

  The only long term impact of the project is the land acquisition that is required for tower construction. For the
  ongoing OTL from Hrazdan TPP to Shinuhayr substation, HVEN undertook all design measures to avoid physical
  relocation. The same is done for the Lalvar-Noyemberyan OTL. Other impacts are expected to be limited.
  Agriculture will be possible in ROW after construction period, and grazing will be allowed within the corridor. Any
  private landowners of grazing lands will be compensated for any temporary or permanent impacts on their access
  to grazing resources.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  Alternative to the project is the "no project". This would, while preventing any construction related impacts, make
  no difference in terms of the operational impacts (as it already exists). "No project" scenario was rejected as it
  carries high risk of disruptions in power supply, including power outages, as well as accidents at workplace due to
  highly deteriorated status of infrastructure, which was commissioned in 1950-70s and was not substantially
  rehabilitated ever since.

  Alternatives in the transmission lines’ routing were analyzed at the conceptual design stage aiming at the reduction
  of a need for land take and physical relocation, as well as minimizing risks of erosion on the slopes and impacts on
  relatively more valuable forest stands. Adjustments to the OTL routing was performed at the detailed design stage
  with full respect of the environmental and social impact assessment provided in the safeguard documents prepared
  for the project.

  The RPF of the original ESRP was updated to analyze the resettlement implications of the rehabilitation of the Lalvar
  and Noyemberyan OTLs, and RAP(s) were prepared and are being implemented.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
     The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     Electricity Supply Reliability Project (P116748)



 As of May 1, 2017, six Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) have been developed covering sections of Hrazdan-
 Shinuhayr OTL. Implementation of four RAPs was completed and HVEN hired an external consultant to prepare
 compliance reports, which were reviewed by the World Bank. Implementation of the remaining RAPs is on-going,
 and they need to be updated to address inconsistencies between cadastral maps and actual land ownership. The
 updated RAPs are expected to be submitted for World Bank review by June, 2017. In total, 475 plots owned, rented
 or illegally used by 651 households are expected to be acquired under the project. So far, 437 plots have already
 been acquired and the acquisition of remaining 38 plots is in the process. During the implementation of the works
 on OTL sections from Hrazdan TPP to Shinuhayr substation, it was found that construction works started on some
 lands before affected people had been fully compensated. Construction works in those locations were suspended
 until the compensation is paid in full. The process is being monitored by external monitoring agency and the result
 will be reported in the RAP completion report. HVEN has already hired a safeguards specialist to conduct a
 continuous monitoring of the situation on ground and ensure that similar issues would not occur in future.

 To address potential environmental and social impacts, HVEN prepared site-specific EMP for Zovuny substation,
 which contains mitigation and monitoring plan along with their implementation arrangements. The EMP was
 reviewed by the World Bank Environmental Specialist, which found it in full compliance with the National EA
 requirements and World Bank Operational Policies. HVEN remains the implementing agency for the restructured
 project. The implementation of the original project is progressing well and is rated as Satisfactory on the safeguards
 performance. All safeguard documents due at various stages of preparation and implementation were delivered
 and are being implemented to the satisfaction of the Bank. HVEN uses consultant services for supervising works
 under the project, and the project is financing in-house capacity building of HVEN as well.

 HVEN hired an environmental specialist, which undertakes quality control of supervision consultants and conducts
 field trips to the sites of this project and the Electricity Transmission Network Improvement Project (ETNIP), which is
 another Bank-supported operation for which HVEN is the implementing entity.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies,
 with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
 HVEN, administrations of individual power substations, and all electricity consumers in Armenia supplied with
 power infrastructure targeted by the project are key beneficiaries and stakeholders of the project. They were
 involved and consulted from early stage of the project preparation onwards; specific concerns and perspectives
 were heard, recorded and factored into preparation of the safeguards documents. The final versions of EMPs for
 three existing substations, RPF, and RAPs for Hrazdan TPP - Shinuhayr OTL were prepared, disclosed, and publicly
 consulted. After incorporation of all relevant comments, the documents were re-disclosed in-country and on the
 World Bank's external website. An updated RPF was prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed in country and on the
 World bank's external website. RAPs for Lalvar and Noyemberyan OTL are under preparation and will be disclosed
 after public consultations.

 The project will continue supporting widespread stakeholder information-sharing and consultation. The project
 promotes gender-sensitive consultation mechanisms at all stages. The existing grievance redress mechanism will
 continue to be used to support citizen engagement in the project. The GRM is operated by HVEN and allows project
 affected people and other interested stakeholders to submit all types of complaints, suggestions, or questions
 related to the project. Local self-governing bodies on the community level are involved in the process of GRM as
 mediators between the stakeholders, community member and HVEN. All affected households were explained about
 the GRM during Public Consultation meetings as well as through the disclosed project information leaflets. The GRM
 has been functioning well and HVEN records all questions/concerns, and provides responses in timely manner.
                      The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                      Electricity Supply Reliability Project (P116748)



                  The draft EMP for Zovuny substation was disclosed in Armenian and English languages through sending hard copies
                  to communities and posting on the web-site of HVEN, and it was open for feedback from potentially affected
                  communities by advertising locations for accessing hard copies of these documents and contact information for
                  submitting comments. The draft final EMP for Zovuny substation was subsequently disclosed on HVEN's website
                  (May 26, 2017) and at World Bank's external website (May 26, 2017). The final version of the EMP will be re-
                  disclosed on HVEN's and WB external website by June 30, 2017 after review and incorporation of comments from
                  the World Bank.

            DISCLOSURE_TABLE
            B. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

        Date of receipt by the Bank                                      Date of submission for disclosure
        09-Mar-2011                                                      09-Mar-2011
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                        Date of Disclosure
            Armenia                                                        07-Apr-2014
            Comments
            The final ESIA report for the sections of OTL from Hrazdan TPP to Shinuhayr substation was received by the Bank on
            March 4, 2011 and disclosed in-country and at Bank's external web-site on March 9, 2011.

            The final ESIA report for additional Lalvar and Noyemberyan OTLs was received by the Bank on July 16, 2015; was
            disclosed in-country on August 21, 2015; and on Bank's external web-site on August 26, 2015.

            EMPs for Haghtanak, Charentsavan-3, and Vanadzor-1 substations were disclosed in-country on April 4, 2014 and on
            Bank's external web-site on April 7, 2014.

            Draft final EMP for Zovuny substation was disclosed in-country and on Bank's external website on May 26, 2017. The
            final EMP will be disclosed in-country and on Bank's external website by June 30, 2017 after review and incorporation of
            Bank's comments.


RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Date of submission for disclosure
           The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Electricity Supply Reliability Project (P116748)



09-Mar-2011                                                    09-Mar-2011
“In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                         Date of Disclosure
 Armenia                                                         07-Apr-2014
 Comments
 The final updated RPF report, which includes Lalvar and Noyemberyan OTLs, was received by the Bank on July 16, 2015;
 was disclosed in-country on August 21, 2015; and submitted to InfoShop on August 26, 2015.

 RAP for Section 1 of the OTL from Hrazdan TPP to Shinuhayr substation was disclosed in-country and on Bank's external
 web-site on January 27, 2015.

 RAP for Section 2 of the OTL from Hrazdan TPP to Shinuhayr substation was disclosed in-country and on Bank's external
 web-site on January 27, 2015.

 RAP for Section 3 of the OTL from Hrazdan TPP to Shinuhayr substation was disclosed in-country and on Bank's external
 web-site on April 7, 2015.

 RAP for Section 4 of the OTL from Hrazdan TPP to Shinuhayr substation was disclosed in-country and on Bank's external
 web-site on August 28, 2015.

 RAP for Section 5 of the OTL from Hrazdan TPP to Shinuhayr substation was disclosed in-country and on Bank's external
 web-site on November 24, 2014.

 RAP for Right-of-Way land plots on Sections 3 and 4 of the OTL from Hrazdan TPP to Shinuhayr substation was disclosed
 in-country and on Bank's external web-site on January 8, 2016.
COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                  Yes
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the
                                                                                                  Yes
 credit/loan?



 NH_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical
                                                                                                  No
 natural habitats?
        The World Bank                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Electricity Supply Reliability Project (P116748)



If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures      NA
acceptable to the Bank?



PCR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                Yes

Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                   Yes
impacts on cultural property?



IR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy             framework/process
                                                                                   Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice
                                                                                   Yes
Manager review the plan?



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                   Yes
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups     Yes
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                   Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                   Yes
cost?

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
                                                                                   Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal               Yes
documents?
          The World Bank                                                       RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          Electricity Supply Reliability Project (P116748)




III. APPROVALS


                                              Artur Kochnakyan
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                              Abdulaziz Faghi

    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor                        Nina Chee          06-Jun-2017

    Practice Manager/Manager                  Sameer Shukla      06-Jun-2017

.
