                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA8080
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Feb-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Argentina                         Project ID:   P145686
                            Project Name:      AR Flood Risk Management Support Project for the City of Buenos Aires
                                               (P145686)
                            Task Team          Christophe Prevost,Maria Catalina Ramirez
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       28-Jan-2016                          Estimated   05-Jul-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GWA04                                 Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Flood protection (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Water resource management (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:        326.00             Total Bank Financing: 200.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 126.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    200.00
                              Total                                                                                    326.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           Strengthen the Autonomous City of Buenos Aires to efficiently manage flood risk and improve the
                           drainage systems in the Cildáñez, Maldonado and Vega watersheds.
                            3. Project Description
                           The Project would support the City of Buenos Aires’s plan to reduce flood hazard and will build

                                                                      Page 1 of 19
                         upon the activities conducted under the Urban Flood Prevention and Drainage Project APL1, lessons
                         learned, best practices, and experiences obtained from its implementation, as well as from activities
                         in other countries. The proposed project will have three components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Institutional Development for Flood Risk Management (approximately US$31.2
                         million): This component will support the creation of a modern and sustainable framework for flood
                         risk management within the City of Buenos Aires based on a permanent inter-institutional
                         organization that goes beyond the life of the Project. Component 1 will finance systems, equipment,
                         the development of risk models, policies and strategies, and capacity-building amongst other goods
                         and services. At this point it is envisaged that the following four sub-components or activities will be
                         financed:
                         •        Hydro-meteorological observation, surveillance and alert system (SIHVIGILA for its initials
                         in Spanish): This sub component will finance an integrated hydro-meteorological observation,
                         monitoring, alert, alarm, and response system which will increase the City’s severe-weather
                         forecasting capacity thus improving flood preparedness and emergency management and recovery.
                         City counterparts responsible for Component 1 are currently drafting an agreement with the National
                         Meteorological Service that explores synergies and creates joint forecasting capabilities to
                         incorporate a high resolution S-band Doppler-effect radar, the first of its kind in Argentina.
                         •        Flood Risk Financing and Protection Scheme: This sub-component will finance technical
                         assistance (TA) for the development a flood risk financial and protection program for homeowners
                         and SMEs that includes the design of a strategy (based on existing data) of innovative retention and
                         transfer instruments and products such as insurance (starting with a probabilistic flood risk model),
                         flood exposure databases, hazard maps, risk-based pricing and underwriting tools, web-based
                         production systems, claims management systems, etc. A regulatory capacity-building process as well
                         as outreach and consumer education on flood risk insurance will also be fostered. The proposed
                         Flood Risk Financing and Protection Scheme will enable the City of Buenos Aires to considerably
                         reduce fiscal outlays on post-flood compensation payments by applying a rational fiscal and
                         budgetary retention capacity and by transferring flood risk exposure to the private insurance and
                         reinsurance markets.
                         •        Flood Risk Social Communication and Education: This sub-component will finance the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         design of contents for communication and educational campaigns (formal and informal) on flood risk
                         topics. Some of the activities could be implemented by local NGOs based on specific proposals
                         aimed at building capacity in flood related topics and the dissemination of information. This sub-
                         component aims at increasing social awareness on flooding risk and educating residents on
                         emergency response plans and recommended behaviors to increase safety before and under an
                         emergency, particularly targeting local neighborhood councils (comunas), civil-society
                         organizations, and NGOs.
                         •        Capacity Building for flood risk management: The objective is to support City institutions in
                         charge of different functions related to flood hazard management including infrastructure planning,
                         emergency response, and operation and maintenance of the City's increasing drainage infrastructure
                         and systems amongst others.

                         Component 2: Flood Mitigation Infrastructure (approximately US$290 Million): This component
                         will finance works for a total of approximately US$215 million. All works will be designed for the
                         10 year storm. This component includes the specialized independent supervision of the works. It will
                         finance the following works in three of the City’s drainage basins:
                         •        Maldonado Stream Basin: Roughly 40 kilometers of secondary and tertiary drainage
                         conduits which will convey water into the large drainage tunnels built with funds from the previous
                         Bank loan;
                         •        Vega Stream Basin: The Project will finance the construction of one large drainage tunnel

                                                                      Page 2 of 19
                         with an estimated length of 8.4 kilometers, which will act as a second emissary for the Vega stream.
                         The new drainage tunnel will more than double the capacity of the existing one. The Project will also
                         finance 10.5 kilometers of secondary and tertiary networks;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •       Cildáñez Stream Basin: The activities in this basin will include (i) improvements to the
                         existing conduits to increase the drainage capacity in the lower lands of the Cildáñez watershed to
                         reduce the likelihood of flooding, (ii) the environmental recovery of Lake Soldati by diverting both
                         sewage and storm runoff currently discharging into the lake, and (iii) the use of this pond as a flood
                         retention basin to delay flows towards the Riachuelo River.

                         Component 3: Project Management (approximately US$4.3 million): To finance Project audits,
                         monitoring and evaluation, including an impact evaluation based on baseline and post-project
                         surveys, capacity building, training, and other operating costs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project is located in the city of Buenos Aires, capital of Argentina. The city is situated on the
                         south bank of the La Plata River, has a surface area of approximately 200 square kilometers, and a
                         population of approximately 3 million inhabitants (8 percent of the national population).
                         The works and improvements under Component 2 will be located in the Cildáñez, Maldonado, and
                         Vega basins. The Cildáñez basin covers a suburban area in the southern part of the city of Buenos
                         Aires (3131 hectares within the city) and is populated by around 290,000 inhabitants; the low basin,
                         the primary target of the planned interventions under Subcomponent 2.1 (which have an influence
                         zone of about 310 hectares), is populated by around 50,000 low-income residents who dwell in
                         informal settlements and social housing in the surroundings of the Cildañez stream, where the Lake
                         Soldati is located. This lake is actually a pond, a depressed area in the low basin. Now the lake area
                         is environmentally degraded due to the discharge of wastewater from the informal settlements and
                         the dumping of solid waste. The Maldonado and Vega basins comprise over 30 percent of the city's
                         area and population and cover the central area of the city. The geographically delimited area of the
                         Vega Basin, integrally located within the city, has a surface area of approximately 1700 hectares and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         is populated by around 280,000 people. The Maldonado basin has a surface area within the city of
                         about 5100 hectares and is populated by over 1,000,000 people.
                         The La Plata River is the most important surface water resource of the study area. It has an average
                         yearly flow of 22,000 cubic meters per second. The La Plata River is the receiving body of the
                         present Vega and Maldonado basins discharges and, directly or indirectly, of all the Metropolitan
                         Area of Buenos Aires basins discharges, including those of the Riachuelo River (where the Cildáñez
                         stream discharges). The La Plata River is subject to pollution from domestic and industrial waste.
                         Hydrologic characteristics of this river favor higher concentrations of contaminants in a relatively
                         narrow strip, approximately 500 meters wide measured from the coastline. This coastal zone is
                         seriously compromised due to the presence of physical and bacteriological contaminants.
                         The long history of man-made physical modifications to the city has caused the existing natural
                         habitats’ conditions to be almost entirely replaced by urban components; no natural habitats or
                         environmentally sensitive areas are present in the zone directly affected by the projected works.
                         No known or suspected archeological sites have been documented in Project related studies or
                         literature in areas that would be directly impacted by the works; however, the underground of the city
                         of Buenos Aires could be considered of archeological potential.
                         There are two relevant groundwater systems in the project area:
                         (i)      Epipuelches is a multilayer aquifer located in the Pampeano sediments (aquifer of medium to
                         low productivity) and Postpampeano sediments (mostly an aquitard, of low productivity, and with
                         waters of a high saline content). Pampeano sediments are not present towards the Eastern and


                                                                     Page 3 of 19
                         Southeastern parts of the city, including the Vega, Maldonado and Cildáñez low basin areas, and the
                         La Plata and Riachuelo Rivers riverbanks. The water table in the shallow layers of the above
                         mentioned sediments ranges between 2 and 15 meters below surface elevation and generally follows
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the surface morphology. The water table presents high levels of diverse chemical, physical, and
                         biological contaminants originated by human activity. Based on its productivity and quality,
                         Epipuelches aquifer is not exploited in the Project location zone;
                         (ii)      Puelches is located in the Puelchenses sands underneath the Epipuelches aquifer and
                         separated from it by a low permeability layer of clay. The Puelchenses sands, which are found at an
                         average depth of 30 meters below surface elevation, rest on the impermeable Paraná aquiclude
                         (underlying rock). The Puelches is a semi-confined aquifer; the layer of clay makes difficult but does
                         not impede a low natural circulation of groundwater (ascendant and descendant) between the
                         Puelches and Epipuelches aquifers. The Puelches is an extensive (it extends beyond the City and
                         even the Province of Buenos Aires), very productive aquifer with a large amount of water that is safe
                         for human consumption, irrigation, and industrial uses. However, its quality diminishes towards the
                         La Plata River and the Riachuelo River (where Pampeano sediments are not present). In the Project
                         location zone the Puelches aquifer is affected by high levels of nitrates (NO3-) and even, towards the
                         riverbanks, by high saline contents; at present, it is only used in limited amounts for industrial
                         purposes.
                         According to the project design and feasibility technical studies of the new tunnel in the Vega basin,
                         the top of the tunnel segment to be built by conventional methods (approximately 2.4 kilometers)
                         will be located between 10 and 15 meters below the surface and cut across the Pampeano sediments
                         and the water table. The rest of the tunnel—built by TBM-EPB method (approximately 6 kilometers)
                         —will be excavated at a depth ranging between 23 and 30 meters below surface (tunnel ceiling). This
                         portion of the tunnel will be mostly located at the base of the Pampeano formation, but a segment of
                         it will intersect the Puelches formation. The walls of the discharge chamber to be constructed in the
                         margin of the La Plata River will traverse the Epipuelches (Postpampeano sediments) and Puelches
                         aquifers.
                         Foreseen physical interventions below surface associated to the construction of the secondary and
                         tertiary drainage conduits in the Vega and Maldonado basin, as well as to the envisioned works in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Cildáñez basin will not be developed at depths that go beyond 6 meters; they will not interact with
                         the Puelchenses sands.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Carlos Alberto Molina Prieto (GSU04)
                         Elba Lydia Gaggero (GEN04)
                         Robert H. Montgomery (GEN04)
                         Santiago Scialabba (LCC7C)

                         6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental               Yes            The Flood Risk Management Support Project for the City
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      of Buenos Aires is classified as Category A according to
                                                                    World Bank Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                                                                    based upon one of the flood mitigation works to be
                                                                    developed under Component 2, specifically the large
                                                                    drainage tunnel and its complementary works in the Vega
                                                                    basin (part of the Subcomponent 2.3), which has some
                                                                    potential significant socio-environmental adverse impacts



                                                                     Page 4 of 19
                         although they are not considered irreversible or non-
                         mitigable.
                         The other works envisioned under the Subcomponent 2.3
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in the Vega basin (secondary and tertiary drainage
                         conduits construction), the Subcomponent 2.2 in
                         Maldonado basin, and the Subcomponent 2.1 in Cildáñez
                         basin, involve relatively standard, smaller-scale
                         infrastructure works that have been assessed to have few
                         and less adverse potential effects, site specific, non-
                         irreversible, not significant, and can readily be prevented
                         or mitigated with routine/standard measures.
                         There are no significant negative indirect or long term
                         impacts anticipated related to the Project.
                         (Note: details on potential impacts associated with
                         Component 2 of the Project are presented below, in
                         Section II - Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their
                         Management)
                         Activities under Components 1 and 3 such as institutional
                         development and capacity building are not likely to
                         generate adverse impacts. In fact, they are designed to
                         enhance the positive outcomes, long-term benefits and
                         sustainability of the project.
                         Given that three different works and interventions in three
                         different areas of the city are envisioned under the
                         Project, three separate, specific Environmental
                         Assessment instruments have been developed in
                         accordance with the World Bank's Environmental and
                         Social Safeguards Policies:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         -        Subcomponent 2.1 - Cildáñez basin:
                         To manage impacts related to this subcomponent, an
                         ESIA (including an ESMP) has been prepared based upon
                         the ESMF originally developed for the project.
                         Note: During the first stage of project preparation
                         (2013/2014), the specific physical interventions to be
                         financed by the Bank were not fully defined and therefore
                         it was not possible to accurately determine needed actions
                         and associated details, secure the pertinent inter-
                         institutional agreements and commitments, and properly
                         integrate the local community’s input. For that reason,
                         and following WB’s safeguards guidelines, an
                         Environmental and Social Management Framework
                         (ESMF) was developed to set the criteria to manage all
                         potential impacts related to this component. The details of
                         the proposed works were defined in a second phase of
                         project preparation (2015) and an ESIA with its
                         corresponding ESMP were prepared accordingly, also
                         following the requirements of the local EIA system.



                          Page 5 of 19
                         -        Subcomponent 2.2 - Maldonado basin: This
                         Subcomponent will complete the network of secondary
                         and tertiary drainage conduits planned for the basin in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         HMP. These works were included in the executive project
                         of the two large tunnels successfully executed under the
                         previous Bank-funded Urban Flood Prevention and
                         Drainage Project APL1. Therefore, they were part of the
                         APL1’s EIA developed in 2005 following the Bank’s
                         guidelines and requirements as well as local regulations.
                         For managing impacts related to this Subcomponent, an
                         updated ESIA has been prepared based upon the existing
                         EIA of the Maldonado’s secondary and tertiary drainage
                         conduits originally developed for the APL1 and other
                         relevant information. The new ESIA addresses
                         environmental and social baseline conditions; potential
                         adverse environmental and social impacts; risks; benefits;
                         and includes an ESMP for construction and operation
                         phases.
                         -        Subcomponent 2.3 - Vega basin: A full
                         Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) has
                         been developed for the hydraulic works in the Vega basin.
                         The ESIA addresses the background (planning stage—
                         city’s HMP preparation, including project alternatives
                         analysis, and early consultations); establishes detailed
                         environmental and social baseline conditions; identifies
                         and assesses potential environmental and social adverse
                         impacts and risks based on the type and scope of physical
                         interventions and site characteristics, as well as expected
Public Disclosure Copy




                         benefits; designs appropriate mitigation, management, and
                         monitoring measures; and presents an Environmental and
                         Social Management Plan (ESMP) for the proper
                         management of works during construction and operation
                         stages.
                         Preliminary reports of the ESIAs and ESMPs of the
                         hydraulic works in the Vega and Maldonado basins were
                         disclosed locally on December 27, 2013. Corresponding
                         draft reports of these instruments were publicly disclosed
                         in country in March, 2014, and through the World Bank
                         InfoShop Website in April, 2014. The Cildáñez ESIA and
                         corresponding ESMP was disclosed in country in
                         September 2015 and in the InfoShop in January 2016.
                         From the time of the development of the HMP, the city’s
                         Government, principally through the Ministry of Urban
                         Development (MUD) and the Ministry of Environment
                         and Public Space (MEPS), has implemented various
                         forms of public input/participation that contributed to the
                         development of the works designs and its corresponding



                          Page 6 of 19
                                                       social and environmental studies and instruments.
                                                       Specific public consultation meetings on the draft ESIAs
                                                       of the hydraulic works in the Vega and Maldonado basins
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       took place as following:
                                                       -        ESIA Maldonado Basin: April 28, 2014;
                                                       -        ESIA Vega Basin: April 29, 2014
                                                       The revised ESIAs including the ESMFs, which took into
                                                       account the stakeholders’ views, were disclosed locally in
                                                       August, 2014, and through the World Bank InfoShop
                                                       Website in September, 2014.
                                                       In addition, the ESIA of the hydraulic works in Vega
                                                       basin had a Public Hearing according to the local EIA
                                                       legal system, which took place on September 29, 2014.
                                                       The Cildáñez’s ESIA and its corresponding ESMP were
                                                       disclosed in country on September 14, 2015 and in the
                                                       Bank’s InfoShop on January 26, 2016. The Cildañez
                                                       ESIA’s consultation process involved periodic meetings
                                                       with the Red Intercomunal Cuenca Cildáñez (RICC), as a
                                                       continuity of the consultation process initiated during the
                                                       ESMF preparation, and technical interactions with other
                                                       relevant stakeholders (such as academy).

                                                       Note: A specific public consultation meeting on the draft
                                                       ESMF of the hydraulic works in the Cildáñez Basin took
                                                       place on May 30, 2014. In preparation to this meeting the
                                                       MEPS, together with the Secretariat of Inclusive Habitat
                                                       hold a series of weekly meetings from early May 2014
                                                       with neighbors and civil society groups to discuss and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       agree on the approach of the works in the Cildáñez low
                                                       basin. During the consultation, these abovementioned
                                                       meetings were highlighted by the attendees as very
                                                       positive for project’s ownership.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No   This policy is not triggered since the Project does not
                         4.04                          require the significant conversion of natural habitats or
                                                       critical natural habitats and will not take place in
                                                       protected areas or ecologically important sites. However,
                                                       the ESIAs and ESMF identified and assessed, as
                                                       applicable, the potential impacts on non-critical natural
                                                       habitats and environmentally fragile areas in the
                                                       corresponding influence zones of the projected works.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No   This policy is not triggered since the Project will affect
                                                       neither forests nor forest-dependent communities, nor will
                                                       it involve changes in the management of forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No    This policy is not triggered since the Project does not
                                                       require the purchase or use of significant quantities of
                                                       pesticides



                                                        Page 7 of 19
                         Physical Cultural           Yes   No known or suspected archeological sites have been
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11              documented in Project related studies or literature in areas
                                                           that would be directly impacted by the Project. However,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           since the underground of the city of Buenos Aires could
                                                           be considered of archeological potential and Component 2
                                                           works entail large excavations and soil movement, a
                                                           potential exists for the accidental discovery of physical
                                                           cultural resources. Thus the policy is triggered. The
                                                           necessary mitigation measures have been considered
                                                           within OP/BP 4.01 and the specific EA instruments (e.g.,
                                                           ESMPs with chance finds procedures).
                                                           None of the Project foreseen works will affect surface
                                                           areas that require PCR protection (Historic Protection
                                                           Areas and Protected Buildings, which are the two legal
                                                           categories of the Autonomous City of Buenos Aires in
                                                           regards to the protection of its urban patrimonial values).
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No       This policy is not triggered since Project activities will not
                         BP 4.10                           affect indigenous peoples as defined in the policy.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes      OP 4.12 has been triggered because at the beginning of
                         OP/BP 4.12                        project preparation the civil works to be carried out in the
                                                           Cildáñez watershed were not fully defined and therefore it
                                                           was possible that one or more physical interventions
                                                           financed by this Subcomponent could potentially affect
                                                           houses in some informal settlements in the Cildañez
                                                           basin. For that reason, a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                           (RPF) has been prepared and was disclosed on August 29,
                                                           2014. The works in Cildáñez watershed have now been
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           defined within selected from CABA’s program for
                                                           integrated urban water management in marginal areas. No
                                                           resettlement is expected linked to the planned physical
                                                           interventions. If any of the civil works planned for the
                                                           Cildáñez Basin cause resettlement at the moment of the
                                                           subproject execution (for example, due to an unexpected
                                                           change in the present conditions of the implementation
                                                           area), a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared
                                                           before the start of the works. No resettlement will be done
                                                           in the Maldonado and Vega watersheds.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP        No    The Project will not support the construction or
                         4.37                              rehabilitation of dams nor will it support other
                                                           investments which rely on the services of existing dams.
                                                           Therefore, the Policy is not triggered.
                         Projects on International   Yes   In consultation with LEGEN it was confirmed that the
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50              OP/BP 7.50 Policy on Projects in International
                                                           Waterways is triggered. The Project involves the
                                                           construction of a new drainage tunnel and discharge of
                                                           storm water into the Rio de la Plata, which is an



                                                            Page 8 of 19
                                                                      international waterway shared by Argentina and Uruguay.
                                                                      The proposed Project works represent expansions of
                                                                      existing systems that would not adversely change the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      quality or quantity of the water flows or be adversely
                                                                      affected by other possible riparian water uses. Following
                                                                      the OP/BP 7.50 requirements, a formal notification of the
                                                                      proposed Project and its elements was sent by the Bank to
                                                                      the Republic of Uruguay on June 18, 2014. It was
                                                                      received and a courtesy translation was required by the
                                                                      government of Uruguay. No objection has been received
                                                                      from the government of Uruguay.
                            Projects in Disputed       No             The Policy is not triggered because the Project will not be
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                          implemented in areas known to involve disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The Flood Risk Management Support Project for the City of Buenos Aires involves a series of
                              works/physical interventions under its Component 2. One of them is an investment of a large scale
                              and high technical challenges: the new tunnel and complementary works in the Vega basin.
                              Because of this investment alone the Project has been categorized as A. This categorization was
                              given based on the type and magnitude of the works, the relative complexity of the works’ location
                              (central area of the city of Buenos Aires), and the subsequent potential environmental and social
                              impacts, even though they are not considered irreversible or non-mitigable. The rest of the
                              projected physical interventions are relatively simple, small to medium sized-scale infrastructure
                              works, for which no significant or irreversible impact is anticipated. In all cases, the potential
Public Disclosure Copy




                              adverse impacts of the construction stage are considered more important than those of the
                              operational stage, although they are mitigable with the application of relatively routine/standard
                              mitigation measures. As the works in the Vega and Maldonado basins will take place on or
                              beneath roads and public space, without existing private formal or informal occupation or uses at
                              present, no potential locations of land acquisition or related activities (such as easement) have
                              been identified and involuntary use of land or expropriations are not foreseen for the Vega and
                              Maldonado subcomponents. Civil works in the Cildañez basin will be carried out as part of
                              CABA’s program for integrated urban water management in marginal areas. No resettlement is
                              expected linked to this physical interventions. If any of the civil works planned for the Cildáñez
                              Basin cause resettlement at the moment of the subproject execution (for example, due to an
                              unexpected change in the present conditions of the implementation area), a Resettlement Action
                              Plan (RAP) will be prepared before the start of the works, accordingly to the provisions included
                              in the Project’s RPF.
                              The main potential positive impacts and long-term outcomes associated with the Project are
                              related to the city’s increased resilience to flooding events. They include the improvement of the
                              population’s quality of life, a reduction in related economic losses, and the efficient delivery of
                              essential services such as energy, transportation, health and education, among other benefits. In
                              addition, the development of large scale drainage infrastructure will boost the construction sector
                              and create jobs. Anticipated potential positive impacts to the Cildáñez basin also include the
                              betterment of sanitation conditions for the vulnerable residents who live in informal settlements


                                                                       Page 9 of 19
                         around Lake Soldati (improvement of water quality, less exposure to pests, etc.), and the
                         improvement of the environmental and aesthetic conditions of the Cildáñez low basin, particularly
                         of the lake’s surrounding area.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         A summary of expected potential impacts for each Subcomponent of Component 2 is described
                         below
                         Subcomponent 2.1, Cildáñez basin: Under this subcomponent the Project will support the
                         implementation of the “Program for integrated urban water management in marginal areas of the
                         Maldonado-Cildañez Basin”. The Program’s general objective is to improve the existing drainage
                         infrastructure to reduce the likelihood of flooding and promote better life conditions in a low-
                         income area within the basin.
                         The influence zone of the Program—about 310 hectares in the low basin—is one of the most
                         socially vulnerable areas of the city. It comprises a population of around 50,000 inhabitants who
                         live precariously in the surroundings of the Cildáñez stream. There are around 12,000 inhabitants
                         that live under flood risk due to the location next to the Lake Soldati (on the left bank of the
                         stream), of which 5,000 have suffered flood related problems in the last flood events (Manzana 9
                         and 10 in Los Piletones Neighborhood, and Nueva Esperanza Neighborhood). Furthermore, other
                         24,000 have problems derived from floods and high water levels, permanence of puddles and
                         returning of sewage derived from deficient constructions and saturated networks. The area also
                         includes two neighborhoods on the right bank of the Cildáñez stream that have around 13,000
                         inhabitants: within Comuna 8 the Nágera Neighborhood (a social housing complex of middle
                         income population) and within Comuna 9 the Villa 6, which in the last years has been urbanized
                         into what is currently known as Cildáñez Neighborhood.
                         The specific different physical interventions include: (i) the construction of two drainage channels,
                         (ii) the construction of a drainage collector around Lake Soldati, and (iii) the construction of a
                         temporary retention area.
                         The main anticipated potential adverse impacts related to activities of Subcomponent 2.1 are
                         related to the construction stage of infrastructure works. They include noise; vibration; exhaust
                         emissions from machinery; dust emission and dispersion from excavation activities; disruptions in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         normal urban movement (traffic and pedestrian); and safety issues. None of these potential
                         impacts is anticipated to be significant. Foreseen works and complementary interventions the
                         Cildañez basins do not anticipate any significant negative impact on physical cultural resources;
                         however, the ESMP and related construction contracts will include procedures and requirements
                         related to chance find management. No resettlement is expected linked to this physical
                         interventions. If any of the civil works planned for the Cildáñez Basin cause resettlement at the
                         moment of the subproject execution (for example, due to an unexpected change in the present
                         conditions of the implementation area), a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared before
                         the start of the works, accordingly to the provisions included in the Project’s RPF.
                         Expected benefits from the implementation of the Program include flood mitigation, betterment of
                         sanitation conditions, and environmental and urban improvement of the area.
                         Subcomponent 2.2, Maldonado basin: This Subcomponent will complete the network of secondary
                         and tertiary drainage conduits planned for the basin in the HMP (around 46 kilometers). To date,
                         the city has built about 32 percent of the network. The remaining 31 kilometers, distributed
                         throughout many different sectors of the basin—which has a surface area within the city of about
                         5100 hectares—is proposed to be partially financed by the new Project. Part of these conduits will
                         feed water directly into the large drainage tunnels built under the previous Bank loan, while
                         another portion will enhance the flowing capacity of the upper Maldonado watershed which is
                         diverted into the Cildáñez watershed, and ultimately flows into the Riachuelo River. It is important
                         to remark that project works in the Maldonado basin will not have effects in the Cildañez

                                                                   Page 10 of 19
                         watershed; the planned works will not modify the existing diversion system that today diverts
                         water from the Maldonado to the Cildañez watershed. The main potential adverse impacts on the
                         urban social and environmental settings are similar to those of Subcomponent 2.1, since small to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         medium sized-scale infrastructure works in urbanized areas will take place. None of these potential
                         impacts is anticipated to be significant. Foreseen works do not anticipate any significant negative
                         impact on physical cultural resources; however, the ESMP includes (and, accordingly, related
                         future contract will include) procedures and requirements associated to chance find management.
                         No resettlement related impact has been identified for these works. The creation of jobs is the
                         main positive impact expected from the construction stage.
                         The operational phase would have mostly positive effects: permanent social benefits with the
                         optimization of the basin’s flood protection infrastructure.
                         Subcomponent 2.3, Vega basin: The projected works comprise: i) construction of a tunnel of
                         approximately 8,400 meters long with tunneling (approximately 6 km using a Tunnel Boring
                         Machine of the Earth Pressure Balance type [TMB-EPB], and approximately 2.4 km using manual
                         or conventional methods), and its complementary works; and ii) approximately 9.8 km of
                         secondary and tertiary drainage conduits. This infrastructure will upgrade the current insufficient
                         drainage system of the Vega basin—which dates back to the 1930s and 1940s—, significantly
                         increasing the level of protection and reducing social and economic losses caused by flooding.
                         Today, the Vega basin over-flows frequently, causing disruptions to the entire city of Buenos
                         Aires by blocking the vital transportation network (road, railway, and subway) that links the
                         districts in the North to downtown and to the industrial, populous areas of the South.
                         During the construction phase, predominant adverse potential impacts were found to be of medium
                         intensity, short term occurrence, with a restricted affected area (operational area of influence);
                         effects are mostly transitory. Potential adverse impacts include particulate matter emissions;
                         increased noise level and vibration; and, mainly, impacts on the urban social setting due to
                         discomfort, nuisance, disruptions in normal urban movement—traffic and pedestrian—, alteration
                         of daily activities; visual impacts; etc. although they will have a transitory effect with a duration
                         confined to the period of the execution of the works. None of these potential impacts is anticipated
                         to be significant. There could also be negative impacts related to occupational health and safety of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the staff if proper measures are neglected. The hydraulic works in the Vega Basin does not
                         contemplate any physical displacement (resettlement) or loss of economic activity. The project
                         does not anticipate any significant negative impact on physical cultural resources; however, the
                         ESMP includes (and, accordingly, related future contract will include) procedures and
                         requirements associated to chance find management.
                         Foreseen construction methods and technical provisions would allow structures to be isolated from
                         groundwater and avoid an artificial hydraulic connection between aquifers (mainly by the use of
                         earth pressure balance for tunneling and the use of hydro milling machine for the discharge
                         chamber walls construction).
                         The ESIA performed a specific analysis on the potential subsidence from excavation activities. A
                         risk assessment on buildings located along the tunnel alignment was made; risks proved to be
                         “very low” and “negligible”. However, future contractors will be required to perform audits and
                         controls on the conditions of the buildings and infrastructure that could be affected by the works.
                         The main disposal site(s) for soil from excavations (estimated in around 250,000 cubic meters)
                         have not been established at this advanced executive project design stage. The city will identify
                         and select the specific location(s) of soil disposal site(s) during works execution based on the
                         quality characteristics of the excavation materials and construction needs (e.g. part of the soil may
                         be used as soil cover in diverse components of the works). The city will be the owner of the
                         material, and will be responsible for the appropriate selection of disposal site(s) for exceeding soil
                         from excavations and the management of the disposal (no involuntary use of land or expropriation

                                                                   Page 11 of 19
                           is foreseen in connection with the disposal site(s) selection); future final design and construction
                           contractor of the works will be responsible for the management of material transportation.
                           However, the ESIA has preliminarily identified four potential sites for the disposal of exceeding
Public Disclosure Copy




                           soil from excavation, which are located in the North, the South (two sites), and in the West of the
                           city—three of them situated in the territory of the Province of Buenos Aires—, in order to assess
                           the availability of such sites, the proper conditions of disposal and the management of material
                           transportation. The ESIA provides recommendations and mitigation measures for the proper
                           environmental management of the soil disposal sites, including soil disposal conditions.
                           The estimated highest potential positive impacts in the construction stage are the creation of jobs
                           —some of them highly specialized in large scale infrastructure—, and the creation of informal
                           economic activities. In general terms, they would be temporary impacts; but they may have effects
                           that go beyond the works completion period.
                           During the operation stage, predominant potential impacts are positive, of high to medium
                           intensity, with an extensive area of influence and mostly permanent effect. The highest and
                           permanent positive impact expected of the operation and maintenance phase of the Vega basin’s
                           new drainage system is increased flood protection in the basin and the associated direct and
                           indirect benefits on all the compartments of the social setting (population, economic activities,
                           infrastructure and services, facilities, cultural heritage, urban movement, territorial structure, and
                           landscape). These benefits could also reach the entire city of Buenos Aires. Another estimated
                           positive impact is job creation. Potentially significant adverse impacts to the water quantity and/or
                           quality of the La Plata River (average yearly flow of 22,000 m3/s) are not expected since the
                           proposed works would not affect the drainage balance of the Vega basin (maximum flow of 60
                           m3/s), and the discharged storm water from the new emissary (with an estimated influence zone of
                           up to 200 meters from the coastline—which is seriously compromised by diverse contaminants
                           presence) would be of similar quality as that one currently being discharged by the existing
                           drainage system. In addition, monitoring activities of the discharge of the Maldonado drainage
                           system showed that the discharged storm waters improve the water quality of the receiving body in
                           the influence zone of the discharge. It is foreseen that the same situation will be verified in the new
                           discharge of the Vega basin.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The positive impacts, long-term outcomes associated with the Project are related to the city’s
                           increased resilience to flooding events. They include the improvement of the population’s quality
                           of life, a reduction in related economic losses, and the efficient delivery of essential services such
                           as energy, transportation, health and education, among other benefits. In addition, the development
                           of large scale drainage infrastructure will boost the construction sector and create jobs. Anticipated
                           potential positive impacts to the Cildáñez basin also include the betterment of sanitation conditions
                           for vulnerable residents who live in the low basin, and the improvement of the environmental and
                           aesthetic conditions in the watershed.
                           There are no significant negative indirect or long term impacts anticipated related to the Project.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           An analysis of alternatives was performed in connection with the hydraulic works. During the
                           HMP (circa 2004) a thorough alternative analysis was carried out considering technical,
                           environmental, and socio-economic parameters. For the hydraulic works in the Vega basin in
                           particular (as the subcomponent that defines the whole Project as Category A), during the planning
                           stage (preparation of the city’s HMP), four alternatives for the management of floods were
                           identified and analyzed on a pre-feasibility basis. The main options for flood protection that were

                                                                      Page 12 of 19
                         considered are (i) different levels of protection: 5, 10, and 20 years of storm recurrence periods;
                         and (ii) different control systems and combinations of them (conveyance tunnel, storage
                         reservoirs). Only the manual or conventional method for the construction of the conveyance tunnel
Public Disclosure Copy




                         was considered during the planning stage; it essentially covered the works’ technical requirements
                         and its cost was significantly lower when compared to the use of Tunnel Boring Machine
                         technology. The construction of additional secondary and tertiary drainage conduits to reinforce
                         the network in the basin was considered in all the alternatives. The hydraulic modeling of the
                         different solution alternatives was performed with the help of the software package InfoWorks CS.
                         The goal was to seek a solution that would afford the city of Buenos Aires protection against
                         floods associated with rainfall events having return periods of up to 10 years, while mitigating the
                         impact of storm events with return periods larger than a decade. The alternatives were analyzed
                         from technical, economic and socio-environmental perspectives, applying a multi-criteria
                         evaluation analysis. Protection levels, initial investment costs, operation and maintenance costs,
                         beneficiary population, averted damage and potential social and environmental impacts—during
                         the construction and operation phases—were the main comparison criteria. Identification and
                         evaluation of potential social and environmental impacts were based on a specific expedited
                         environmental assessment of the different alternative works, considering the main characteristics
                         of each one and the social and environmental sensitivity as described in the preliminary studies
                         that were carried out for the development of the basin baseline. As a result of this analysis, the
                         following alternative was originally selected: i) construction by manual method of a tunnel of
                         approximately 8,400 meters long with tunneling or access shafts every 500 meters and two vents
                         to evacuate air accumulated inside the tunnel; ii) six flow diversion chambers; iii) an outlet shaft
                         on the riverbank of the La Plata River; and, iv) a pump station for maintenance purposes.
                         At the present design stage of the Vega hydraulic works, alternatives were re-analyzed taking into
                         account the present conditions and the experience acquired. As a result, the design was modified in
                         one main aspect: approximately 6 kilometers of the tunnel will be built using a Tunnel Boring
                         Machine of the Earth Pressure Balance type (TMB-EPB) due to i) its optimal technical aptitude to
                         operate at significant depths and, consequently, its ability to minimize the risk of disturbing the
                         existing underground relevant infrastructure (such as a master aqueduct and two subway
Public Disclosure Copy




                         alignments—only one subway crossed the area of the works location at the time the HMP was
                         prepared); and ii) the minimization of construction impacts on the surface (e.g., noise, dust
                         emission and disruptions in normal urban movement). The advantages of the TBM-EPB method
                         were observed in the successful implementation of the APL1.
                         Other particular design aspects are also targeted to prevent or minimize the potential negative
                         impacts and risk of the works. They include i) the use of hydro milling machine to build the outlet
                         shaft (future discharge chamber) vertical structure, which will reach the underlying rock, method
                         that will allow a minimal disturbance and the excavation of the shaft under “dry” conditions; ii)
                         the chamber shaft will serve as temporary access for the tunnel boring machine during
                         construction and the shield of this machine will be lost during the works (it will not be recovered),
                         in order to avoid further disruptions on the surface; iii) foreseen construction methods and
                         technical provisions would allow structures to be totally isolated from groundwater and avoid an
                         artificial hydraulic connection between aquifers (mainly by the use of earth pressure balance for
                         tunneling and the use of hydro milling machine for the discharge chamber walls construction); iv)
                         the alignment of the Vega new drainage tunnel and its complementary works are entirely placed
                         under roads and public space (minimizing risks on buildings from excavation activities and
                         potential resettlement related impacts); main ancillary facilities for the construction of the tunnel
                         (e.g. main camp, factory and deposit of voussoirs) will be also placed in a city-owned land.
                         During the current project preparation, the Bank’s technical team reviewed and endorsed the
                         engineering proposal presented by the CABA for the Cildañez, Maldonado and Vega basins. The

                                                                   Page 13 of 19
                           Bank’s team validated the technical selection of the infrastructure and made recommendations to
                           optimize the design and reduce potential risks during the construction and operation phases.
                           Recommendations focused on geotechnical conditions, hydrologic modeling, hydraulic design,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and behavior of sediments and their implications for excavation procedures and tunnel design.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The overall environmental assessment process for the interventions in the three basins involved in
                           the Flood Risk Management Support Project for the City of Buenos Aires is based on a multi-
                           phase approach: i) the pre-feasibility studies (finished during the HMP preparation), which
                           analyzed alternatives on the basis of their technical, socioeconomic, and environmental merits, and
                           ii) a more thorough and updated environmental assessment for each specific project/work to be
                           developed based upon the HMP. These actions have been, and continue to be, complemented with
                           dissemination and various forms of public input/participation. Thus, social and environmental
                           aspects have been taken into account in each phase of the design for the infrastructure works: from
                           the preliminary ideas to the bidding stage.
                           The definition of the technical aspects and the deepening of the environmental assessment of the
                           works have incorporated the experience and results of the execution of the past Bank-financed
                           projects, including outreach and participation activities. With this in mind, adjustments to the
                           construction sequence for the new Vega tunnel are planned (TBM-EPB technology application)
                           for with respect to the one originally proposed in the HMP, which in turn is recommended for high
                           occupancy zones where human intervention is high. Meanwhile, interventions in the Cildáñez
                           basin are formulated with the purpose of addressing the current socio-environmental situation and
                           the expectations of the community of the surrounding area, which are considerably different than
                           those that were current at the time the HMP was created, for which modifications to the technical
                           approach are required. Previous implementation experiences and stakeholders input were used to
                           refine the works design and the Terms of Reference of the related EA studies of the new Project.
                           An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment, including an Environmental and Social
                           Management Plan, has been developed for each of the hydraulic works related to Subcomponent
Public Disclosure Copy




                           2.1 (Cildáñez Basin) Subcomponent 2.2 (Maldonado Basin), and Subcomponent 2.3 (Vega Basin).
                           The ESIAs (i) present a detailed description of the legal and institutional framework related to the
                           works’ execution; (ii) present a detailed description of the social and environmental conditions in
                           the area of influence of the works; (iii) identify and assess potential environmental and social
                           impacts based on the type and scope of physical interventions and site characteristics; (iv) identify
                           and design appropriate mitigation, management, and monitoring measures; and (v) organize those
                           measures under an Environmental and Social Management Plan for construction and operation
                           stages, constituted by a series of (interrelated) programs including a Legal and Institutional
                           Aspects Management Program, an Occupational Health and Safety Management Program, a
                           Monitoring and Control Program, a Communication and Community Participation Program, and a
                           Contingencies Program, among others.
                           The execution of works under Component 2 will be contracted to construction companies, who
                           will be required to comply with the environmental and social requirements of the corresponding
                           ESIAs/ESMPs.
                           During the construction of the Vega new tunnel and complementary works, the contractor will be
                           supervised by an independent, specialized supervision firm, including all the social,
                           environmental, occupational health and safety related aspects.
                           The project Operational Manual will incorporate relevant environmental and social aspects,
                           including compliance with project specific safeguard instruments (ESIAs/ESMPs, RPF), inclusion
                           of environmental and social conditions in project contracts, supervision and reporting


                                                                     Page 14 of 19
                           responsibilities, among others.
                           The MoF will set up a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) within the UMF that will preserve the
                           continuity of the team of specialists that has been taking part in the preparation of the Project,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           including a senior social specialist and a senior environmental specialist, who will be supporting
                           the implementing units (for example, the Ministry of Urban Development (MUD). The MUD will
                           be implementing the three subcomponents under Component 2 and will be responsible for all
                           Bank safeguard related issues associated with those subcomponents. The MUD developed the
                           environmental and social safeguards documents, consultations, and processes for the Vega and
                           Maldonado Hydraulic Works. The Ministry of Environment and Public Space (MEPS), supported
                           by the MUD, developed the environmental and social safeguard documents, consultations and
                           processes for the interventions in the Cildáñez watershed. The active participation of the MEPS in
                           the preparation phase was important given its functions related to Public Space and the envisioned
                           CABA’s strategy to revitalize the southern areas of the city. The MEPS also has a solid
                           relationship with the Secretariat of Inclusive Habitat articulating interactions with the local
                           community, which helped to generated conditions that will facilitate the foreseen interventions in
                           the area. The MEPS and the MUD, along with other public organisms involved (Secretariat of
                           Inclusive Habitat, Buenos Aires Sur Corporation, Environmental Protection Agency, Social
                           Intervention Management Unit), have been holding periodic meetings from January 2014 to
                           coordinate present and future actions in connection with the hydraulic works and complementary
                           interventions in the Cildañez basin. The MUD has staff and experience related to Bank safeguards.
                           Nevertheless, it will strengthen its socio-environmental team to ensure effective and adequate
                           capacity during Project implementation. In addition, the MUD will be supported by the senior
                           specialists of the PCU. Component 3 provides resources to support the MUD social and
                           environmental safeguards management.
                           In summary, the mitigation strategy for environmental and social risks of the Project builds upon
                           the experience acquired from previous project and includes: (i) strong technical designs, including
                           the use of the best available technologies that minimize potential adverse environmental and social
                           impacts and risks; (ii) sound social and environmental management instruments; (iii) more
                           resources to ensure technically strong social and environmental staff; (iv) strengthening and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           capacity building activities targeted to social and environmental staff; (v) consultation processes
                           for each works’ subcomponent; (vi) communication and participation programs to build broad
                           community support concerning the hydraulic works; (vii) establishment of a robust grievance and
                           redress mechanism to manage project related information requests, complaints and grievances.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders are the neighbors who live in the Vega, Maldonado and Cildáñez basins (in the
                           last case, particularly the low-income residents who dwell in informal settlements and precarious
                           social housing in the surroundings of Lake Soldati in the Cildañez basin), as well as the civil
                           society organizations such as the intercommunal neighbors’ associations (for example Red
                           Intercomunal de la Cuenca del Cildáñez -RICC-, Inter Consejo Consultivo Comunal de la Cuenca
                           del Arroyo Vega -ICCCCAV-).
                           The city’s Government, mainly through the MUD and the MEPS, has implemented various forms
                           of public input/participation, from the time of the HMP preparation to date, that fed the
                           development of the works designs and its corresponding social and environmental studies and
                           instruments, such us:

                          •       Publication of the HMP’s pre-design reports, meetings and seminars to present the
                          findings, with the participation of local and international professionals and experts on the subject,


                                                                    Page 15 of 19
                         NGOs, neighbors, etc. (from 2002 to 2004).
                         •        Implementation of Procedure PSHX-GG-0001 – Outreach to the Community, of the EMP
                         of the construction phase of the APL1’s drainage tunnels for the Maldonado stream (2008 to 2012)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Informative and consultation meetings about the HMP, completed and future hydraulic
                         works projects, and the issue of floods that the Ministry of Urban Development conducted in 2013
                         with residents of the city. The following meetings were held:
                         -        Comuna 10, two meetings in the month of May; Comuna 9, one meeting in April, two in
                         July, one in August and one in September. In connection with the Maldonado and Cildáñez basins’
                         works.
                         -        Development Associations of the Parque General Belgrano and Nuevo Belgrano
                         neighborhoods, March; Comuna 15, October. In connection with the Vega basin’s works.
                         •        Meetings between the Ministry of Urban Development and the Argentine Society of
                         Engineers. (March and November 2013)
                         •        Customer service centers for complaints and inquires of the Ministry of Urban
                         Development and the Ministry of Environment and Public Space for city residents (contact info,
                         email: mduvecinos@buenosaires.gob.ar; phone: 4323-8000 ext. 4070; email:
                         proyectos_mayep@buenosaires.gob.ar.
                         •        Meetings that the Ministry of Environment and Public Spaces has held with NGOs,
                         forums, and community representatives, particularly from the informal settlements in the
                         surroundings of Lake Soldati, Los Piletones and Nueva Esperanza neighborhoods, and other
                         public agencies that work in the area (e.g. the city’s Secretariat of Inclusive Habitat and Buenos
                         Aires Sur Corporation, the Water and Sanitation Utility of the MABA, and the Matanza-Riachuelo
                         Basin Authority). From August 2013 to date.
                         •        Meetings between the CABA officials, the Bank, and local neighbors associations for the
                         Maldonado, Vega and Cildáñez Basins.- From September 2014 to date.
                         Preliminary reports of the ESIAs, including ESMPs, of the hydraulic works in the Vega and
                         Maldonado basins were disclosed in country on December 27, 2013. Corresponding draft reports
                         of these documents and instruments were disclosed in country on March 14, 2014, and through the
                         World Bank InfoShop Website on April 7, 2014. Specific public consultation meetings on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         aforementioned draft instruments took place during April 2014. The Cildáñez’s ESIA and its
                         corresponding ESMP were disclosed in country on September 14, 2015 and in the Bank’s
                         InfoShop on January 26, 2016.
                         The main issues from the earlier consultations can be summarized as follows: (a) ensuring strong
                         technical designs for the hydraulic infrastructure to reach the objective of flood mitigation; (b)
                         ensuring structures totally isolated from underground materials, in particular avoiding any cross
                         contamination between aquifers derived from the works; (c) high expectations of the basins’
                         inhabitants of a prompt solution of flooding problems with the projected works; and (d) emphasis
                         on implementing non-structural measures along with the hydraulic infrastructure. From the public
                         consultation meetings on the safeguard instruments held on April and May of 2014, a particular
                         new outcome can be added to the previous ones: ensuring communication channels between the
                         neighbors and civil society associations and the government for project’s ownership and control.

                         In this regard, pertinent issues from public input have been taken into account. For example, (i) the
                         Bank’s technical team reviewed and endorsed the engineering proposal presented by the CABA
                         for the Cildañez, Maldonado and Vega basins; (ii) strong technical specifications will be
                         incorporated into bidding documents, including the use of the best available technologies that
                         minimize potential adverse environmental and social impacts and risks; (iii) sound social and
                         environmental management instruments have been developed for each hydraulic works; (iv) the
                         required ongoing consultation during the execution stages of the envisioned works under each

                                                                   Page 16 of 19
                           subcomponent of Component 2 will be implemented through communication and community
                           participation programs, as part of the corresponding ESMPs. Among other things, they will inform
                           the involved neighborhoods in an adequate and timely manner about the status of the works
Public Disclosure Copy




                           (implementation schedule, traffic diversion, special warnings, etc.), and promote participation to
                           ensure appropriate interaction and feedback from the main stakeholders of the works; (v) these
                           participation programs at the works level will be articulated with the grievance and redress
                           mechanism that will also be implemented for the Project as an integral part of the current city’s
                           claims management system to efficiently solve questions, suggestions, and complaints. In addition,
                           the proposed Flood Risk Management Support Project for the City of Buenos Aires (P145686)
                           will prioritize the implementation of Component 1 (non-structural measures), along with the
                           physical interventions.
                           The revised drafts ESIAs/ESMPs of the Vega and Maldonado Basins, which took into account the
                           stakeholders’ views, were disclosed in country in August, 2014, and through the World Bank
                           InfoShop Website in August and September, 2014. In addition, the ESIA of the hydraulic works in
                           Vega basin had a Public Hearing according to the local EIA legal system, which took place on
                           September 29, 2014. The Cildañez ESIA’s consultation process involved periodic meetings with
                           the Red Intercomunal Cuenca Cildáñez (RICC), as a continuity of the consultation process
                           initiated during the ESMF preparation, and technical interactions with other relevant stakeholders
                           (such as academy).

                           Citizens residing in the Arroyo Vega basin submitted a complaint to the World Bank’s Grievance
                           Redress Service raising issues regarding some aspects of project design as well as access to project
                           information, consultation, and stakeholder participation in project preparation. The task team, in
                           collaboration with the GRS, provided clarifications to the complainants on the project as designed
                           and proposed actions within the project scope to address issues they raised.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      27-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-Apr-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      14-Apr-2014
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Argentina                                                        14-Mar-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      02-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   06-Aug-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Argentina                                                        27-Aug-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                                                                    Page 17 of 19
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?


                                                                     Page 18 of 19
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Christophe Prevost,Maria Catalina Ramirez
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)                Date: 26-Feb-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Rita E. Cestti (PMGR)                 Date: 08-Mar-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    Page 19 of 19
