                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC20235

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Jan-2017
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Jan-2017
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Mexico                            Project ID:      P154998
                            Project Name:      MX Water Supply Service Improvement Project (P154998)
                            Task Team          Charles Delfieux
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          07-Feb-2017                       Estimated        30-Mar-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GWA04                             Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    133.00                      Total Bank Financing:         40.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       48.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                          40.00
                              Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified)                              45.00
                              Total                                                                         133.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve the efficiency, quality and financial
                           performance of the water supply service in Mexico City.
                           C. Project Description
                           The Program for Water Supply Services of Mexico City. In order to respond to Mexico City's water
                           challenges, the Government of the City adopted in 2014 the Program of Sustainability and
                           Management of Water Services (Programa de Sustentabilidad y Gestion de los Servicios Hidricos),
                           with the overall objective to sustainably meet the needs for drinking water of the City while allowing
                           for the conservation of the infrastructure, the water resources and the environment. The Program sets
                         the goals, strategies, and actions for an integrated management in the provision of water services in
                         the City of Mexico. The first phase of the Program of Sustainability and Management of Water
                         Services is embedded into the Program for Water Supply Services of Mexico City (Programa Hidrico
Public Disclosure Copy




                         de la Ciudad de Mexico) whose objectives are to (i) improve the efficiency and quality of the water
                         services and (ii) increase the production capacity in targeted areas. The Government of Mexico City
                         and SACMEX's strategy to achieve these objectives is to leverage private sector expertise and
                         incentives through Performance-Based Contracts. The World Bank's financial and technical
                         assistance has been specifically requested to support the achievement of the first objective of the
                         Program through the design and implementation of water service quality and efficiency improvement
                         contracts.

                         SACMEX has some experience in contracting private sector to improve the efficiency of water
                         services. In 1993, the Government of Mexico City awarded 10-year service contracts to four
                         consortiums for the commercial management of its water supply system, including billing, collection,
                         and customer service. These contracts, which have already been extended and modified several have
                         been renewed in July 2016. Overall performance of these contracts has not been fully satisfactory for
                         SACMEX in the past since the collection rate has not improved as planned mainly due to a
                         compensation scheme not sufficiently incentivizing.

                         Objectives of the water service quality and efficiency improvement contracts. The objectives of the
                         water service quality and efficiency improvement contracts are to improve continuity and reduce
                         NRW. These objectives are built in the contracts' compensation scheme. The terms of the contract
                         will be sufficient to embed new practices and levels of service into the institution, and to allow for
                         recovery of private finance provided by the contractors.

                         Description of the water service efficiency and quality improvement contracts. The contracts will be
                         executed by several service providers in 4 mega sectors encompassing 12 out of the 16
                         administrative delegations of Mexico City. The service providers will be responsible for the
                         operation and maintenance of the distribution networks, active control of leakages and of commercial
Public Disclosure Copy




                         losses, and installation and replacement of meters. Service providers' scope of work will also include
                         the planning and execution of the investments required to achieve the targets associated with the
                         performance indicators of the contracts reflecting the improvement of the efficiency and quality of
                         water supply service. SACMEX will remain responsible for the production, treatment and
                         conveyance of bulk water supply to the entry points of the mega sectors operated by the Service
                         Providers, as well as for the operation of the combined sewerage and stormwater drainage networks.

                         Financing of contracts' investments. Investments to be executed by service providers will be subject
                         to two different financing schemes throughout the duration of the contracts. During the Initial Phase,
                         which will have a duration of up to six years, investments will be aimed at establishing hydrometric
                         sectors or District Metered Areas (DMAs) and will be financed by three sources: (i) grants from the
                         FONADIN federal program (Fondo Nacional de Infraestructura) (US$144 million on average,
                         representing 36 percent of total Project costs), (ii) resources from the Government of Mexico City
                         coming from a World Bank loan channeled through BANOBRAS (US$120 million on average,
                         representing 30 percent of total Project costs), and (iii) funding from the service providers
                         themselves -from both equity (US$80 million or 20 percent of total Project costs) and debt (US$56
                         million or 14 percent of total Project costs)-. During the Subsequent Phase, when all DMAs have
                         been established and are up and running, the previous financing scheme involving the World Bank
                         loan and FONADIN grants will be no longer available and investments required will be fully
                         financed by the service providers themselves.
                         Articulation with existing commercial management contracts. The proposed contracts will be
                         implemented in parallel with the current commercial management contracts. The latter will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         complement activities of the proposed contracts through the improvement of the billing and
                         collection rate of SACMEX. The existing four private consortiums will continue to be in charge of
                         meter reading, issuance and delivery of tariffs' bills, collection, and customer service in their
                         respective service areas whose boundaries differ from those of the mega-sectors to be assigned to the
                         private operators under the quality and efficiency improvement contracts. The terms of the contract
                         will stipulate in details the respective responsibilities and obligations of the Service Providers and
                         Concessionaires for any tasks for which could exist contracts' interferences including the installation
                         of micro-meters, the update of the commercial system, the identification and regularization of the
                         illegal uses and connections.

                         Compensation scheme of the water service quality and efficiency contracts. The service providers
                         will be remunerated directly by SACMEX through budget transfers received from Mexico City - and
                         channeled through a management trust fund to be set by the Service Providers. Whilst the financial
                         performance of SACMEX as a stand-alone entity is weak, it is backed by the general revenues of the
                         City of Mexico. This will be an important feature in project design given that the Service Providers
                         are expected to mobilize around one third of the capital expenditures.

                         Component financed by the World Bank Project. The Project will co-finance the investments to be
                         executed by the service providers during the Initial Phase of the contracts as presented previously.
                         The Bank financing will not fund the compensation paid to the service providers. Investments
                         considered include: water network replacement, rehabilitation and leakage repair, sectorization,
                         water connections replacement, update of the commercial database, detection of illegal connections
                         and consumption, and supply, replacement and installation of meters.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project is located in Mexico City. The contracts will be executed by several Service Providers in
                         4 mega sectors encompassing 12 out of the 16 administrative delegations of Mexico City. The
                         service providers will be responsible for the operation and maintenance of the distribution networks,
                         active control of leakages and of commercial losses and installation and replacement of meters.
                         Service providers' scope of work will also include the planning and execution of the investments
                         required to achieve the targets associated with the performance indicators of the contracts reflecting
                         the improvement of the efficiency and quality of water supply service, and including water network
                         replacement, rehabilitation and leak repairs, sectorization, water connection replacement, update of
                         the commercial database, detection of illegal connections and consumption, and supply, replacement
                         and installation of meters. The Project mega sectors are urbanized areas in Mexico City.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The World Bank will lend to BANOBRAS that will on-lend to Mexico City. As any subnational
                         lending operation in Mexico, proceeds of the World Bank loan to the Government of Mexico City
                         will be channeled through the National Bank for Public Works and Services (BANOBRAS).
                         BANOBRAS will be the Borrower, which in turn will on lend to Mexico City's Government. The
                         Bank has prior experience working with BANOBRAS at subnational level. The most recent
                         operation, approved in June 2014, was a US$55 million loan to the State of Oaxaca for the Water
                         and Sanitation Sector Modernization Operation.
                           SACMEX, which is a department of the Government of Mexico City under its Secretariat of
                           Environment, will be the contracting and supervising authority of the contracts with the Service
                           Providers, and as such, it will be in charge of selecting/negotiating with and overseeing the Service
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Providers during the contracts' implementation period through a Project Implementing Unit that will
                           be created within SACMEX for that purpose. Based upon existing information, SACMEX has the
                           capacity to manage social and environmental safeguards issues, as it has current and previous
                           experience in successfully implementing a large number of infrastructure-intensive projects in the
                           water and sanitation sector. As for the social management, the Mexico City Secretariat of Finance
                           (through the Inter-institutional Relations Office) is currently responsible for managing social issues,
                           especially those related to small business. During Project preparation, an assessment of SCAMEX
                           capacity to manage Project-related environmental and social aspects will be performed. If deemed
                           necessary, SACMEX would be requested to provide additional environmental and/or social technical
                           support to assist in Project contract management.

                           The Service Providers will be responsible for the environmental, social, and health and safety
                           (ESHS) management of works performed under each contract. The contracts will oblige the Service
                           Providers to comply with the applicable Mexican regulation, including obtaining all necessary
                           environmental permits. Based on the type and size of these contracts, it is anticipated that large
                           national or international firms will be awarded, and thus they are likely to have the needed ESHS
                           capacity. In this case, the bidding process will include considerations of ESHS aspects. Under the
                           Bank financing, there will be a requirement for Project related works to comply with applicable
                           Mexican regulations and to implement an ESHS management system, which will include: screening
                           potential subprojects for environmental and social risks and impacts, carrying out an environmental
                           and social assessment required to obtain regulatory authorization for the respective subprojects, and
                           implementing necessary mitigation and monitoring measures. The ESHS system will be applicable to
                           SACMEX and to the service providers.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Diacono Raul Vera Hernandez (GEN04)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (GSU04)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         Yes            The Project is proposed to be classified as Category
                           OP/BP 4.01                                      B, since the anticipated environmental and social
                                                                           impacts are relatively limited in scope and mitigation
                                                                           measures are fairly standard. The potential negative
                                                                           impacts are associated with the works executed by
                                                                           service providers in the mega sectors in the Mexico
                                                                           City urban environment which have been highly
                                                                           impacted by humans. The works involve (i) water
                                                                           supply operation and maintenance of the distribution
                                                                           network, active leakage and commercial losses
                                                                           control, and installation and replacement of meters,
                                                                           and (ii) planning and execution of the investments
                                                                           required to achieve the targets associated with the
                                                                           performance indicators of the contracts reflecting the
                         improvement of the efficiency and quality of water
                         supply service, and including water network
                         replacement, rehabilitation and leak repair,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sectorization, water connection replacement, update
                         of the commercial database, detection of illegal
                         connections and consumption and supply,
                         replacement and installation of meters. The Project
                         does not involve any activities associated with the
                         upstream water supply (e.g., collection and storage of
                         raw water) or wastewater collection and treatment,
                         which remain the responsibility of SACMEX. The
                         works and activities envisioned under the contracts
                         do not contemplate the expansion of the water supply
                         distribution network, just the rehabilitation of
                         existing systems in the urban environment, thus no
                         indirect impacts are anticipated due to new water
                         supply collection or additional wastewater generation
                         beyond existing levels.

                         As the Project will use a performance-based contract,
                         no subprojects can be identified prior to appraisal.
                         Therefore, an Environmental and Social
                         Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared.
                         The ESMF will include a screening and assessment
                         procedure to identify, assess and manage potential
                         environmental and social impacts and risks under the
                         contracts. The ESMF will address both SACMEX
                         and Service Providers. The ESMF will identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                         environmental and social requirements for the
                         Service Providers, which will be included in the
                         bidding process and in the contracts. The draft
                         ESMF will be disclosed and consulted prior to
                         Project appraisal.

                         The creation and use of the ESMF should avoid and
                         mitigate potential environmental impacts due to the
                         execution of works to replace the distribution
                         network and to rehabilitate and repair leaks, such as
                         the following:

                         Social impacts: Suspension of water supply during
                         the replacement of the distribution network; Road
                         problems arising from deviations, ditches, storage of
                         materials and operation of machinery and equipment
                         on public roads; Blocking of houses, offices, schools,
                         emergency services (hospitals, firemen); Health
                         damage from dust generation and emissions to the
                         atmosphere from material handling and machinery
                         and equipment operation; Possible damage to
                         property and physical integrity due to voucher
Public Disclosure Copy




                         accidents and leaks or fires resulting from damage to
                         existing facilities in the work area such as Gas
                         Natural, Pemex and CFE. Possible social surveys by
                         the installation of meters of consumption in places
                         where they do not exist at the moment and a fixed
                         fee is paid very low, or it is not paid.

                         Environmental impacts: Impact to the atmosphere by
                         generation of dust, gases and noise derived from the
                         movement of materials and operation of machinery
                         and equipment on public roads; And the increase in
                         emissions of cars in transit through the work area due
                         to deviations and increased traffic). Impact on soil
                         and water due to improper handling of construction
                         waste and hazardous waste, in public road storage
                         and transportation and final disposal. Possible
                         damage to soil, air and water due to leaks or fires
                         resulting from damage to existing facilities in the
                         work area such as Gas Natural, Pemex and CFE.

                         Safety hazards to workers: Damage to health and
                         physical integrity derived from road accidents due to
                         lack of road signs and safety signs on the site; And
                         lack of personal protective equipment and lack of
                         training on the use of tools and equipment
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Consequently, the ESMF will establish the need for
                         mitigation measures related mainly to the control of
                         construction waste, control of emissions of gases,
                         dust and noise, road signs, safety signs on the site
                         and with the Supervision and training for the proper
                         use of personal protective equipment, adequate
                         storage of chemicals and safe procedures in the
                         vicinity of gas pipelines, electric power and other at
                         risk. Measures to mitigate social impacts will be
                         related to the planned information to the community
                         in each affected area, the consultation on them and
                         the attention and follow up of complaints and
                         suggestions of the users

                         The ESMF shall include references to works
                         contracts for service providers and shall define the
                         responsibilities under execution and supervision
                         related to such contracts.
                                                             The ESMF will also include relevant aspects such as
                                                             a subproject selection procedure and assignment of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             environmental requirements according to their level
                                                             of environmental risk, in accordance with the
                                                             applicable national environmental, health and
                                                             occupational safety legislation; and in accordance
                                                             with the World Bank Group's EHS guidelines (the
                                                             Guidelines can be found here: www.ifc.org/
                                                             ehsguidelines); and propose a set of good
                                                             environmental and safety and hygiene practices that
                                                             should be applied in all cases; In addition to the
                                                             establishment of an efficient Project-level Grievance
                                                             Redress Mechanism (GRM) for the development of
                                                             the works.

                                                             During project implementation, and based on the
                                                             ➢❨ screening and assessment procedures,➢❨ the
                                                             ESMF will set out requirements and provide
                                                             guidance for the preparation of, and disclosure/
                                                             consultation, of site-specific ESMP.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No    This policy should not be triggered since the Project
                                                             will not involve any conversion of natural habitats or
                                                             critical natural habitats, as the anticipated works
                                                             involve existing infrastructure in urban
                                                             environments.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No    This policy should not be triggered since the Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             will not affect forests or forest dependent
                                                             communities, and it will not involve changes in the
                                                             management of forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No    This policy should not be triggered since the Project
                                                             will not involve the purchase or use of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources   Yes   While the Project does not contemplate significant
                         OP/BP 4.11                          impacts on physical cultural resources, there is some
                                                             potential for encountering physical cultural resources
                                                             during the rehabilitation of existing water supply
                                                             distribution networks in Mexico City. The ESMF, as
                                                             part of OP/BP 4.01, will include procedures to
                                                             address chance findings of archeological and cultural
                                                             resources during construction works supported by the
                                                             Project.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      TBD   Screening of Indigenous Peoples in the Project area
                         4.10                                has not been concluded at this time.

                                                             This Policy is left TBD, contingent on the results
                                                             from the screening process to determine if
                                                                                                                        Indigenous Peoples are present in, or have collective
                                                                                                                        attachment to, the Project area. The screening
                                                                                                                        process will take place during project preparation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        and may be finalized by appraisal. The social
                                                                                                                        assessment of the project area will include a desk
                                                                                                                        review of the demographic and socio-economic
                                                                                                                        characterization of the population in the project area,
                                                                                                                        followed by consultations to analyze the potential
                                                                                                                        social risks and impacts (positive and negative) of
                                                                                                                        the proposed works on the population affected, to
                                                                                                                        ensure wide community support to the project. The
                                                                                                                        assessment will determine the presence or not of
                                                                                                                        Indigenous Peoples in the project area. An
                                                                                                                        Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) will
                                                                                                                        be developed if Indigenous Peoples are present in, or
                                                                                                                        have collective attachment to, the Project area and if
                                                                                                                        subprojects that will be undertaken in that area have
                                                                                                                        not been identified prior to appraisal.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                Yes                        The Project will finance urban public works that
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                might require land acquisition and that may have
                                                                                                                        resettlement related impacts. In addition, the Project
                                                                                                                        will temporarily impact the economic and
                                                                                                                        commercial activities of nearby inhabitants during
                                                                                                                        construction processes. A Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                                        Framework (RPF) will be prepared by appraisal as
                                                                                                                        site-specific locations will not be identified during
                                                                                                                        Project preparation. The RPF will inform the
                                                                                                                        preparation of site-specific RAPs when locations are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        identified during Project implementation. The RPF
                                                                                                                        will include a Project-level GRM. As the Project will
                                                                                                                        use a performance-based contract, no subprojects can
                                                                                                                        be identified prior to appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         This policy should not be triggered since the Project
                                                                                                                        will not support the construction or rehabilitation of
                                                                                                                        dams.
                                 Projects on International                                   No                         This policy should not be triggered, as the Project
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   will not finance activities involving the use or
                                                                                                                        potential pollution of international waterways. There
                                                                                                                        is no international water body in the Project area.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      This policy should not be triggered, as the Project
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                will not finance activities in disputed areas as defined
                                                                                                                        in the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 18-Jan-2017
                               B.



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                             The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                             All expected safeguard instruments (ESMF, RPF, IPPF) are expected to be completed in January
Public Disclosure Copy




                             2017. Consultations on the instruments will follow and be completed before Appraisal scheduled
                             in February 2017.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader(s): Name: Charles Delfieux
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor: Name: Noreen Beg (SA)                                  Date: 12-Jan-2017
                           Practice Manager/    Name: Rita E. Cestti (PMGR)                           Date: 12-Jan-2017
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
