                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC16788

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Ethiopia                       Project ID:      P158987
                            Project Name:        Multi-sector Investment Planning for Climate Resilience
                            Team Leader(s):      Stephen Danyo,Timothy H. Brown
                            Estimated Date       27-Oct-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GENDR                          Lending          Lending Instrument
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           Forestry (45%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (45%), Public
                                                 administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (5%), General energy sector
                                                 (5%)
                            Theme(s):            Natural disaster management (5%), Climate change (80%), Land
                                                 administration and management (5%), Water resource management (5%),
                                                 Other environment and natural resources management (5%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 1.5                           Total Bank Financing: 0
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Climate Investment Funds                                                                    1.5
                            Environment        C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           10.      The PDO is to support Ethiopia’s effort to develop a programmatic multi-sector investment
                           plan (MSIP) for climate resilience in key sectors. Responding to MOFEC’s 2015 request to the CIF,
                           this small recipient-executed grant would begin with forest and agriculture sectors which also takes
                           into consideration activities in livestock, water resources, irrigation, and energy as pertaining to
                           resilient landscapes.
                           C. Project Description
                           12.     This 19-month grant would finance the development of a strategic, inclusive programmatic
                           multi-sector investment plan (MSIP) for climate resilient development activities, including forest,
                           agriculture, livestock, water and energy sectors. The MSIP preparation process is Government-
                           owned, led by the Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation (MoFEC) and including the
                           Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources (MoANR), the Ministry of Environment and Climate
                         Change (MEFCC), the Ministry of Water, Irrigation and Electricity (MoWIE), and the Ministry of
                         Livestock and Fisheries (MoLF). This grant complements on-going Bank-executed work with the
                         same agencies and counterparts on multisector planning for the country’s CRGE strategy and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Facility. The proposed small grant is an extension of this work, bringing greater visibility,
                         accountability, credibility, and inclusivity to the existing process, enhancing the potential of the
                         sectors involved to deliver transformational impact.

                         13.      The grant’s objective would be accomplished through analysis of key development plans,
                         policies, strategies, and existing or planned large-scale investment operations; targeting and
                         leveraging financing opportunities, and broad consultation with key stakeholders and partners. This
                         process will also examine the potential, merits and mechanisms for Ethiopia to access, combine and
                         leverage global climate finance opportunities to support a long term series of transformational
                         investments, including potential PPCR funds, greater use of IDA and other multi- or bi-lateral funds
                         toward climate resilience goals, performance based financing, as well as private financing in the form
                         of PPPs or other modes.

                         14.      Expected output: One comprehensive, unified, realistic, costed, multi-sector investment plan
                         (MSIP) for climate resilience in the forest and agriculture sectors. The MSIP would be expected to
                         consist of a pipeline of large scale, programmatic investment concepts that serve to further the aims
                         of the GTP-2, the CRGE Strategy and other relevant national strategies and policies. This MSIP
                         would be informed by (i) key analytical inputs for sector planning, (ii) increased awareness and
                         support of stakeholders and development partners, and (iii) a plan of action for leveraging and
                         channeling international climate financing and “conventional” financing. The MSIP would build on
                         and incorporate all major GoE strategies (GTP-2, Agriculture PIF, REDD+, Forest/Agriculture
                         resilience strategy), investment planning processes or opportunities (such as IDA, Green Climate
                         Fund proposal, The Africa Climate Business Plan, etc.) and existing large-scale operations (such as
                         the large-scale Bank-financed Sustainable Land Management Program, Agricultural Growth
                         Program, Productive Safety Nets Program, and the Oromia Forested Landscape Program), while also
                         incorporating lessons from other projects such as the first generation of small projects funded by
Public Disclosure Copy




                         MOFEC’s CRGE Facility. As such the MSIP process would build credibility by centering on an
                         inclusive and consultative process with numerous development partners and other stakeholders.

                         15.      Added value: The MSIP process would help Ethiopia to systematically convene, coordinate
                         and complement financing for resilience objectives in forest, agriculture, livestock, water and energy
                         from a variety of existing and future sources, and via multiple channels such as blended climate and
                         non-climate financing, private investment, government budget, direct financing to CRGE Facility,
                         bilateral support, pooled and stand-alone financing, among others. The process would also enhance
                         and expand GoE’s existing large scale resilience programs (like SLMP, et c.); help fill gaps in
                         resilience responses (i.e. insurance, performance-based payments, etc.); strengthen the credibility of
                         investment proposals, plans, programs, projects, and policies; and reduce transaction costs to
                         Ethiopia and her partners from overlaps and duplications. By doing so, the MSIP process would
                         boost GoE capacity for cost-effective and efficient scaled up action on the ground as well.

                         16.      Through the strategic MSIP process, the GoE seeks to address some of the key challenges/
                         barriers for the efficient management of its climate-vulnerable natural resource-based sectors and
                         pave the way for a more green and resilient development path. The PPCR could usefully support
                         Ethiopia’s CRGE initiative and provide additional focus on the resilience aspects of programming, as
                         well as cross-sector bottlenecks and trade-offs that may arise, for example with water and energy
                         sectors. In this regard, the preparation grant is a resource that can contribute to the overall MSIP
                           process by providing technical/analytical skills, resources for consultations and a core government
                           team to guide the process of development. This would also support the existing efforts and leverage
                           larger investments across the participating sectors.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           17.      During scoping -- already on-going due to the CRGE TA support from the Bank -- the main
                           activities include: identify a core group of stakeholders; organize and plan meetings; confirm the
                           focal point from each Ministry to form the core team members; prepare detailed activities for
                           implementation of the grant; prepare appropriate briefing materials; and announce and conduct the
                           scoping mission. As a result, a synthesis document that outlines policies (including CRGE Strategy,
                           mitigation and resilience related strategies), national development plans (GTP-2), INDC and other
                           programs and activities will be developed.

                           18.      During analysis, technical, policy and institutional assessments will be carried out.
                           Accordingly, (i) a technical assessment document which includes assessments of cross-sector
                           tradeoffs and defining incremental resilience needs and assessing gaps (potential vs actual) will
                           prepared; (ii) a policy assessment document which presents analysis of the current policy framework,
                           focusing on the critical legal and policy gaps necessary to achieve climate resilience (e.g., adoption
                           of infrastructure norms), as well as international examples and innovations will be prepared; and (iii)
                           an institutional assessment document which presents analysis of institutional capacity and
                           coordination, staffing, and knowledge and awareness needs will be developed.

                           19.     During prioritization, investment concepts will be prioritized, considering sector
                           investments, enhancements to existing investment operations, institutional strengthening, financing
                           options, and collaborative arrangements, among others.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Because the project is not financing investment or TA activities such as land use planning that can
                           trigger WB safeguards policies, there are no physical characteristics that pertain to the safeguards
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Capacity is strengthening through existing TA support on safeguards training from the WB to the
                           CRGE teams at MOFEC and 8 line ministries, existing safeguards teams and frameworks in place at
                           MOANR and MEFCC through existing investment operations, and new safeguards capacity
                           enhancements at sub-national levels being carried out by the new WB financed ESPES operation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Asferachew Abate Abebe (GEN01)
                           Chukwudi H. Okafor (GSU07)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09                      No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/              No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
                           Projects on International                    No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP             No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Stephen Danyo,Timothy H. Brown
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                                     Date: 01-Apr-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Magda Lovei (PMGR)                                           Date: 11-Apr-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
