                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC20215

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Oct-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Serbia                  Project ID: P162123
                            Project Name:
                            Team Leader(s): Svetlana Vukanovic,Juan Navas-Sabater
                            Estimated Date 01-Nov-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:                              Lending       IPF
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    0.30534            Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:         0
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building                                              0.30534
                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of the project is to facilitate the growth of an Open Data ecosystem in
                           Serbia that would catalyze a broader digital transformation of the country, improving government
                           delivery to citizens and generating innovations and growth in the ITindustry, especially small and
                           medium size enterprises.

                           Specifically, the project aims to:
                           ➢❨¢ Support the Government of Serbia with implementing the Strategy for e-Government
                           Development and the Open Data Action Plan, launching a comprehensive Open Data Policyin Serbia
                           that is firmly rooted in the national legislative and institutional framework and responsive to the
                           needs of key data users;
                           ➢❨¢ Enable effective reuse of data by both government (central and local) and external
                           stakeholders (including businesses and civil society), generating business opportunities, improving
                           public service delivery and enhancing government accountability;
                           ➢❨¢ Build an open data portal and support the development of institutional capacities for
                           releasing open data, from development of criteria for priority areas to technical skills of government
                           officials;
                           ➢❨¢ Secure greater use of open government data in practice and supportthe growth of data-driven
                           business, civil society and media.
                         The Strategy of Official Statistics Development in the Republic of Serbia over the period 2016 ➢❨
                         2020 defines a vision of achieving ➢❨ a high degree of harmonization with international
Public Disclosure Copy




                         statisticalstandards➢❨ . Among the developmental activities envisaged, ICT is identified as an area
                         upon which the development of modern statistics is directly contingent. In this regard, the Action
                         Plan that is part of the Strategy mentions the use of modern technologies(including Open Data) as a
                         basis for realizing the priority of further development of ICT.
                         C. Project Description
                         The project will support the development of an open data ecosystem in Serbia, helping it bridge the
                         gap to European and global best practices in governance and supporting several strategic processes,
                         including the implementation of the E-Government Development Strategy. It follows the
                         recommendations from the ODRA Action Plan, which is in line with Serbia➢❨ s Action Plan for the
                         Development of e-Government.

                         The following activities will be implemented:

                         1.      Support to the functioning of an Open Data Working Group (ODWG)

                         The ODWG was established in March 2016 and has been structured to include a ➢❨ core group➢❨
                         comprising institutions that will champion the open data initiative and bring expertise from several
                         different angles, and a broader group of stakeholders that include large data-holding agencies as well
                         as representatives of business, civil society and academia, with particular emphasis on organizations
                         that can act as incubators of solutions and multipliers of results. As per the Action Plan for
                         Development of e-Government, he Directorate for e-Government coordinates the work of the group.

                         The following institutions are taking part in the ODWG:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Cross-cutting:

                         ➢❨¢ Office of the Prime Minister ➢❨ Delivery Unit, Team for Public Administration Reform: the
                         Delivery Unit has been established within the Prime Minister➢❨ s Office in 2015 as a single
                         information and coordination point supporting the head of Government in reaching evidence-based
                         policy decisions. Its focus is on delivery of better results faster on a small number of top priority
                         topics, while leaving ownership for these priorities with the respective Ministries/agencies. The team
                         for Public Administration Reform is one of six currently operating teams and works closely with
                         numerous institutions to reduce administrative burden and facilitate better cooperation and data
                         exchange within Government.
                         ➢❨¢ Public Policy Secretariat (PPS): another Center of Government institution, the PPS was
                         established in 2014 with a mission to serve as a professional service to Government in creating and
                         adopting public policies and legislation that will be of better quality, more harmonized and more
                         efficiently implemented. Its mandate relates to improving management of public policies (planning,
                         analysis, creation, adoption, monitoring, evaluation, implementation and coordination), monitoring
                         the implementation of Government priorities, and establishing an effective coordination framework
                         for public policy implementation. Its analytical unit both supports government agencies with
                         developing quality strategic framework (including indicator development), as well as conducting on-
                         demand analysis and evidence basis for specific policy measures considered. As such, it is the most
                         significant institutional user of Government data for policy purposes.
                         ➢❨¢ Statistical Office: the central institution charged with statistical data collection, processing,
                         analysis and publication, setting standards, maintaining registers, etc. Due to the key role that official
                         statistics play in the European integration process, the Statistical Office has been rapidly modernizing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and adapting to European and international standards, with a plan for further reforms underway.
                         While it is struggling with qualified staff retention, the Statistical Office is the key institutional
                         bearer of expertise in data management as well as being the single         largest data holder itself.
                         ➢❨¢ Commissioner for Information of Public Importance and Personal Data Protection : an
                         autonomous and independent public authority established in 2004, with the role of enhancing
                         administration transparency and assisting citizens with exercising the right of free access to
                         information. The Commissioner promotes proactive publication of up to date information on
                         webpages of public bodies and their information directories, and publishes the data it holds in an
                         open format. The Commissioner➢❨ s role also pertains to personal data protection and irregularities
                         during data collection, data keeping, using, processing, archiving, and transferring across borders and
                         exercising the right to privacy.
                         ➢❨¢ Chamber of Commerce and Industry: an independent non-budget in stitution, the Chamber
                         acts as a representative of the business community, advocates for the interest of business with
                         Government and public bodies, supports local and international companies with services, mediation,
                         consulting and business information, provides business training for strengthening competitiveness,
                         and promotes Serbia➢❨ s international economic cooperation. It includes an association of IT
                         companies and an Innovations Center, and has been hosting and organizing events related to e-
                         government and open data.

                         Data-holding agencies:

                         ➢❨¢ Ministry of Interior: opened first data set on traffic accidents, holder of large data sets
                         including traffic control, vehicle registration (including depersonalized data on structure of vehicles
                         in use), citizen register, depersonalized citizen residence register including in-country migration, etc.
                         ➢❨¢ Public Procurement Office: opened all core data on contracting authority, type of procedure
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and type and subject of procurement. Potential to open all publicly accessible data, including reports
                         on low and high value public procurements and to develop services based on open data integrated
                         into the new public procurement portal, as well as to work towards Open Contracting standards.
                         ➢❨¢ Agency for Medicines and Medical Devices: opened entire registry of medicines for human
                         and animal use and all medical devices in use.
                         ➢❨¢ Ministry of Education and Science: developed own open data portal including an ever-
                         growing number of data sets such as school registers, current vacancies in schools, current excess
                         staff by school, schoolbooks, faculties, studying programs, R&D institutions, R&D projects, etc. The
                         portal can be integrated with the future central open data portal. This Ministry is also the first to run
                         its own open data competitions targeting schools (for data visualization) and the academic
                         community (for policy analysis).
                         ➢❨¢ Agency for Environmental Protection: opened first data sets on quality of air, allergens and
                         part of the pollutant registry. Holder of large amount of data already in electronic form and in
                         compliance with EU and IPCC standards.
                         ➢❨¢ Ministry of Energy and Mining: holder of significant data of primary value for the private
                         sector and currently exploring opening data on energy permits.
                         ➢❨¢ Ministry of Construction, Transport and Infrastructure: holder of significant data of primary
                         value for freight operators, private vehicle users, construction companies and general public and
                         recently opened e-permit portal for the citizens and companies.
                         ➢❨¢ Public Investment Management Office: implements ongoing project utilizing public sector
                         data on landslides, hazard and risk maps on municipal level for the development of a public GIS web
                         portal as a platform for interactive landslide event reporting and unifying landslide data records,
                         identifying critical sites for landslide rehabilitation and improvement of governmental agencies
Public Disclosure Copy




                         practice in building/updating national landslide database.

                         First partnerships with data users and developers have also already been established. The ODWG
                         includes a number of civil society groups that have been active in the field of open data, including
                         transparency organizations, start-up hubs, privacy activists and promoters of digital culture.

                         The first open data hackathon in Serbia was organized on 4-6 December 2015, gathering IT
                         developers, civil society activists and media representatives working with data opened through the
                         pilot initiatives. The software solutions and prototypes developed have been presented at a high-level
                         conference on 8 December 2015, which officially launched the ODRA and where World Bank
                         experts participated in panels with top government officials.

                         The project will support the functioning of the ODWG through:

                         ➢❨¢ Providi ng a part-time expert as ODWG facilitator who will moderate meetings, provide
                         written inputs collecting best practices and tracking progress among pilot institutions, as well as
                         monitoring use of open data, identify champions, ensure that the ODWG keeps open channels of
                         communication with all external stakeholders, including the IT community and civil society
                         organizations, and support revisions of the Open Data Action Plan. In the initial stage the facilitator
                         will provide support for establishing a governance mechanism and coordinate MOUs between data-
                         holding institutions and the core group managing the Open Data portal.
                         ➢❨¢ Providing ad hoc short-term experts to advise on specific aspects of the open data program
                         (including development of the legislative and institutional framework, addressing specific sectoral
                         challenges, regulatory aspects such as anonymization, licensing, etc.)
                         ➢❨¢ Capacity building through trainings, workshops, study visits, and mentoring
                         ➢❨¢ Support for organization of meetings with the broader ODWG and public events, including
Public Disclosure Copy




                         joint sessions with agencies and organizations active within the Open Government Partnership.

                         2.      Support to developing the legislative framework for open data

                         The ODWG is charged with preparing the groundwork for amending the legal framework relevant to
                         open data, including the Law on Free Access to Information of Public Importance (changes
                         anticipated in the next several months) and Law on Personal Data Protection. Examples of best
                         practices are being assessed to consider which model should be applied (e.g. amendments to existing
                         relevant laws; a separate piece of legislation covering open data). The ODWG will also help with the
                         preparation of relevant bylaws for ensuring implementation of open data as defined in the laws, as
                         well as the transposition of the EU PSI directive.

                         Activities will include:

                         ➢❨¢ Short-term expert support to review existing legislation, assess comparative practices, and
                         support impact assessments
                         ➢❨¢ ODWG retreats with relevant authorities for drafting legislation (laws and bylaws)
                         ➢❨¢ Public debates on draft legislative proposals concerning open data
                         ➢❨¢ Meetings with parliamentary committees and public hearings on open data legislation in the
                         National Assembly

                         3.      Support to developing the institutional framework for open data
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Activities will include:

                         ➢❨¢ Expert support to the ODWG in collecting best practices and assessing mechanisms for
                         positioning Open Data within Serbia➢❨ s institutional framework, including appointment of Chief
                         Data Officer, assessment of the institutional placement of e-Government and/or initiation of a new
                         Government innovation hub
                         ➢❨¢ Facilitating the designation of open data officers in all agencies and providing training and
                         regular exchanges with the ODWG and external stakeholders
                         ➢❨¢ Providing initial support to the identified institutional solution as approved by the
                         Government, including capacity building, functional analyses, and development of internal acts

                         4.      Development of a central open data portal

                         The ODWG will assess best practices and approve the model to be applied, including specific
                         features for user interaction and feedback and whether to include functionalities for publishing data
                         from sources other than the public sector. The Portal as a highly functional software needs to include
                         functionalities as mapping, visualization and analysis to aid government officials, journalists,
                         businesses and most importantly citizens in using the available data. The project will support the
                         development of the portal as endorsed by the ODWG.

                         In addition to serving as a platform for releasing data sets, the open data portal will establish a
                         mechanism to receive users➢❨ requests and feedback, channel it to the respective institution and
                         monitor responses (which should all be published on the portal). It will include features that allow
                         users to subscribe for updates in spec ific fields of interests and notify them when new datasets or
Public Disclosure Copy




                         updates are released.

                         5.      Pilot projects and support to individual institutions with opening of data

                         The ODWG will develop criteria identifying priority areas for open data, including impact on cit
                         izens, relevance to developmental priorities potential, for development of innovative public services,
                         business development potential, quality of data, capacity of data-holding institution, etc. The
                         institutions that have already implemented first pilots in fall 2015 (see above) will continue to be
                         supported in their efforts, while new ones will be identified as well. Preliminary interest exists with
                         the Geodetic Authority, the Central Register of Obligatory Social Insurance (CROSO), the Ministry
                         of Construction, Traffic and Infrastructure, the Serbian Business Registers Agency, as well as a
                         number of other smaller data-holders.

                         Furthermore, local-level pilots will be initiated supporting cities in their transition/transformation
                         into Smart Cities. The City of Belgrade, Subotica, Novi Sad, Krusevac, and more expressed their aim
                         to transform into Smart City by using ICT, in order to increase their competitiveness, quality of life,
                         infrastructure accessibility, etc. Under the project the cities will be invited to nominate ideas for their
                         local community, upon which the ODWG will select one to three that can be implemented within the
                         available budget and that could be easily replicated to other local communities. While the focus will
                         be on transport related programs and solutions (i.e. public transport, parking, cycling, road safety), it
                         will not be limited to it.

                         Pilot institutions will be supported through:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ➢❨¢ Access to expert advisory services, including technical expertise
                         ➢❨¢ Technical support with opening data, which may include engagement with IT maintenance
                         companies already contracted by the data holding institution
                         ➢❨¢ Opportunities to have their data included in hackathons and further incubated afterwards,
                         benefitting from early learning and feedback
                         ➢❨¢ Support in equipment and hardware, where exceptionally justified and necessary (e.g. with
                         the Ministry of Interior)
                         ➢❨¢ A data fellows program, supporting students from tech universities and open data activists to
                         assist institutions with developing their open data programs

                         6.       Stimulating demand for open data and support to open data users

                         Ensuring that the data released is responsive to the needs of potential data users, that the drive for
                         opening data is complemented with continuous skills building, and that all major strides in opening
                         data are immediately followed by proactively created opportunities for use, will be a top priority of
                         the project. To this end, several potential multipliers gathering relevant stakeholders are already
                         actively involved, including in the IT startup community, civil society, academic research institutes,
                         and media. This network will expand and will be invited to join ODWG meetings to ensure a
                         consistent feedback loop .

                         The project will support the demand side of open data through:

                         ➢❨¢ Development of a strategy for audience growth and user engagement for the ODWG,
                         including identification of specific user groups and their distinct needs, identification of models of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         engagement and specific channels with each group
                         ➢❨¢ Contracting of organizations for development and incubation of open data-based solutions
                         (both non-profit and private), including organizations that: gather large numbers of stakeholders and
                         have the capacity to become champions of open data in their fields; propose creative uses of data for
                         public good; represent innovative partnerships across sectors (e.g. developer groups working together
                         with civil society organizations, academic researchers, or media)
                         ➢❨¢ Boot camps and hackathons gathering multi-disciplinary teams to develop software solutions
                         and generate ideas for implementing them
                         ➢❨¢ Public challenges and contests for using open data to develop policy solutions
                         ➢❨¢ Providing developers and activists specific opportunities to interact with policy-makers
                         through the ODWG and data fellows program, testing the policy relevance of their ideas and
                         informing future activities
                         ➢❨¢ Continuous campaigns and maintenance of the open data community in Serbia, particularly
                         via social media.

                         7.       Development of open data knowledge products

                         A set of indicators to measure and evaluate the impact of open data initiatives will be developed.
                         The project will support the creation and publishing of guides to opening data for institutions, as well
                         as translation into Serbian of existing toolkits and case studies collecting global best practices.
                           8.       Broader stakeholder promotion and capacity building activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           A national Open Data Days conference will be organized in the second year of project
                           implementation, to gather all stakeholders and the broader public in a stock-taking effort and review
                           what has been achieved.
                           The workshops and trainings organized for the broader ODWG and open data officers will include
                           specific components for enhancing general IT capacities in Government (including data management
                           training, capacity building of IT staff, etc.).
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No
                           Projects on International           No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP    No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                                Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):            Name: Svetlana Vukanovic,Juan Navas-Sabater
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:        Name: Nina Chee (SA)                                Date: 26-Oct-2016
                         Practice Manager/                Name: Jane Lesley Treadwell (PMGR)                                 Date: 30-Oct-2016
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                         InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                         affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
