                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC17599

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Aug-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Ethiopia                       Project ID:      P159798
                            Project Name:        Ethiopia EITI (Grant II)
                            Team Leader(s):      Kirsten Lori Hund
                            Estimated Date       21-Nov-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GEEX1                          Lending          IPF
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.375                         Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Extractives Global Programmatic Support                                                     0.375
                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of the grant is to support the effective implementation of the Extractive
                           Industries Transparency Initiative in Ethiopia. Specifically, the grant will support the National
                           Steering Committee (➢❨ i.e. Multi-Stakeholder Group➢❨ ), and the Implementation Secretariat
                           (➢❨ National EITI Secretariat) in Ethiopia in implementing the activities and processes required for
                           Ethiopia to successfully undergo Validation in accordance with the EITI Standard, 2016.
                           C. Project Description
                           A.      Rationale for EITI Grant
                           The EITI in Ethiopia has been titled ➢❨ EEITI➢❨ , and is overseen by the National Steering
                           Committee (which is the national Multi-Stakeholder Group), which has regular meetings. The
                           Hon➢❨ ble Minister of Minerals, petroleum and Natural Gas, Ethiopia functions as the EEITI chair,
                           while the State Minister of Mines is the deputy-chair of EEITI. An Implementation Secretariat
                           (national EITI Secretariat) has been housed within the ministry of Minerals, Petroleum and Natural
                           Gas to conduct day-to-day activities.
                           The National Steering Committee has created a draft work-plan for the year 2017, and is in the
                           process of finalizing its work-plan to implement EITI. The Government of Ethiopia (➢❨ GoE➢❨ )
                           has requested technical as well as financial assistance from the World Bank to support EITI
                           implementation, given the latter➢❨ s global expertise in assisting countries to implement EITI. And
                         considering that we have been supporting them successfully over the past 2 years.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B.    The activities to be financed by the Grant include the following:


                         Proposed Activity and indicative Date of Delivery

                         Capacity Building and Training
                         Capacity building workshops for EITI stakeholders completed for:
                         -       Publishing Roadmap for declaring beneficial ownership by January1, 2017
                         -       Improving participation of Stakeholders
                         -       Reporting regionally on contributions of Artisanal and Small scale Mining (ASM)
                         -       Increasing reporting disclosures along the gold-buying value chain for ASM, i.e. reporting
                         on the further transfers of gold from the Central Bank, and other onward transferees.     2016
                         Exchange missions to EITI-implementing countries (2016- 2018 )

                         Preparation of Reports
                         TOR for reconciliation firm completed; and vendor selected       (2016, 2017, 2018)
                         Second EITI Report completed and published (2016)
                         Third EITI Report completed and published        (2017)
                         Fourth EITI Report completed and published       (2018)
                         Annual Activity Reports published       1st July of each year: (2016, 2017, 2018)
                         Beneficial Ownership Roadmap published           (January 1st, 2017)

                         Communication and Dissemination Campaign
                         Website of EEITI properly established and administered (2016-2018)
                         Implementing EEITI Communications Strategy (2016-2018)
                         Disseminate EITI Report findings widely using various media / meetings / workshops ➢❨ in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Communications Plan (2016-2018)
                         Broad dissemination of results of EITI Reports at sub-national level (2016-2018)

                         Operational Support for the Executive Secretariat
                         Supporting the office of the Implementation Secretariat with adequate infrastructure and staffing
                         needs (2016- 2018)

                         A description of the above activities is as follows:

                         (i)     Capacity building
                         -       Organize training activities for key stakeholders to increase their understanding of the EITI
                         and to encourage their participation in the implementation of the Initiative. Key stakeholders include
                         National Steering Committee representatives, especially from civil society and broader civil society
                         organizations outside the Committee (both at the local/municipal and national levels) that are
                         involved in transparency and extractive industry issues, business and professional associations, and
                         the media, as well as public institutions relevant to extractive industries and/or transparency, access
                         to information, accountability and Open Government more broadly.
                         -       Organize exchanges with other EITI implementing countries, particularly in Africa.
                         (ii)    Preparation of Reports
                         -       Finance the National Steering committee in conducting ongoing scoping studies on EITI
                         implementation, and creation of an EITI Reporting Template : including with regard to scope of the
                         reporting sectors; level of detail of the reconciliation/audit process; defining materiality with regard
                         to payments and revenue streams; degree of data disintegration; inclusion/non-inclusion of sub-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         national, in-kind, and social payments; etc.
                         -        Finance the hiring of an Independent Administrator to prepare the subsequent EITI reports,
                         including the reconciliation of payments made by mining and oil companies to the Government and
                         direct payments by mining companies to specific municipalities.
                         -        Finance the publication of other reports relating to EITI, such as the annual activity reports,
                         beneficial ownership roadmap, etc.
                         (iii)    Awareness-raising / Communication
                         -        Implement the EITI Communications strategy by a communication company to
                         communicate the merits of transparency of mining and oil revenues; the EITI process in Ethiopia and
                         the results of the first EITI Report at the municipal and community level, with the objective of
                         provoking public awareness and debate over these issues.
                         -        Carry out other EITI dissemination activities, including postings in government websites,
                         newspaper articles, press conferences, TV shows and radio spots.
                         -        Set up the EEITI website, along with required contents showing progress on implementation
                         periodically.
                         -        Organize outreach activities by civil society engaged in EITI in rural Ethiopia.

                         (iv)     While performing the above-mentioned activities, gender-based issues shall be mainstreamed
                         into the grant implementation through the following steps:
                         (a)      Representation of Women in the NSC: Ensuring that men and women➢❨ s groups are well
                         represented in the Multi- Stakeholder Groups (MSGs) ➢❨ with an initial minimum target
                         representation of 20% of the entire National Steering Committee across all stakeholder groups,
                         covering not just civil society but also government and industry participation. Women will be
                         included not only as members, but also in leadership positions ➢❨ to avoid the risk of tokenism
                         where women are included but not given equal standing as men. Though the NSC has already been
Public Disclosure Copy




                         formed, the minimum target representation for women will be encouraged while replenishing/
                         refreshing the MSG membership.
                         As the EITI implementation in Ethiopia is overseen and monitored by the NSC, this will help ensure
                         that the implementation monitoring team is also gender inclusive.

                         (b)     Gender-Inclusive Participation in Trainings, Workshops and other activities: In funding
                         workshops for civil society organizations, it is important to ensure that the Secretariat has a gender
                         inclusive list in order that men and women participate, contribute and benefit from awareness raising
                         sessions/programs.

                         (c)     Gender-Informed Communication Implementation Plan: In considering the EITI
                         communication and dissemination campaign, easily accessible communication medium will be used
                         which can reach both men and women as target groups in the EITI engagement. For those in remote
                         locations, use of the local leadership to pass messages as well as radio will be explored.
                         (d)      Operational support
                         -       Provide operational support to the Implementation Secretariat, including the procurement of
                         personnel and the purchase of office equipment.
                         -       Provide financial support to civil society members of the National Steering Committee to
                         enable them to participate in the Committee➢❨ s meetings (i.e. to cover transportation and
                         accommodation costs) if they are based in the same city as the said events.
                           -        Finance operating costs of workshops, including travel costs of the civil society members
                           that will monitor the implementation of the EITI so that they can attend the workshops and meetings
                           with to coordinate the preparation of the EITI Report and assist in communication about EITI.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project is an administrative initiative on transaprency of sector governance in extractives, and
                           therefore is not associated with any physical extractives operations per-se. No physical-works exist
                           or are envisioned.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Not applicable as safeguards are not applicable.

                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Maman-Sani Issa (OPSPF)
                           Nathalie S. Munzberg (OPSPF)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        No               No physical works are supported or anticipated
                           BP 4.01                                              under the project. This project is to support the
                                                                                improvement of transparency in the mining
                                                                                sector, and does not involve the installation or
                                                                                modification of any extractive operation that
                                                                                requires environmental assesment.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               No physical works are supported or anticipated
                                                                                under the project. This project is to support the
                                                                                improvement of transparency in the mining
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                sector, and does not involve the installation or
                                                                                modification of any extractive operation that
                                                                                impacts natural habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No               No physical works are supported or anticipated
                                                                                under the project. This project is to support the
                                                                                improvement of transparency in the mining
                                                                                sector, and does not involve the installation or
                                                                                modification of any extractive operation that
                                                                                impacts forests.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No               No physical works are supported or anticipated
                                                                                under the project. This project is to support the
                                                                                improvement of transparency in the mining
                                                                                sector, and does not involve the installation or
                                                                                modification of any extractive operation, and
                                                                                also does not involve pest management.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No               No physical works are supported or anticipated
                           BP 4.11                                              under the project. This project is to support the
                                                                                improvement of transparency in the mining
                                                                             sector, and does not involve the installation or
                                                                             modification of any extractive operation that
                                                                             impacts physical cultural resources
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No            No physical works are supported or anticipated
                                                                             under the project. This project is to support the
                                                                             improvement of transparency in the mining
                                                                             sector, and does not involve the installation or
                                                                             modification of any extractive operation that
                                                                             impacts indegenous peoples.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No            No physical works are supported or anticipated
                           4.12                                              under the project. This project is to support the
                                                                             improvement of transparency in the mining
                                                                             sector, and does not involve the installation or
                                                                             modification of any extractive operation that
                                                                             involves involuntary resettlement.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No            No physical works are supported or anticipated
                                                                             under the project. This project is to support the
                                                                             improvement of transparency in the mining
                                                                             sector, and does not involve the installation or
                                                                             modification of any extractive operation that
                                                                             concerns the safety of dams.
                           Projects on International           No            No physical works are supported or anticipated
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                              under the project. This project is to support the
                                                                             improvement of transparency in the mining
                                                                             sector, and does not involve the installation or
                                                                             modification of any extractive operation.
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No               No physical works are supported or anticipated
Public Disclosure Copy




                           7.60                                              under the project. This project is to support the
                                                                             improvement of transparency in the mining
                                                                             sector, and does not involve the installation or
                                                                             modification of any extractive operation in any
                                                                             disputed area.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                             Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):             Name: Kirsten Lori Hund
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:         Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (SA)                   Date: 03-Aug-2016
                           Practice Manager/           Name: Masami Kojima (PMGR)                        Date: 11-Aug-2016
                           Manager:
                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                         affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
