INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC14538
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Sep-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Oct-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Nicaragua                  Project ID:   P155235
Project Name:   Caribbean Regional Communications Program (CARCIP)-Nicaragua (P155235)
Task Team       Elena Gasol Ramos
Leader(s):
Estimated       05-Nov-2015                Estimated     02-Feb-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIO9                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Information technology (70%), Telecommunications (30%)
Theme(s):       Regional integration (50%), Technology diffusion (50%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      21.00            Total Bank Financing:   18.45
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               2.55
International Development Association (IDA)                     18.45
Total                                                           21.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
Increase access to regional broadband networks and advance the development of an IT and IT
enabled services (IT-ITES) industry in Nicaragua and in the Caribbean Region.
C. Project Description
30.64. The design of the proposed Project directly applies lessons learned from the implementation
of CARCIP Phase 1, as to the very limited availability of training institutions and high cost of
specialized courses both domestically and within the region. difficulty of accessing certifications and


﻿training courses in the region, and accessing those that are available at a reasonable price. CARCIP
Nicaragua will therefore follow the model implemented under the Mexico IT Industry Development
Project, which created the NGO Mexico FIRST for developing the IT-ITES skills and certification
program. The project showed how creating an institution focused on internationally recognized
O
U       certification, mentoring and 'training the trainer' programs, to cater for the needs of the industry,
facilitated the design of courses and skill development programs for niche specializations in areas
relevant to the needs of key offshoring markets and local industry demand. MexicoFIRST
successfully overcame the problems of high costs and access to specialized training by aggregating
demand across the country in order to lower unit costs. CARCIP Nicaragua would do the same by
creating a similar institution to aggregate demand regionally (Caribbean FIRST). A similar body will
be created for CARCIP countries to benefit from this model. The second lesson learned in this
project is that the operation needs to be led or at least needs to have a high participation of the main
ICT industry stakeholders in the country.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The connectivity infrastructure will be deployed in the Caribbean Coast of Nicaragua. There exist
several areas within this Region that could be categorized as environmental sensitive areas. There
also exists several indigenous communities in the Departments of the Caribbean Coast that could be
affected by the deployment of infrastructure, and includes the following departments: RACCS
(Region Autonoma de la Costa Caribe Sur), RACCN (Region Autonoma de la Costa Caribe Norte),
the special area of the High Wangky in the department of Jinotega, and five municipalities of Rio
San Juan.
The project area is a vast territory with lack of roads, infrastructure and limited access to basic
services (water, sewer, electricity, and telephone) and mainly collective transport. In many areas, the
only available routes and have been used by communities for generations have been the rivers, as
most of them sit on the banks of rivers or coastal areas.
The project plans to deploy two different types of telecommunications infrastructure depending on
the necessities of the areas. The deployment of infrastructure could have very specific impacts, which
are expected to be low to moderate, on the environment, areas of natural reserves or forests, are, low
to moderate intensity. The team is studying all the possible situations for mitigating the possible
negative effects in these areas from the deployment of the infrastructure.
Infrastructure 1. Tower: The towers include shelter telecommunications equipment and there exists
two types, self-supported and braced. The team has estimated that for being able to cover the
population estimated the operator should install 16 towers.
Infrastructure 2. Deployment of Fiber Optic. There exists two methods for the deployment of the
infrastructure, aerially through existing electric posts, using the existing power lines of the country
wherever is possible; and through the deployment of underground cable. The team has estimated that
a total length of 405 km of fiber optic would be needed for covering the communities expected in the
project.
The exact location of the works that are going to be done have not been determined due to the fact
that the only requirement that will be specify in the bid documents is the communities that need to be
covered and have service. The specific technology to be used and the location of the infrastructure
will depend on the contractors choice


﻿The construction of the planned infrastructure could involve sensitive or critical environmental areas
(eg national parks, forests, wetlands, etc). The deployment of the infrastructure could also affect
some properties of the soil (eg, crops) and private infrastructure (fences, houses, etc.). Environmental
O
)       measures to prevent, mitigate and / or compensate potential negative impacts should be included in
the Environmental Management Plan (PMA) of each subproject, as well as measures to mitigate
possible effects on resettlement should be included in the resettlement plan.
The specific location of the subprojects has not been specified. Regarding this issue Environmental
and Social Frameworks should be developed during the preparation stage of the project, according
with the Bank's safeguards requirements.
Measures to mitigate and / or compensate for negative impacts on the environment, housing,
productive assets and economic activities must be included in the respective plans (ESMP and RAPs)
once the specific subproject is specified by the contractors that deploys the infrastructure.
Additionally, the subprojects should comply with the national and regional environmental and social
regulation, and the Bank's safeguards policies.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The borrower has previous experience with World Bank safeguards policies (Nicaragua Rural
Telecom - P129264). After the Mid Term Review of the previous project the PCU implement some
environmental and social management tools in order to comply with the Bank's safeguards policies.
The PCU's Technical Safeguard Team (TST) will prepare the Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF), which will include the specific Frameworks in order to fulfill with
the Bank's Safeguard Policies: Environmental Management Framework (EMF); Resettlement
Management Framework (RMF); and Indigenous and Afro-descendent People Framework (IAPF),
following the Bank's requirements for this type of projects although the exact location of the
infrastructure is unknown at this stage, These Frameworks should be applied during the
implementation of all the activities under CARCIP-Nicaragua project.
The TST of the PCU will support the environmental and social management during the CARCIP
implementation. This team includes 3 environmental specialists, and 2 social specialists. This
mentioned team has already worked in the implementation of the previous project, Rural Telecom
(PO89989) and has proven enough experience on Bank's safeguards policies and in the application of
the national and regional environmental and social regulation and policies.
As mentioned before, the ESMF, including the safeguards Frameworks, will be developed during the
project preparation and will be approved and disclose by the Bank and TELCOR, in compliance of
the Bank's information and disclosure policy.
Finally, as mention in the project description, Component 5, the Project also include resources to
strength the capacity building of the UCP-TELCOR safeguard team, in order to assure the proper
environmental and social management during the project implementation.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez (GEN04)
Ricardo Jose Castellon Zamora (GSU04)


﻿II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment  Yes         This policy is triggered because the Project will
Q       OP/BP 4.01                              finance (Component 1), works (fiber optic, and
others) that potentially will affect the natural
environment, especially sensitive areas in the
Caribbean Coast of Nicaragua. These potential
negative impacts are not significant and the
mitigation measures are easy to know and to
implement. In this regards the project will be
classified as Category B according with the Policy.
In order to comply with the Bank's safeguard policy,
an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) will be develop by the
environmental and social UCP-TELCOR team, in
order to be applied during the project
implementation. This instrument is based in the
previous project experience in regards of the Bank's
safeguards compliance.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes         This policy is triggered because the construction of
fiber optic or transmission towers in the Caribbean
Coast Region potentially will cross sensitive or
critical areas (national parks, protected areas, and
others) that could be affected.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          This policy should not be triggered since the project
activities are not expected to impact forested areas,
forest dependent communities or involve changes in
management of forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No          This policy should not be triggered given that the
project's activities don't include the use of pesticide.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes        The construction of fiber optic requires movement of
OP/BP 4.11                              material during the construction. In this regard,
potentially during the excavation the project will
affect physical, cultural, and/or archeological sites.
Consequently Safeguards Policy OP 4.11 is
triggered. An Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF), will be drafted by the PCU with
the safeguards specialists supervision to avoid,
prevent or mitigate potentially adverse effects on
physical cultural resources will be documented.
The Nicaraguan Cultural Heritage protection is
guaranteed at the legal level by Decree 1142 "Law
on Protection of Cultural Heritage of the Nation,"
which contains rules on conservation to
paleontological, archaeological, historical and artistic


﻿heritage nationally. The contractors must follow the
procedures of the law and report findings to the
Nicaraguan Institute of Culture.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    Yes          Some indigenous groups (misquitos, mayagnas,
4.10                                    others) live in the Caribbean Cost of Nicaragua, who
will be beneficiaries of the Project. In this regard, the
OP/BP 4.10 is trigger.
The project is not directed exclusively to an
indigenous target population, which has seen fit to
strengthen the project design to the preparation of a
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework to ensure
that all project activities are implemented in
compliance with the principles and procedures set
out in BP / OP 4.10; with a prior, free and informed
consultation of culturally appropriate indigenous
communities and to stay throughout project
execution.
The framework has defined the specific process for
consultation and information with indigenous
peoples and local and regional authorities as there
could be throughout the project cycle from site
selection, construction works and delivery mitigation
of potential environmental effects or involuntary
resettlement. The project will maintain an existing
complaint system to accommodate problems caused
by the works, with emphasis on vulnerable groups
such as, youth, women, elderly people among others.
The PCU within TELCOR has experience working
with indigenous peoples and Afro-descendants in
recent projects. The team has shown good ability to
communicate with them and coordinate with their
authorities. TELCOR has already made consultation
sessions in the Regi6n Atuton6ma del Caribe Sur
(RACCS) and in Regi6n Aut6noma del Caribe Norte
(RACCN). No consultation will be done in Rio San
Juan as there are no indigenous communities.
The operators that will execute the works
(installation of towers and laying of fiber optic
networks), as well as other organizations including
government agencies contractors will be informed
about the requirement of the Law in these Regions
regarding the use of indigenous lands among other
issues.


﻿In order to comply with this Bank's safeguard policy
a Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework will be
include in the ESMF, to be applied during the project
implementation.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        The construction of Fiber Optic included in the
BP 4.12                                  project, potentially will affect land, house, crops,
others, during the project construction. In this regard,
the OP/BP 4.12 is trigger.
Among the potential adverse impacts arising from
Component 1 are: Infrastructure Connectivity; by
way of displacement, resettlement or involuntary
deprivation of lands, which could result in the
following: loss of housing, loss of assets or access to
assets, loss of income sources or means of
subsistence (croplands) whether the affected persons
must move to another location or not, the effect on
the social and economic conditions of affected
households.
In order to comply with this safeguard policy, the
ESMF includes an Resettlement Policy Framework.
Social units to be eligible to be considered affected
and consequently to compensation, must give the test
subjects:
a) Earlier rights sufficiently demonstrate that the
social unit has been affected in their rights of
possession of the property, regardless of the type of
tenure. Indigenous and Afro-descendent
communities on the Atlantic coast, the Community
authorities guarantee the right of ownership over the
land.
b) When you have accurate information proving that
it is owned by the social unit affected.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No           This policy should not be triggered given that the
project will not support the construction or
rehabilitation of dams.
Projects on International   No           This policy should not be triggered given that the
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                     project will not affect international waterways as
defined under the policy.
The policy is not triggered because the project works
to be built in the department of Rio San Juan (border
with Costa Rica) will be located in the northern part
of the river, in the territory of Nicaragua. Similarly,
work on the special area of the High Wangki in
Jinotega or on the banks of the Coco River (border
with Honduras) will be built on the south side in
territory of Nicaragua.


﻿Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No           This policy should not be triggered given that the
BP 7.60                                     project will not affect disputed areas. The project
works to be built in the department of Rio San Juan
(border with Costa Rica) will be located in the
northern part of the river, in the territory of
Nicaragua. Similarly, work on the special area of the
High Wangki in Jinotega or on the banks of the Coco
River (border with Honduras) will be built on the
south side in territory of Nicaragua.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 28-Sep-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Safeguard studies are currently underway.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Elena Gasol Ramos
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)                     Date: 30-Sep-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Boutheina Guermazi (PMGR)                   Date: 15-Oct-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


