INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC13529
,2   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Aug-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Aug-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Kazakhstan                 Project ID:   P154975
Project Name:    SME Line of Credit (P154975)
Task Team        Nabila Assaf,Colleen Mascenik
Leader(s):
Estimated        15-Sep-2015                Estimated     07-Dec-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTC10                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       SME Finance (100%)
Theme(s):        Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (50%), Other Financial Sector
Development (50%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     200.00             Total Bank Financing:   200.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                          0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development           200.00
0         Total                                                           200.00
Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to improve SME access to sustainable enterprise lending.
C. Project Description
This project has two components: 1) the Line of Credit, and 2) The Center of Excellence in Lending,
part of a broader program to improve SME Competitiveness in Kazakhstan. The SME
Competitiveness project, a recently approved US$ 40 million project, takes direct aim at the


﻿constraints and impediments to competitiveness at the firm-, cluster-, and supply chain-levels. The
outcomes of that project will be to improve business and management practices of SMEs and their
participation in supply chains, which is expected to increase both their demand for credit and their
bankability and credit-worthiness. This line of credit complements the SME Competitiveness project
O
addressing a critical supply-side constraint to SME growth, access to finance, by providing access to
the type of loan products needed in any sector or region where they are needed.
Component 1 -Line of Credit ($200 million)
As a result of this component, access to both investment and working capital loans will allow
borrowing enterprises to undertake new initiatives, and/or broaden the product or services range, and/
or improve the existing product quality and production efficiency. Additional working capital finance
will facilitate entry to markets where the payment for goods or services takes longer. More
importantly, the systemic approaches to lines of credit and their management will be enhanced
through introduction of best practice methods.
The aim of this component is to implement a market-based, broadly accessible line of credit as a
benchmark to improve the effectiveness of future credit lines including those currently funded by the
government. This will support the GOK's objective to maintain a steady flow of credit to the private
sector and assist in enhancing competitiveness, including to sectors and groups of borrowers that
would otherwise be excluded. It would also contribute to extending the maturity structure of
enterprise lending. At the systemic level, it would also stimulate introduction of new technologies for
credit risk appraisal and management and new products, and would strengthen financial
intermediaries.
Table 2. Key features of the Line of Credit
- Open to all sectors: The LoC would be open to all enterprises operating in any sector of the
economy to allow diverse sectors of the economy to benefit from the financing
0
- SME focused: SME focused within the maximum flexibility allowed within DAMU's governing
framework, at up to a $US 5 million loan amount.
o       - Lending in local currency: Responding to the increased demand by SMEs for KZT-denominated
credit, the Project will agree with NBK providing a swap arrangement for PFIs.
- Lending for longer terms: The LOC provides DAMU the option to borrow on a longer-term, a
benefit which may be passed along to borrowing enterprises.
- Lending to first time borrowers: A portion of the loan (to be determined) will be allocated to first-
time borrowers. New firms tend to create more jobs, and are more likely to face constraints in
accessing finance for the first time. Combined with technical assistance on credit risk analysis and
cash flow based lending (in Component 2), this allocation will aim to broaden access to finance
among the lesser served segments, including new firms, smaller firms and women-managed
businesses. The project will also seek to link up PFIs with partial-credit guarantee programs already
offered by DAMU to reduce collateral requirements for marginalized borrowers who may have been
denied in the past due to lack of sufficient collateral.
- Lending in lesser served regions: The project will seek to include PFIs with regional reach beyond


﻿Astana and Almaty and seek to leverage DAMU's engagement on both this project and the SME
Competitiveness project, which will offer services to SMEs in a planned 171 Entrepreneurship
Centers all over the country. The project will seek to embed lending information and assistance on
loan applications to SMEs through those same centers.
o
- Safeguard policies: DAMU has indicated already the willingness to apply Bank safeguard policies,
including those triggered by Environmental Category B projects. PFIs will receive technical
assistance (as needed) to improve their implementation of environmental safeguards.
Component 2 - Center of Excellence on Lending and Project Management ($2 million)
DAMU will establish a Center of Excellence on Lending (CEL) with the aim of disseminating
international best practices in lending within the Kazakh banking sector. The CEL will be created
within DAMU and will provide training and limited technical assistance to banks and other financial
institutions on international best practices in lending. Training would be provided by experts on
topics including lending technology, cost-efficient models of SME lending, credit risk assessment,
cash flow based lending, implementing environmental safeguards, and other topics. The focus will be
on SME lending departments of banks which tend to have lower capacity. Training may be
sponsored by DAMU or provided on a cost-recovery basis, while individualized TA would only be
provided on a full cost-recovery and limited scope basis. The CEL would also host a community of
practice on SME lending in Kazakhstan to facilitate knowledge sharing and promote an
understanding of key priorities in improving SME credit-enabling financial infrastructure.
The CEL would also collaborate with the Economic Research Institute (ERI) on developing an
impact evaluation of lines of credit under its supervision, including this LoC and government
sponsored LoCs, to help promote learning on the outcomes and impacts of different approaches and
designs of LoCs. This impact evaluation would be proposed as one of the impact evaluation activities
on the efficacy and impact SME interventions in Component 3 of the SME Competitiveness project.
U5 The CEL would also collaborate with the Economic Research Institute (ERI) on developing an
impact evaluation of lines of credit under its supervision, including this LoC and government
sponsored LoCs, to help promote learning on the outcomes and impacts of different approaches and
designs of LoCs. This impact evaluation would be proposed as one of the impact evaluation activ
ities on the efficacy and impact SME interventions in Component 3 of the SME Competitiveness
project.
The Project management costs, including the establishment of Project implementation unit and its
expenditures, will be included in this component. The PIU will be staffed by DAMU's staff (with
consulting support) and run as part of its routine operations. It will also be linked into the
implementation structure of the SME Competitiveness project through its reporting to the same
Project Implementation Commission established under the SME Competitiveness project.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will operate throughout Kazakhstan. The project will not finance category A projects,
projects in extractive industry nor SMEs involved in any activities which are inconsistent with WB
policies (e.g. arms, tobacco, etc.). Note that these criteria do not exclude firms in non-extractive
sectors that operate "upstream" or "downstream" from larger corporations in the extractive sector.
Project will also not finance activities that might trigger Natural Habitats policy. In cases where the


﻿project will finance investments in already existing SME's, sub-project evaluation should include
due diligence review to confirm that the SME's are in compliance with environmental (including
safety) national laws and regulations and have no pending legal actions or complaints against them.
If any non-compliance or issues are identified, the sub-projects could still be eligible as long as there
O
U       is a commitment and an approved action plan to correct the identified problems, either independently
or as needed with financing included in the project loan.
O
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
a      The main implementing agency for the project is DAMU Fund, an implementing arm of the Ministry
of the Regional Development. It is a national development institute whose explicit mission is to
promote quality development of SMEs in Kazakhstan. This is the first engagement of the Bank with
DAMU, although DAMU has experience with the Asian Development Bank. DAMU has indicated
already the willingness to apply Bank safeguard policies. PFIs will receive technical assistance (as
needed) to improve their implementation of environmental safeguards. The World Bank team will
work closely with the DAMU expert to build the capacity during project preparation period. An
Environmental Management Framework has already been prepared by DAMU which will be
responsible for ensuring the adherence to the Bank's safeguard policies. Adherence will be assured
through various measures including application of safeguards as part of PFI eligibilty criteria,
assessment of safeguards capacity of PFIs and capacity building where needed, environmental
screening of sub-borrower projects, and monitoring of compliance. In cases where the project will
finance investments in already existing SME's, sub-project evaluation should include due diligence
review to confirm that the SME's are in compliance with environmental (including safety) national
laws and regulations and have no pending legal actions or complaints against them. If any non-
compliance or issues are identified, the sub-projects could still be eligible as long as there is a
commitment and an approved action plan to correct the identified problems, either independently or
as needed with financing included in the project loan.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Lola Ibragimova (GSURR)
Natasa Vetma (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         Component 1, Line of Credit, will include various
OP/BP 4.01                              initiatives/ subprojects implemented by borrowing
enterprises. The nature of sub-projects will not be
known by appraisal. However it is possible that sub-
projects will relate to physical infrastructure,
refurbishment of assets, provision of equipment,
changes/ optimization of physical processes and
other. Therefore, there is a need to outline the
process for identification, prediction, evaluation, and
mitigation of the environmental impacts and risks
which may arise from the proposed sub projects.
Thus, OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment is
being triggered.
At present no other SG policies are triggered, but


﻿during project preparation, it should be determined
whether there will be the potential for financing sub-
projects which might trigger other policies, or
whether these should be explicitly excluded. the
Team will explore with the Borrower the option of
applying the WB Performance Standards, as this is
an option in the case of projects providing financing
to the private sector.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No            Project will not finance any activities that might
trigger OP 4.04.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           No
Pest Management OP 4.09      No
Physical Cultural Resources  No
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  No           SME investments that would involve any land
BP 4.12                                   acquisition (including land acquisition carried out for
purposes of the project prior to seeking project
funding) will be ineligible for financing. Detailed
criteria for screening will be included in the
Operations Manual. Therefore, OP 4.12 is not
triggered.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No
O
Projects on International    No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Aug-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
An Environmental Management Framework has already been prepared by DAMU and will be an
integral part of the Project Operations Manual. It will be reviewed during preparation, disclosed in
country and submitted to the infoshop by Aug 31, 2015.
Sub-projects specific safeguards documents will be prepared when SME loans /sub -projects are
identified during project implementation.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Nabila Assaf,Colleen Mascenik
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:  Name: Brandon Enrique Carter (SA)           Date: 12-Aug-2015
Practice Manager/    Name: Paloma Anos Casero (PMGR)             Date: 13-Aug-2015
Manager:


