INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA13588
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-May-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Apr-2015, 28-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Pacific Islands            Project ID:  P147839
Project Name: Pacific Resilience Program (P147839)
Task Team       Denis Jean-Jacques Jordy,Michael Bonte-Grapentin
Leader(s):
Estimated       16-Mar-2015                Estimated    19-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSURR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Flood protection (60%), Public administration- Financial Sector (40%)
Theme(s):       Natural disaster management (60%), Climate change (40%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       9.47            Total Bank Financing:    3.68
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
O
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
IDA Grant                                                                   3.68
Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                5.79
Total                                                                       9.47
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The objective of the Program is to strengthen early warning, resilient investments and financial
protection of participating countries.
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 6


﻿The Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC) is a regional intergovernmental organization whose
membership includes both nations and territories in the Pacific Ocean and their metropolitan powers.
SPC is a regional organization in the Pacific and is a key player in the resilience space, with the aim
to: (i) develop the technical, professional, scientific, research, planning and management capability
of Pacific Island people; and (ii) directly provide information and advice, to enable them to make
informed decisions about their future development and well-being. Given the capacity constraints in
the participating countries and the need to improve tools and data that can be used by all PICs in
coming years, PREP will also provide support to regional organizations such as SPC.
SPC's specific role in PREP implementation is detailed below:
Component 1: Strengthening Early Warning and Preparedness
The objective of this component is to increase the resilience of participating countries and the Pacific
region as a whole to natural hazards such as cyclones, coastal and riverine flooding, volcanic
eruptions, tsunamis and earthquakes by improving the quality of forecasting and warning services as
well as disaster preparedness. This component has two sub-components: (i) Investments in Early
Warning and Preparedness (nationally implemented); and (ii) Regional TA to strengthen impact
forecasting and preparedness for response (regionally implemented by SPC).
Sub-component 1.2 - Regional TA to strengthen impact forecasting and preparedness for response -
will provide the Technical Assistance and advisory services required to support Early Warning and
Preparedness activities under Component 1.1 for the participating countries. This will be done
through regional technical assistance, development of a platform to provide access to the range of
knowledge, training and education material as well as tools to strengthen capacity and improve
understanding of early warning and preparedness in PICs. This component has the following three
sub-components: (i) Sub-component 1.2.1: Impact Forecasting; (ii) Sub-component 1.2.2:
Strengthening Preparedness for Response; and (iii) Sub-component 1.2.3: Post Disaster Recovery.
O
Q)        Component 2: Mainstreaming Risk Reduction and Resilient Investments
The objective of this Component is to support a multi-sectoral planning process for integrating
climate and disaster risk and resilience into development and prepare investments for Phase II. This
component is divided into two sub-components: (i) Risk reduction and resilient investment planning
and preparation (which will be implemented at the national level); and (ii) Regional tools and
advisory services to support planning and investment, which will be regionally implemented by SPC.
Sub-component 2,1 - Regional tools and advisory services to support planning and investment -
will: (i) support a multi-sectoral planning process for integrating climate and disaster risk and
resilience into development; (ii) invest in data and tools to make risk information actionable, which
will benefit the broader region, and (iii) support planning and preparation of national infrastructure
and community resilient investments in participating countries to be funded and implemented in
Phase II and/or by other Project Donors. The PREP regaional activities will build on the PPCR
supported activities administered by ADB and implemented by SPREP. The types of projects
contemplated under this sub-component include:
*      Feasibility studies for specific technologies (e.g. doppler radar for weather forecasting,
mobile applications for real-time alerts);
*      Feasibility studies for investment projects of priority sectors (e.g. public schools that serve as
Page 2 of 6


﻿emergency shelter during recovery); and
*      Complete natural hazard risk profiles and vulnerability assessments including surveys and
data compilation.
O
U         Component 3: Disaster Risk Financing
SPC will not be implementing Component 3 activities during Phase I of the Program.
Component 4: Project and Program Management
The objective of this component is to provide efficient and effective implementation support to the
Projects in each country, including staff, operating costs, monitoring and evaluation, and the cost of
audits. It will also provide efficient regional coordination of the different country Projects and the
implementation of activities that will be executed at the regional level as well as high level
coordination of climate and disaster resilient projects and initiatives in the Pacific. This component
will strengthen the capacity of SPC for the: (a) implementation of the Project; and (b) provision of
implementation support to the Participating Countries, including establishment and maintenance of a
Program Support Unit (PSU). The PSU will be established within SPC and will provide technical
and fiduciary support for the implementation of regional activities as well as technical, fiduciary and
monitoring and evaluation support for the implementation of country Projects. The PSU will
undertake the procurement process on behalf of participating countries for joint procurement
processes, as well as support day-to-day implementation and financial reporting as needed. The PSU
will conduct frequent implementation support missions to each participating countries.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The SPC implemented components of PREP will provide technical and administrative assistance.
There are no relevant salient physical characteristics as all activities will be administratively-based.
All activities with potential safeguard implications will be nationally implemented under separate
Project IDs. The SPC will provide technical and administrative assistance to the participating
countries and in doing so will assist and guide individual countries to ensure that any planned
activities achieve safeguards compliance.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Nicholas John Valentine (GSURR)
Ross James Butler (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          TA activities including support for planning and
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                preparation of national infrastructure and community
resilient investments in participating countries to be
funded and implemented in Phase II and/or by other
Project Donors will need to ensure that World Bank
safeguard compliance can be achieved.
World Bank will review and clear Terms of References
for the project to ensure they require diligent responses to
safeguard issues.
Page 3 of 6


﻿Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
a
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
a
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The SPC will provide technical and administrative assistance to the participating countries and in
doing so will assist and guide individual countries to ensure that any planned activities achieve
safeguards compliance.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Indirect environmental or social impacts are not anticipated from the proposed SPC activities
under PREP. Responsibility for safeguards is devolved to the participating countries who will be
subject to the requirements of the program ESMF. The SPC TA will be designed (via WB
approved ToRs) to assist and guide future activities to meet World Bank safeguards requirements.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Country-specific activities under all four components will be implemented by a designated entity
within the relevant Ministries of Finance, with inputs from the National Disaster Management
Agencies, Meteorological and Hydrological Agencies, and the Ministries incharge of Works.
These agencies have already been exposed to WB safeguards procedures through existing DRM/
CCA projects and initiatives. However, there is relatively weak implementation capacity for some
of the implementation agencies in the Phase I countries, in particular due to limited human
resources. This risk will be mitigated through the participation of the Secretariat of the Pacific
Page 4 of 6


﻿Community (SPC) in the Program. SPC has demonstrated capacity, and will provide real-time
support to backstop participating countries where needed, including for Safeguard policies. The
country level coordinators will also be supported by a Regional Project Management and
Coordination Unit (PRMCU), and significant training and human development will be provided to
O
Q)         relevant staff through various aspects of the Program. The World Bank will maintain a close
dialogue with the regional coordinator and ensure implementation support for Safeguards when
needed.
The SPC is a key player in the resilience space, with the aim to: (i) develop the technical,
professional, scientific, research, planning and management capability of Pacific Island people;
and (ii) directly provide information and advice, to enable them to make informed decisions about
their future development and well-being. SPC has been mandated by the Leaders to coordinate the
capacity development of PICs in DRM as a broad-based development issue cutting across all
sectors, from food and water security, health, economic development and coastal zone
management.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The national-level Project Operations Manuals will outline a Consultation Plan and formal
procedures to manage public consultation and community engagement across PREP activities in
each participating country. The purpose of public consultation is to gather stakeholder input and
feedback into subproject development and design, and the effectiveness of mitigation measures.
SPC will undertake consultation with key stakeholders in relation to its activities under the TA. It
will also provide indirect technical and administrative support to the individual participating
countries which is expected to extend to consultation and disclosure activities.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              24-Feb-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           02-Mar-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Tonga                                                    05-Mar-2015
Comments:
Samoa                                                    05-Mar-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Page 5 of 6


﻿Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ]  No[X]    NA[     ]
report?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Denis Jean-Jacques Jordy,Michael Bonte-Grapentin
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)               Date: 28-May-2015
Manager:
Page 6 of 6


