INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC15821
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Dec-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Bosnia and Herzegovina     Project ID:   P149920
Project Name:    Health Sector Project (P 149920)
Task Team        Ana Holt,Timothy A. Johnston
Leader(s):
Estimated        26-Apr-2016                Estimated     20-Oct-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GHNO3                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Health (75%), Public administration- Health (25%)
Theme(s):        Health system performance (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      22.00             Total Bank Financing:    22.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                          0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development            22.00
Total                                                            22.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to help improve efficiency and quality of
health service delivery by strengthening systems for quality assurance, monitoring, and integration of
care, improving hospital efficiency, and strengthening strategic purchasing of health care.
C. Project Description
The proposed Project would include the following three components:


﻿Component 1: Strengthen quality and integration of health service delivery
This component would focus on improving the quality and integration of health service delivery.
Proposed activities include: (i) supporting the development of an information sharing system that
O
Q)      links health care institutions, and would support integrated monitoring of efficiency and quality; (ii)
development of performance scorecards for primary care and hospitals, which could be produced at
least annually and shared with facility managers, policy makers, and the public; and (iii)
strengthening of mechanisms for quality monitoring and quality assurance, including clinic audits,
licensing, and accreditation. The focus will be primarily on noncommunicable diseases (NCDs),
particularly improved integrated screening and management of NCDs such as hypertension, diabetes,
and cervical cancer. The project may also support mechanisms to strengthen prevention and
outreach services for maternal and child health at primary care level, including for vulnerable groups
such as the Roma.
To improve the integration of care and monitoring of quality across levels, this component would
support the development of an information sharing system that links all relevant health institutions.
This would include health care providers, health insurance funds, public health institutes,
pharmacies, etc., to allow for efficient information flows in accordance with patients' needs. It would
build on the IT supports to primary care provided under the HSEP as well as extend support to
secondary and tertiary care levels and promote interoperability between systems at different levels of
care. This area would also support implementation of e-health systems, telemedicine solutions and
diagnostic equipment, particularly for developing self-care and home-care.
Activities would be complemented by Component 3, including reforms to introduce quality-adjusted
payment systems at primary care and hospital level. The component also would complement
prevention and health promotion activities supported by the Reducing Health Risk Factors in BiH
supported a Trust Funds financed by the Swiss Development Cooperation (SDC).
Component 2: Modernizing the hospital sector toward efficiency
0
This component would focus on providing support to address a number of challenges facing the
hospital sector in both entities, which currently represents the largest share of health expenditures.
Modernization would involve strengthening financial management and accountability of hospitals, as
a       well as shifting the role of hospitals to focus on intensive, lifesaving care while other functions
would be ensured through outpatient polyclinics (specialized diagnostic and treatment), and primary
care (integration of specialized care and family health as well as palliative and home-based care into
primary health care teams ("health homes"). The component would support: (i) strengthening of
management and accounting systems for hospitals; (ii) technical support for policy reforms to
strengthen hospital accountability and autonomy; and (iii) management strengthening and skill
development. It may also finance targeted investment to improve efficiency of care in selected
hospitals, including limited financing of equipment to enable increased use of day surgeries, or to
transition excess acute care beds to long-term or social care. This support would be contingent on
hospital management adopting a rationalization plan, including addressing hospital arrears.
Component 3: Strengthen health system strategic purchasing and governance
This component would aim to strengthen strategic purchasing and governance of the health system,
including support for: (i) introduction and scaling up of quality and risk-adjusted capitation payments
for primary health care; (ii) introduction of Diagnostic Related Group (DRG) payments for acute


﻿hospital care in FBiH, and introduction of quality adjusted hospital payments in both RS (which has
already introduced DRGs) and FBiH; (iii) strengthening capacity and coordination of the health
insurance funds in both entities for strategic purchasing and health service monitoring; and (iv)
supporting reforms for the pharmaceutical sector to improve efficiency and access of both generic
U       and patented drugs. If agreed by the authorities, the project could provide technical support for
reforms to help improve Universal Coverage of health care, including enhancing portability of health
insurance among cantons or entities, or de-linking of health insurance from employment status.
This component would also support the operational costs of implementing the proposed Project. This
would include project coordination and supervision, fiduciary management and monitoring and
evaluation. The component would finance technical assistance, surveys, studies, hiring and training
of consultants under the project implementation units (PIUs) of each entity, limited office equipment
and recurrent costs. It would also help support institutionalization of health surveys to collect
information at household level.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project is nationwide in scope and coverage. Key considerations for safeguard analysis may
include investments under Component 2: Modernizing the hospital sector toward efficiency, such as
provision of equipment and/or adaptation of hospitals as part of the modernization efforts in
secondary and tertiary care. These investments might require minor renovations of selected hospitals
(within the same footprint) to increase use of day surgeries or to convert acute care wards to long
term care. Investments may also generate incremental health care waste (medical equipment), which
will need to be handled properly.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Both entities (FBiH and RS) have experienced in safeguards practices under the now closed
(December 31, 2014) Health System Enhancement Project (HSEP) and the ongoing support from
CEB (under World Bank management). Given the nature and small scale of impacts, the Clients will
rely on external environmental consultant(s) to undertake supervision of environmental performance
of contractors. In addition, it is worth mentioning that the ICR for the HSEP concluded that all the
works done under HSPE have been carried out according to standards and environmental guidelines
O
and that safeguards compliance has been satisfactory, throughout the project implementation period.
This was also confirmed during the visit of the ICR team to several rehabilitated facilities.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Esma Kreso (GENDR)
Ifeta Smajic (GSURR)
Maja Colovic-Daul (GENO3)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project is categorized as B as the activities may
OP/BP 4.01                              increase health care waste by procuring medical
equipment and create minor environmental impacts
associated with minor renovation works planned for
some adaptation of hospitals to increase use of day
surgeries (existing sites) as part of the modernization


﻿efforts in secondary and tertiary care. In that case,
impacts are expected to be small-scale and site-
specific, which can be mitigated by following
specific safeguard mitigation measures and
provisions highlighted in an ESMP to be prepared
before appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No            Although the project covers the entire country, the
project interventions are not located in or nearby
protected areas or in areas with natural habitats
Forests OP/BP 4.36             No            The project does not include any activities that could
affect forest, forest health and forest-dependent
communities.
Pest Management OP 4.09        No            The project does not focus on disease control and
will not finance pesticides, such as for control of
vector-borne diseases.
Physical Cultural Resources    No            Hospitals currently in use are not on the cultural
OP/BP 4.11                                   heritage list for Bosnia and Herzegovina. There will
be no new constructions or expansions of hospitals,
therefore it is highly unlikely that the project will
affect any physical cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No            Not applicable
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/   No            The policy is not triggered. At most the project will
BP 4.12                                      involve minor civil works within hospitals under
component 2, if at all. Any potential rehabilitation
will be within the existing hospital footprints and
there is no scenario involving major changes to a
ward during rehabilitation.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No            The Project will not finance any activities related to
the construction of dams nor affect operations of
existing dams or affiliated reservoirs.
Projects on International      No            The project will not affect international waterways.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No            The project will not affect international waterways.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 04-Apr-2016
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
ESMP should be prepared prior to appraisal for Component 2 with potential hospital adaptation
activities
All safeguards documents will be disclosed in local languages and English and publicly consulted
prior to Appraisal. A meaningful citizen engagement mechanism and indicator, with particular
focus on vulnerable groups targeted in component 1, will also be provided at the Appraisal Stage.
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ana Holt,Timothy A. Johnston
Approved By:
O
Safeguards Advisor:  Name: Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler (SA)       Date: 10-Dec-2015
Practice Manager/    Name: Enis Baris (PMGR)                     Date: 10-Dec-2015
Manager:


