INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC8284
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Apr-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Afghanistan                Project ID:   P145347
Project Name:   Trans-Hindukush Road Connectivity Project (P145347)
Task Team       Andreas Schliessler,Luquan Tian
Leader(s):
Estimated       27-Jul-2015                Estimated     15-Sep-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIDR                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (85%), Telecommunications (10%),
Public administration- Transportation (5%)
Theme(s):       Regional integration (80%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     250.00            Total Bank Financing:  250.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               0.00
IDA Grant                                                     250.00
Total                                                          250.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The project development objective is improved road transport connectivity across the Hindukush
mountain range between the Kabul region and Baghlan.
C. Project Description
The proposed project would achieve the Project Development Objective through the implementation
of the two project components described below. The total project cost is estimated at US$250


﻿million.
Component 1: Road construction (US$240 million). Component 1 will include (i) civil works for the
rehabilitation and maintenance of two separate roads, namely the B2B road and the Salang highway,
O
Q)      (ii) consulting services, for the supervision of works for the same roads and for regular technical
audits by an independent international auditor to verify that road works have been executed in
compliance with the technical specifications, and (iii) goods, which will include a small number of
equipment items which MPW may need to keep the two roads open during construction. The MPW
already commissioned and received detailed feasibility and design studies for the two roads, which
the World Bank team reviewed and which will be further refined during project preparation. Design
of the highway includes all the road safety features typically applied under international good
practice. The finalized technical design of the Baghlan to Bamiyan road will include ducts and fiber
optic cables. The new cable along this road will therefore also become part of the "data highway" for
Afghanistan and provide a backup loop for the existing trans-Hindukush cable along the Salang
highway. For procurement purposes the civil works will be divided into smaller lots in order to
facilitate the participation of local groups and contractors and to make the best possible use of their
capabilities. This is also expected to reduce the security risk for the project since this procurement
strategy is expected to generate strong support by local communities, including in areas dominated
by insurgent forces. It is estimated that within the total cost of Component, about US$ 170 million
will be spent on the Baghlan to Bamiyan road, US$ 55 million will be spent on the Salang highway
and tunnel, while the remainder of US$ 15 million will be spent on goods and services benefitting
both roads.
Component 2: Institutional support and project management (US$ 10 million). This component will
be comprised of several subcomponents:
a)      Road Safety. This will include a review of the existing design for the two roads with the
specific purpose of detecting and remedying any potential design deficiencies in terms of road safety.
This activity will be combined with practical training of engineers at the MPWH on road safety
issues.
b)     Definition of asset management arrangements for the trans-Hindukush roads. This
subcomponent will include activities to define the most appropriate arrangements for the effective
o       and efficient management, operation and maintenance of the newly upgraded roads, after their
completion. This will include a study on the feasibility of introducing tolling and outsourcing the
management of the roads to the private sector. The objective is to avoid a repetition of the cycle of
quick road deterioration observed in the past due to the lack of enforcement of axle load limits,
inadequate management and maintenance, the excessive use of snow chains, and the absence of
incentives for good management. The Bank team will work with IFC to develop an appropriate
solution involving the private sector. The setup for the management of the trans-Hindukush roads
will be also developed with the added objective of generating social benefits for the communities
living along the road, such as the use of small and medium-sized local firms whenever this is
possible and efficient.
c)     Information and communications campaign. This will include the design and execution of
MPW's information and communications campaign for the purpose of building public and
stakeholder support for upgrading of the two roads. This is especially important because the
construction works will occasionally cause disruptions of the normal traffic patterns. The
communications/outreach campaign is expected to include ICT-based citizen feedback mechanisms


﻿and will also promote road safety awareness among road users.
d)     Training and capacity building. This subcomponent will include resources to fund various
types of training and capacity building for staff of the MPW and DPW.
o
e)     Project management support, including the cost of the Project Management Unit (PMU)
operation.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will undertake physical works on two separate roads:
- On the Salang highway (87 km length) which is located between Charikar and Pol-e-Khomri in the
northern region of Afghanistan. Civil works will be limited to repairs, rehabilitation and
maintenance, located entirely within the existing right-of-way of the road, with NO widening which
would affect slopes or would require land acquisition or resettlement.
- On the Baghlan to Bamiyan road (152 km), works will upgrade the road to paved standard. The
works will essentially take place within the existing right-of-way of the road. Widening will be
needed at some locations, requiring very limited land acquisition and resettlement.
Both roads pass through heavily mountainous terrain typical for much of Northern Afghanistan. It is
characterized by steep slopes and undulating hills that are mostly unprotected as there is very little
vegetative cover on most of these slopes. During the winter months, the slopes are covered with
snow as the mean elevation is about 2500 m above sea level.
The existing Baghlan to Bamiyan road is an unpaved 2-lane road. The planned civil works in the
proposed project consist mostly of the construction of a new asphalt concrete pavement along the
entire length of the road. Works will also include the improvement of the drainage system, retaining
walls, etc. The present width of the road is between 8 and 12 meters, with a few pinchpoints as
narrow as 5 meters. The with of the rehabilitated road is expected to 10 m (with two 3.5m lanes
withl.5m road shoulder on either side). The widening of the road at some points will require some
land acquisition and rather limited resettlement.
In terms of environmental impact, the widening of the Baghlan to Bamiyan road at some locations
will require significant cutting of slopes and filling of valley areas, albeit mostly within the existing
road corridor and alignment. Due to these unprotected slopes, significant erosion and therefore
sediment transportation and deposition are expected and need to be mitigated. The landscape is
otherwise unremarkable as there are no forests and no known significant natural habitats.
An EIA for the Baghlan to Bamiyan road project was carried out in 2011 by USAID and SIDA. It
covers the same civil works which are to be carried out under the proposed project. The EIA found
that potential adverse environmental impacts on human populations or environmentally important
areas are limited and site specific; few of them are irreversible. On the other hand, the project brings
about positive environmental impacts, such as soil erosion protection. A review to the EIA and
updating with the new information are needed in the preparation stage and a detailed and quality
ESMP is critical to the implementation of project.
USAID has also commissioned a Social Impact Assessment (SIA) of the proposed B2B road in 2009,
which the implementing partner are now updating to re-assess any risks to affected communities and
to consider alternatives to minimize land acquisition impacts. There will be a household census of all


﻿affected households undertaken to update the Social Management Plan (SMP) prepared by MoPH in
2012 and to formulate development strategies in the form of a comprehensive Resettlement Action
Plan (RAP) in order to assist in determining project impacts on the social, economic, cultural, and
livelihood activities of the affected communities.
0
Once the detailed designs for specific road sections are finalized and if resettlement/land acquisition
is foreseen, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared by the client and submitted to the
Bank for clearance. The Implementing partner and relevant governmental agencies (i.e. ARAZI) will
be responsible for implementing the RAP(s) prior to commencement of civil works. The final
version of RAP(s) as well as the updated SIA will be disclosed in-country in local languages and
through the InfoShop, before appraisal of the project.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The client is the Ministry of Public Works, and over the past several years the Bank and other donors
have implemented several road projects with them throughout the country. Additionally, the
environmental and social officers in this ministry have benefitted from several training events
organized by the Bank office in Kabul. Therefore, the ministry staff is familiar with World Bank
safeguards policies and has experience with implementing Bank-supported projects. Their capacity
over the years has progressively increased but they will still need significant support going forward
and the TT will continue to provide this support to ensure the safeguards aspects of the proposed
project are managed adequately.
The client capacity to implement land acquisition and resettlement is good and reliable, since MoPW
is responsible for implementation of the ongoing WB supported NERAP and ARAP projects. The
borrower has already hired a Social Safeguards Focal Officer, who will be responsible for the day to
day implementation of social safeguards. B2B project will organize social safeguards training for
project staff including the field staff to strengthen their capacity for preparation and implementation
of the Resettlement Action Plan.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
0
Asta Olesen (GSURR)
James Orehmie Monday (GENDR)
Mohammad Yasin Noori (GSURR)
Obaidullah Hidayat (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The proposed project is classified as Category A.
OP/BP 4.01                              The mountainous terrain through which this corridor
passes will pose significant challenges due to soil
erosion and sediment transportation concerns, risks
of slides from potentially unstable slopes, storm
water drainage concerns, etc. Additional risks
include road safety concerns and difficulty with
suitably disposing of spoil material. These concerns,
if not properly addressed, would have significant
environmental impacts that could be irreversible.


﻿Therefore, consistent with OP4.01, this project has
been assigned an EA Category A. No protected
areas or forest reserves are traversed by the civil
works planned under this project.
Appropriate measures to ensure occupational health
and safety to workers and safety of the general public
will be included in all contracts for civil works.
A thorough EIA was carried out in 2011 by USAID
and SIDA which found that potential adverse
environmental impacts on human populations or
environmentally important areas are very limited and
site specific.
The TT will ask the client to update the 2011 EIA
with the new project information and to prepare a
detailed and quality ESMP.
The TT will also work with the client to ensure that
participatory and meaningful consultations are held
during the updating of the 2011 EIA, and that a
record of these consultations will be included in an
annex in the updated EIA.
The updated EIA will be translated into Pashto and
Dari, and then locally disclosed in the project area,
and at the Infoshop, before appraisal of the project.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No         No known natural habitats in project area.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          No forests in project area.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No          Not applicable due to type of project.
Physical Cultural Resources  No         The SIA commissioned by USAID provides no
OP/BP 4.11                              indication of existence of Physical Cultural
Resources within the proposed road alignment,
therefore it is unlikely to impact any known
historical and cultural monuments. The project
documents will nevertheless include chance find
procedures according to National Law.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No          No recognized indigenous people present in project
4.10                                    area.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes       Based on the project's preliminary design, the
BP 4.12                                 upgraded road is expected to 10 meters wide, with
two 3.5 meter wide lanes and 1.5meter wide road
shoulders on each side. The existing road width is
between 8 and 12 meters, with some pinch points of
only 5 meters wide. The Project will therefore
require some minor land acquisition and
resettlement.


﻿Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     No            Not applicable, since no dams are be built under the
project.
Projects on International     No            Not applicable.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No           Not applicable.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 16-Jun-2014
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The existing ESIA/ESMP and the existing RAP will be reviewed and updated as needed, and
disclosed. The expected date for disclosure is May 15, 2015, but in any case the disclosure will
take place before project appraisal.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Andreas Schliessler,Luquan Tian
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)                     Date: 30-Apr-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Shigeyuki Sakaki (PMGR)                     Date: 01-May-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


