                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA17238
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Feb-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Feb-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Haiti                               Project ID:    P155191
                            Project Name:      Providing an Education of Quality in Haiti (PEQH) (P155191)
                            Task Team          Juan Baron,Melissa Ann Adelman
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          30-Mar-2016                         Estimated   29-Jun-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GED04                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General education sector (10%), Primary education (90%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (90%), Managing for development results (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         45.00               Total Bank Financing:         45.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                             0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                   15.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                     30.00
                              Total                                                                                         45.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objectives of the Project are to: (i) strengthen public management of the education sector; (ii)
                           improve learning conditions in selected public and non-public primary schools; and (iii) maintain
                           enrollment of students in selected non-public primary schools.
                            3. Project Description

                                                                        Page 1 of 11
                         Component 1: Improving Institutional Capacity (US$6.0M). This component would finance goods,
                         training, and consultancies to carry out activities to modernize and strengthen the technical capacity
                         of MENFP’s key units at the central and decentralized levels, in order to improve sectoral
Public Disclosure Copy




                         governance and the quality of primary education service delivery, and to support the implementation
                         of Components 2 and 3. Key units to strengthen include, inter alia: the Directorate of Primary
                         Education (Direction d’Enseignement Fondamentale; DEF), the Directorate of Private Education and
                         Partnership (Direction d’Appui a l’Enseignement Privé et au Partenariat; DAEPP), the Directorate of
                         Professional Training (Direction de Formation Professionelle; DFP), and the Directorate of Planning
                         and External Cooperation (Direction de Planification et Cooperation Externe; DPCE). These units
                         will be supported in, inter alia:
                         (a)      Designing, developing, and building a sustainable and effective management information
                         system, that incorporates data generated by the QAS;
                         (b)      Developing and piloting the components of the QAS;
                         (c)      Strengthening the capacity of the DEF and other units in developing, improving, and
                         administering learning assessments as part of the QAS;
                         (d)      Strengthening the capacity of the DAEPP and other units to regulate non-public schools
                         through the QAS;
                         (e)      Developing support to DFP, public universities and training centers, and other units in
                         designing and managing school director and teacher training programs based on the QAS and
                         international best practices;
                         (f)      Strengthening the ability of selected Departmental Directorates of Education (Directions
                         Departementales, DDEs), set forth in the Project Operations Manual (POM), to provide support to
                         schools, teacher training centers, and communities, as well as supervise the implementation of
                         activities at the local level; and
                         (g)      Strengthening the planning and budgeting practices of MENFP through the use of data for
                         decision-making.

                         Component 2: Supporting Access to Quality, Public Primary Education in Poor Communities (US
Public Disclosure Copy




                         $17.5M). This component would finance community grants, public school grants, goods, and
                         consultancies aimed at providing access to quality primary education in poor communities in selected
                         departments set forth in the Project Operations Manual (POM).

                         Sub-component 2.1: Support to the cohorts of the community school access grant program under the
                         EFA-II Project (US$7M). This sub-component would continue the financing of community grants
                         for primary education in isolated, rural communities currently receiving support under EFA-II.
                         These communities would receive annual grants to fund community-developed plans for providing
                         access to primary schooling and technical support to execute their plans.

                         Sub-component 2.2: Public School Improvement Model (US$10.5M). This sub-component would
                         provide access to a quality primary education in public schools located in poor communities in
                         selected departments of Southern Haiti set forth in the Project Operations Manual (POM) through a
                         public school improvement model with a focus on, inter alia:
                         (a)     Assessing the learning conditions and learning outcomes in participating schools using the
                         QAS;
                         (b)     School director training in effective management and leadership, including support in
                         formulating and implementing school improvement plans based on results of the QAS;
                         (c)     Teacher training to, inter alia, improve pedagogical skills and content knowledge;
                         (d)     School grants for the implementation of school improvement plans that prioritize needs


                                                                     Page 2 of 11
                         identified through the QAS, such as, inter alia: school rehabilitation, including access to electricity
                         and water and sanitation facilities; school feeding; pedagogical materials; furniture, uniforms, or
                         other materials;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (e)      Community engagement activities (including innovative communication approaches through
                         Information and Communication Technologies (ICT)) and School Management Committees (SMCs).

                         Component 3: Supporting Access to Quality, Non-Public Primary Education in Poor Communities
                         (US$18.5M). Building on the experience of the EPT program, this component would finance school
                         grants, goods, and consultancies aimed at supporting access of poor children to non-public schools
                         while increasing the quality of education of those non-public schools though a results-based model
                         with an emphasis on accountability and improvement.

                         Sub-component 3.1: Support to the final tuition waiver program cohort under the EFA-II Project (US
                         $2.5M). This sub-component would finance sixth grade tuition waivers in t he 2017-2018 academic
                         year for the youngest cohort of approximately 28,000 students currently supported by the
                         Government’s tuition waiver program under EFA-II, as well as the improvement of the program.
                         The sixth grade cohort would be supported in all non-public schools currently participating in the
                         tuition waiver program that continue to meet the program’s requirements. Improvements of the
                         program would require that schools are registered with MENFP, students supported by the program
                         are not charged any tuition and receive textbooks, the existence of a functional School Management
                         Committee (SMC), and schools respect the procedures of the program as established in the POM.
                         The structure of the tuition waiver program as currently implemented under EFA II would be
                         maintained for continuity. Specifically, financing would be on a per-student basis, at US$90 per
                         student for the academic year, and would be based on verified enrollment numbers. Financing would
                         be divided into two tranches, with 60 percent transferred at the beginning of the academic year based
                         on reported enrollment, and the remaining 40 percent transferred after independent verification of
                         enrollment. Each SMC would maintain its current bank account at the Banque Nationale de Credit to
                         receive the transfers. In addition, MENFP would continue its communication activities to raise
                         awareness among school officials, parents, and other community members that the tuition waiver
Public Disclosure Copy




                         program is ending and that no additional cohorts would be financed after the 2017-2018 academic
                         year.
                         Sub-component 3.2: Support to the development and implementation of a replicable model for
                         results-based financing of non-public schools (Quality Education Access Program, QEAP) (US
                         $16M).
                         This sub-component would provide support to MENFP’s development and implementation of a
                         replicable model for results-based financing of non-public schools located in poor communities in
                         selected departments of Southern Haiti set forth in the Project Operations Manual (POM). The model
                         would focus on service delivery improvement in terms of learning conditions and learning outcomes.
                         The sub-component would finance, inter alia:

                         (a)      Assessing the learning conditions and learning outcomes in participating schools using the
                         QAS;
                         (b)      School grants to SMCs conditional on meeting well-defined standards on learning conditions
                         and learning outcomes as set forth in the POM;
                         (c)      Voluntary, on-demand technical support to assist schools in meeting the standards, including,
                         inter alia: training school directors in effective management and leadership based on the QAS, and
                         training teachers to improve pedagogical skills and content knowledge;
                         (d)      Strengthening supervision of the program.



                                                                      Page 3 of 11
                         Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$3.0M). This component would
                         finance the costs of implementing the Project, as well as monitoring and evaluation costs. As an
                         integral part of the evaluation approach for the Project, this component would finance studies and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         impact evaluations of Components 2 and 3, exploiting when possible the random selection of schools
                         into the models supported under Sub-Component 2.2 and Sub-Component 3.2 and the potential for
                         gradual phase-in of additional schools when new financing becomes available. The component
                         would finance goods, rental space, training, operating costs and consultancies. It would also finance
                         and implement a gradual integration plan of project management functions into the national
                         structures of MENFP, and strengthen the overall capacity for the management and evaluation of
                         Project activities. This component would also finance Project management costs to implement and
                         supervise activities and strengthen MENFP monitoring and evaluation systems, including data
                         collection for at least one school census. The component would also support the costs of
                         consultancies associates with the Project Implementation Unit (PIU), including a Project coordinator,
                         administrative staff (procurement and financial management staff), and technical consultants who
                         would support the technical and departmental directorates in the areas of intervention and oversee the
                         implementation of specific Project activities.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         While the sites for school construction were identified, donated voluntarily, and transferred to the
                         Directorate of School Engineering (Direction du Genie Scolaire) (DGS) in the previous project, the
                         current Project will reassess the need for each community-managed school and its corresponding site.
                         Not all sites identified in the previous project will be used. The Project will return some of the sites
                         to the communities and take alternative measures to improve access to education.

                         Since the exact location of schools would not be known before Project implementation, as per OP/BP
                         4.01 (Environmental Assessment), an ESMF and RPF are required to outline how sites would be
                         selected, and how potential adverse environmental and social impacts at these sites would be
                         identified, minimized, mitigated, and managed. This ESMF and RPF have been prepared by the DGS
Public Disclosure Copy




                         based on a previous framework prepared by the Economic and Social Assistance Fund (Fonds d’
                         Assistance Économique et Sociale) (FAES) and MENFP. Potential adverse impacts would be small-
                         scale in time and space related to construction/rehabilitation impacts. The ESMF focuses on how to
                         address construction-type impacts (what kind of training and protective gear workers would receive;
                         how waste, noise, and dust would be managed, etc.). Any identified sites requiring acquisition of
                         private land, involuntary resettlement, loss of economic livelihoods or that affect critical natural
                         habitats, forests or physical cultural resources would be screened out by MENFP’s local offices
                         during the approval process of community Projects. The ESMF and RPF will also include a budget
                         for safeguard actions and a snapshot of the institutional arrangements for screening sites, developing
                         mitigation actions, implementing these actions and supervising adherence to them. The ESMPs
                         (Environmental and Social Management Plans) and RAPs (Resettlement Action Plans) will be
                         developed when the sites are identified prior to the beginning of the construction works, and DGS
                         would supervise the implementation of these instruments at each site through regular field visits and
                         providing a hotline to the project beneficiaries to obtain feedback.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Asli Gurkan (GSU04)
                         Emmanuel Ngollo (GEN05)
                         Felipe Jacome (GSU04)



                                                                      Page 4 of 11
                         6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental            Yes        The OP/BP 4.01 will be triggered due to the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01               activities that will include the rehabilitation and/or
                                                             construction of primary schools. These works may have
                                                             adverse impacts, although they are expected to be small-
                                                             scale with easily identifiable mitigation measures.
                                                             Furthermore, the sites that have been proposed by local
                                                             communities will be evaluated on the basis of the updated
                                                             ESMF and their proximity to an existing public school.
                                                             The public schools to be rehabilitated will also be
                                                             identified and screened using the updated ESMF.
                                                             Therefore, the project is classified as category B. The
                                                             Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                             (ESMF) for EFA II has been updated to include
                                                             guidelines and procedures for assessing and monitoring
                                                             the social and environmental risks and impacts (both
                                                             positive and negative) throughout the project, including
                                                             guidelines for the preparation of Environmental and
                                                             Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and their
                                                             implementation for school construction/ rehabilitation.
                                                             The updated ESMF will be consulted upon and re-
                                                             disclosed both in country and at the World Bank’s website
                                                             prior to appraisal (see dates below in section II.5). The
                                                             updated ESMF will clearly reflect the issues of the
                                                             construction-type impacts and building safety, disability
                                                             access, that no asbestos-containing materials should be
                                                             used in the construction, and safe removal of any existing
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             materials. Any exceptions will be identified during the
                                                             screening phase (as detailed in the ESMF) and additional
                                                             assessment work will be done during project
                                                             implementation, if required.

                                                             The general environmental management clauses for civil
                                                             works rehabilitation/construction will be inserted into the
                                                             bidding documents and contracts. Detailed environmental
                                                             assessments or Environmental Management Plans and
                                                             Resettlement Action Plans, if necessary, will be carried
                                                             out for all school site rehabilitation/construction activities
                                                             and disclosed in-country and at the Bank´s Infoshop
                                                             before the start of works.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No         The proposed project is not meant to affect any type of
                         4.04                                habitat naturally inhabited by biological creature that
                                                             could be disturbed. However, the ESMF will include
                                                             screening procedures to ensure that adverse impacts on
                                                             natural habitats are avoided.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No         The proposed project is not meant to affect forests, nor



                                                              Page 5 of 11
                                                        will it involve reforestation. However, the ESMF will
                                                        include screening procedures to ensure that adverse
                                                        impacts on forests and forest resources are avoided.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     This policy is not triggered. Specific activities under the
                                                        project which may involve the incidental use of pesticides
                                                        or herbicides include termite building treatments, vector
                                                        control and/or emergency response activities.
                                                        Nevertheless, the incidental use of pest control measures
                                                        will be managed by detailing appropriate procedures in
                                                        the generic standardized EMP for inclusion into contracts.
                         Physical Cultural        No    The proposed operations are not expected to pose risks of
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           damaging cultural properties. Nevertheless, some of the
                                                        construction works may result in the destruction of
                                                        artifacts of cultural significance. The updated ESMF will
                                                        include a chapter relating to Chance-find procedures as
                                                        well as historic building screening procedures, describing
                                                        the assistance for preservation of historic or archeological
                                                        sites; and no separate no separate safeguards instrument
                                                        will be prepared.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No    The activities of the proposed project are not anticipated
                         BP 4.10                        to trigger this safeguard policy since there are no
                                                        indigenous people in Haiti.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   OP 4.12 has been triggered to allow municipalities to
                         OP/BP 4.12                     identify resettlement needs that could be required and to
                                                        ensure that the affected people would be provided with
                                                        the required assistance and livelihood support under the
                                                        policy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        While all communities have earlier identified potential
                                                        land plots of land for school construction as part of the
                                                        ongoing education project, and voluntarily and formally
                                                        transferred them to the Government, it was agreed as part
                                                        of this new project’s design that there will not be
                                                        construction on most of those plots.

                                                        It is currently not known on which sites the schools will
                                                        be built/rehabilitated. Instead, the project will identify
                                                        public schools that children in the communities can
                                                        access, and finance transportation for them, as well as
                                                        improvements at the existing schools. Only in cases
                                                        where there is no option to access an existing school, the
                                                        project will consider new construction. The Project will
                                                        return some of the already identified sites to the
                                                        communities and take alternative measures to improve
                                                        access to education (i.e. increase number of classrooms of
                                                        existing school, or facilitate access to existing schools).



                                                         Page 6 of 11
                                                                       The project is currently in the process of hiring a
                                                                       consultant to make this assessment and selection in the
                                                                       next several months.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       As the exact nature and location of the works remains
                                                                       unknown, a “Framework” approach will be adopted. A
                                                                       Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) of the last project
                                                                       will be updated, consulted on and disclosed before
                                                                       appraisal. If it is determined that any of the sites where
                                                                       sub-projects are yet to be developed require the
                                                                       involuntary taking of land, the Project will prepare a site-
                                                                       specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAP), which needs to
                                                                       be implemented by the client prior to the start of any
                                                                       construction. The affected people must have received
                                                                       their compensation or relocated under conditions equal to
                                                                       or better than their conditions before the investments.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             This policy is not triggered, as there will be no dam
                            4.37                                       construction or rehabilitation of dams that will necessitate
                                                                       safety status reports.
                            Projects on International   No             This policy is not triggered, for the project sites will not
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       affect international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed        No             This policy is not triggered because project intervention
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                           sites will not be within disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project is classified as Category B as the potential environmental and social impacts are likely
                              to be small in scale, site-specific and manageable. The project is expected to have overall positive
                              social impacts, particularly linked to improved learning outcomes and expanding access to
                              education. Negative social impacts may include minor land acquisition, physical resettlement, and
                              loss of economic livelihoods. Additionally, conflicts and frustration at the community level could
                              be caused by the non-use of the local workforce during the work or lack of circulation among the
                              local workforce, or by tensions between beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries of project activities.

                             The civil works to be financed under this operation consist primarily of (a) classrooms
                             rehabilitation and/or construction in existing identified primary schools and construction of new
                             ones where primary schools do not exist; and potentially (b) latrines rehabilitation and/or
                             construction. With regards to construction/rehabilitation of classrooms, instructions from the
                             ESMF will reflect the issues of the construction-type impacts and building safety, disability
                             access, and asbestos-containing materials that should not be used in the construction operations,
                             and safe removal of any existing materials.

                             Four types of environmental impacts are foreseen under this project, arising from the construction/
                             rehabilitation activities:


                                                                        Page 7 of 11
                           a.      Civil Works: Nuisance and pollution associated to activities and wastes form construction
                           and/or rehabilitation works of the classrooms and the school latrines (noise, dust and construction
Public Disclosure Copy




                           wastes) will affect especially the construction workers, pupils, the closest riverine to the sites. The
                           anarchic rejection of wastes and residues from the sites preparation and the storage of
                           construction/rehabilitation materials could constitute a source of nuisance for public health if no
                           sustainable ecologic management system is put in place. Also, excavation works at the sites could
                           cause the unstable soil subsidence, which can cause accidents.

                           b.      Construction accidents: During the civil work phase, there will be risks of accidents
                           associated with construction equipment/instruments and the presence of building materials poorly
                           protected or used inappropriately. The risk of falling exists for all authorized and unauthorized
                           persons on the construction sites in terms of narrow and congested traffic areas. The risk of
                           accidents also related to road traffic during delivery of building materials is to be feared
                           (movement of vehicles: collision, skidding, striking, pinching, crushing, or load-fall, stumbling)
                           during operations.

                           c.       Degradation of cultural relics: Culturally, it is suggested that the project avoids the cultural
                           sites, sources of social conflicts. However, in case of fortuitous discovery (chance finds) during
                           excavation, the builders must commit to notify immediately the relevant services of the Ministry
                           of Culture, and the work will be oriented in accordance with their guidelines.

                           d. Populations and workers’ health: Health wise, there are risks of STI/HIV/AIDS transmission
                           associated with the presence of temporary foreign workers, composed usually of isolated youths,
                           with a tendency to increase contacts with young girls and women within the local population in the
                           work areas.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The potential environmental and social impacts are likely to be of small-scale, site-specific,
                           manageable and thus easily mitigated as described in the previous section. There is no indirect or
                           long term adverse impacts expected during project implementation.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Not applicable.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The approach to safeguards is, as construction/rehabilitation activities to be carried out are within
                           the Grand Sud but the areas covered are still unknown, to update the existing Environmental and
                           Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to cover
                           all activities financed under the new project. An environmental and social safeguards consultant
                           will be hired under the proposed project to manage and oversee the environmental and social
                           management process, and provide institutional strengthening and on-the-job training services
                           throughout the PEQH project. This consultant will work closely with the DGS Engineers and
                           contractors and other implementing entities to implement and strengthen the existing ESMF and
                           RPF procedures that will improve classrooms construction quality through compliance with
                           safeguards under the conditions of the PEQH project financing.



                                                                       Page 8 of 11
                           During implementation, Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs), Environmental
                           and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and/or Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) or Abbreviated
                           Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs) will be prepared as and when necessary, once the school
Public Disclosure Copy




                           construction/rehabilitation sites and plans are finalized.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholder include:
                           Ministry of Education and Professional Training (MENFP)
                           Ministry of Finance
                           Ministry of Public Works
                           UN Agencies (UNESCO, WFP, UNDP)
                           Municipal Councils
                           Community Members

                           The key stakeholders are the community members likely to benefit from the Project, including the
                           out-of-school children, their parents, and the potential community instructors to be trained, as well
                           as the larger community that would participate in the management of the Project activities at the
                           community level.

                           All stakeholders (Government Agencies and Ministries, private sector, Municipal Councils,
                           Communities, development partners, etc.) will continue to be consulted regularly. The PEQH
                           project will continue the dialogue with key stakeholders and the project will rely on the RPF and
                           ESMF to ensure that the appropriate mitigation measures are taken into account in accordance
                           with the Republic of Haiti and the Bank’s safeguards policies in consultation with key
                           stakeholders. This participatory approach will be carried on throughout implementation,
                           maintenance, supervision and evaluation of the project activities.

                           Advanced drafts of ESMF and RPF will be consulted upon at the central and department levels of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the MENFP and disclosed by Feb 29, 2016.
                           These instruments will be finalized and re-disclosed by March 30, 2016.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         17-Feb-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      26-Feb-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Haiti                                                               29-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         17-Feb-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      26-Feb-2016




                                                                      Page 9 of 11
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Haiti                                                            29-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?
                          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                          the project legal documents?


                                                                     Page 10 of 11
                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Juan Baron,Melissa Ann Adelman
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Yves Jantzem (PMGR)              Date: 25-Feb-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                Page 11 of 11
