                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA17007
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Apr-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Bosnia and Herzegovina            Project ID:   P152406
                            Project Name:     Federation Road Sector Modernization Project (P152406)
                            Task Team         Liljana Sekerinska
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         20-Apr-2016                       Estimated   12-Jul-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GTI03                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (83%), Public administration-
                                              Transportation (17%)
                            Theme(s):         Regional integration (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:       101.84           Total Bank Financing:  64.91
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                    Amount
                              Borrower                                                                               0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                 64.91
                              EC European Investment Bank                                                           36.93
                              Total                                                                                101.84
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Program Development Objective of the Transport Sector Modernization Program (TSMP) is to
                           upgrade transport infrastructure along priority transport links and to strengthen capacity for
                           sustainable transport asset management.


                                                                     Page 1 of 10
                         The Project Development Objectives of the First Phase of the TSMP (the Federation Road Sector
                         Modernization Project) are to improve road connectivity and safety for road users along project roads
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and to strengthen capacity for sustainable management of the main road network in the Federation of
                         Bosnia and Herzegovina.
                         3. Project Description
                         The proposed Project (the First Phase of TSMP) will support the Government of FBH in the
                         implementation of a part of its new Road Modernization Program. It is envisioned that the
                         Government’s Program will be supported by EBRD, EIB and the Bank (EIB has already approved its
                         loan). The proposed Project would be co-financed by EIB and the Bank totaling about €91.0 million.
                         Co-financing shares could vary by subproject/contract. EIB will also finance additional sections,
                         which are out of the scope of the proposed Bank Project, estimated to cost €15.9 million. These
                         additional EIB sections are separated geographically from the Project financed road sections. EBRD
                         would use parallel financing in the amount of €80.0 million to implement a certain proportion of the
                         Government’s Program in two phases. The first phase will be flood-related damage repair that is
                         expected to start at the end of this year and the second phase planned for 2017 will finance by
                         bypasses, a few of which might be physically adjacent or located in close geographical proximity to
                         the Project financed road sections. However these are not functionally linked to the EBRD financed
                         bypasses.

                         In accordance with design documentation, the design and economic viability of the proposed Bank
                         Project are not dependent on the EBRD project or on the additional sections financed by EIB.
                         Moreover, the second phase of the EBRD project is not contemporaneous with the proposed Bank
                         Project. The World Bank safeguards will be applicable to the proposed Project only, covering all the
                         activities co-financed by the Bank and EIB regardless the size of co-financing shares. The Project
                         Board date is currently being set for August 2.

                         The Project is designed as the first of a series of projects (SOP). This approach provides a common
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project framework to address specific issues needed to enhance transport connectivity, increase the
                         efficiency of transport operations and improve asset management in BH. Under the SOP approach,
                         interested entities may opt for participation in the program, but there is no interdependency in
                         implementation among specific projects in the series. In other words, each project can achieve its
                         own objectives independent of whether the other projects are carried out. The program is horizontal
                         in that the different projects could start when ready. The advantage of the SOP instrument is that it
                         allows the Bank to provide support in a flexible manner and is well-suited to support long-term
                         reforms, with logical sequencing of activities, when each entity meets the readiness criteria. Each
                         subsequent project in the SOP will be described in a separate PAD and corresponding ISDS.
                         However, under the SOP approach, there is also no commitment to the financing of ensuing phases.

                         The Project in FBH is the first phase since FBH has demonstrated readiness and willingness to
                         participate through: (i) a formal request and expression of interest to join the program; (ii) a program
                         of activities designed to meet the PDO of the program; and (iii) the preparation (including advanced
                         preparation with EIB) of detailed designs and related safeguards documents.

                         It is proposed that the Project have five components:

                         Component 1: Road Upgrade and Rehabilitation (total estimated cost €78.21 million co-financed by
                         IBRD and EIB, including contingencies). This component will finance civil works to:


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         (i)      complete construction of the main road M17.3 Neum – Stolac from St.Neum to Drenovac in
                         three stages: (1) St.Neum- Broćanac, 6 km; (2) Broćanac - Cerovica approx. 12 km length, and (3)
                         Cerovica – Drenovac, approx. 13 km length;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (ii)     construct passing lanes for slow traffic on selected road sections;
                         (iii)    reconstruct/rehabilitate selected road sections with partial axis correction;
                         (iv)     rehabilitate selected tunnels; and
                         (v)      rehabilitate selected bridges.

                         The selected sections and structures under activities (ii)-(v) are located outside M17.3 Neum – Stolac
                         road.

                         Component 2: Road Safety Interventions (total estimated cost €2.76 million, including
                         contingencies). This component will finance reconstruction of intersections classified as black spots
                         on the main roads.

                         Component 3: Improving Main Road Network Management (total estimated cost €3 million). This
                         component will strengthen road management in FBH with a particular focus on the enhancing road
                         asset management, enhancing capacity to improve climate resilience and road safety.

                         Component 4: Project Management and Implementation (total estimated cost €7 million). This
                         component will finance the supervision of civil works and capacity-building of PC Roads of FBH
                         through the provision of technical assistance, carrying out the annual financial audits of the Project,
                         monitoring project activities, beneficiary satisfaction activities, as well as mid-term and impact
                         evaluation surveys.

                         Component 5: Contingency for Disaster Risk Response (€0). This component will support
                         preparedness and rapid response to disaster, emergency, and/or catastrophic events, as needed. The
                         provisional zero cost for this component will allow for rapid reallocation of loan proceeds from other
                         components under streamlined procurement and disbursement procedures.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The SOP is envisaged to be implemented at a number of locations throughout Bosnia and
                         Herzegovina while the first phase will be implemented solely within the entity of Federation of
                         Bosnia and Herzegovina as a part of overall Government’s Program.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Esma Kreso (GEN03)
                         Eva Rossi (CRKI3)
                         Ifeta Smajic (GSU03)
                         Nikola Ille (GEN03)
                         Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (GEN03)
                         Sandra Kdolsky (GSU03)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes            The project is comprised of a number of interventions on
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      road reconstruction (re-pavement, safety interventions,



                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                                                        widening of lanes) but also includes new construction of
                                                        passing lanes, tunnels, overpasses and underpasses and
                                                        select road sections aimed at improving traffic
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        communication within FBH. A number of environmental
                                                        and social impacts are related to reconstruction (dust,
                                                        noise, waste management, worker safety, community
                                                        health and safety, traffic management etc) while
                                                        construction of the new road (component 1.1, M17.3
                                                        Neum – Stolac road) will also have permanent impacts of
                                                        land use changes, with a potential impact on the
                                                        surrounding biodiversity and environment and changes in
                                                        landscape which have been generally addressed through a
                                                        full Environmental and Social Impact Assessment report.
                                                        The risk of mines is also addressed in the ESIA, and all
                                                        works shall be cleared by the relevant authority BH MAC
                                                        (Mine Action Center).
                                                        For the M17.3 works, an Environmental Impact Study
                                                        (EIS) has been prepared by independent consultants and
                                                        approved by the Government. The EIS required some
                                                        updating to address specific gaps (e.g. on social aspects)
                                                        and also because it was prepared in 2009.The updated
                                                        ESIA has been prepared by independent consultants and
                                                        disclosed on April 1, 2016, in line with World Bank
                                                        requirements – prior to project Appraisal. A site-specific
                                                        ESMP shall be prepared for this section, based on the EIS;
                                                        ESIA and specific sampling and monitoring on the ground
                                                        prior to the start of any works. This has been reflected in
                                                        the PAD and the Loan Agreement.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                         For other investments under Component 1, and
                                                        Component 2, an Environmental and Social Management
                                                        Framework (ESMF) has been prepared, as at least some
                                                        of the works were not identified or at a sufficiently
                                                        advanced design stage by Appraisal to enable preparation
                                                        of site-specific EA/EMP. The ESMF contains three
                                                        template ESMPs that will serve as a guide on preparing
                                                        site-specific ESMPs. The ESMF with the three generic
                                                        ESMPs has been disclosed in Sarajevo, while site-specific
                                                        ESMPs shall be subject to disclosure at the project sites.
                                                        Adequate due diligence documentation will also be
                                                        prepared for other phases of the SOP as they are
                                                        conceptualized, during implementation and as such,
                                                        independent of this project’s preparation. The due
                                                        diligence will be reflected in the preparation documents
                                                        for each separate project.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   Some of the road sections that are included in the
                         4.04                           rehabilitation activities under the ESMF are located
                                                        adjacent to, or in the proximity of the potential natural



                                                         Page 4 of 10
                                                        habitats and protected areas. The ESMF provides general
                                                        guidelines on addressing this, and ensures that specific
                                                        details of each given site, including proper identification
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        and monitoring shall be determined in the site-specific
                                                        ESMPs.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36      No     It is unlikely that any major impacts will occur on the
                                                        forested areas beyond the measures that would be
                                                        included under the Natural Habitats OP.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     No activities on pest management are foreseen.

                         Physical Cultural       No     There are no identified physical-cultural resources
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           directly impacted in any of the project locations,
                                                        particularly those with new road construction. However, a
                                                        chance findings procedure is included in the ESMF and
                                                        generic ESMPs (the chance finds procedure also applies
                                                        to UXO, although this is not considered as cultural
                                                        heritage).
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No
                         BP 4.10
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   Component 1 and 2 will result in land acquisition and
                         OP/BP 4.12                     minor resettlement activities related to the potential
                                                        construction of a new road M 17.3 (Neum-Stolac),
                                                        construction of slows lanes along certain sections,
                                                        changes of alignment and axis corrections, and
                                                        reconstruction of black spots. OP 4.12 is triggered to
                                                        address any adverse impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        A Resettlement Review and Audit (RRA) was prepared
                                                        for sections of M17.3 (12 km in total) with completed and
                                                        nearly completed expropriation.
                                                        The RRA concluded that the completed expropriation
                                                        process had been conducted entirely in line with the
                                                        relevant local legislation (i.e., Law on Expropriation of
                                                        FBH) and no serious or major gaps in terms of OP 4.12
                                                        compliance were identified. Thus, no retroactive
                                                        corrective actions were proposed.

                                                        A project-specific Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                                                        and two Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) were
                                                        prepared, and disclosed in country on March 14, 2016.
                                                        One RAP covers the Neum-Stolac new road and the
                                                        second integrated RAP is prepared for 9 road sections
                                                        with final detail designs. Once remaining detailed designs
                                                        are available, the client will prepare RAPs in accordance
                                                        with the RPF for remaining sections requiring land
                                                        acquisition/resettlement.



                                                         Page 5 of 10
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             There are no impacts on dams or any impacts that can be
                            4.37                                       anticipated downstream from dams.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International   No             Works may include reconstruction of bridges over smaller
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       rivers that are tributaries to international waterways.
                                                                       However, with adequate mitigation measures in place,
                                                                       there should be no direct or indirect impacts from this
                                                                       activity on the international waterways. However, some of
                                                                       the proposed interventions do include mention of riverbed
                                                                       interventions that the Client needs to ensure will cause no
                                                                       changes to the quality or quantity of water in the
                                                                       waterway.
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              There are no major and irreversible environmental impacts associated with the activities addressed
                              under both the ESMF and the ESIA for Neum-Stolac. There are permanent changes to the land use
                              created by the new road, but the ESIA presents the different types of land and shows that the
                              alignment was done to minimize impact to the most valuable land assets (based on land quality
                              and use). The excavated material from the Zaba tunnel is also foreseen to be used in embankments
                              and leveling of land, where needed, and that there shall be no excess amount of excavated
                              material. The impacts associated with the works are fairly straightforward and can be mitigated
                              easily, while chance finds are included due to the rich cultural heritage in the area surrounding the
Public Disclosure Copy




                              future road. Prior to start of works, a site-specific ESMP shall be developed that shall provide
                              precise information including biodiversity survey, cultural heritage survey and baseline data that
                              the ESIA is lacking at the moment, since it is usual practice for the contractor to finance sampling
                              and monitoring prior to the actual start of works.

                               The activities within the program, and addressed under the ESMF will include mostly
                              rehabilitation or improvements on existing roads, and the impacts will deal with standard
                              construction activities that can be well mitigated using sound construction practices (dust, noise,
                              waste management, proper site organization and access control…). Areas where the roads may
                              require widening for the slow lanes, as is the case with the third lane in Posušje-Tomislavgrad or
                              for the Neum-Stolac road, the impacts of storing/disposal of excavated materials presents a
                              permanent change to land use, and will need to be carried out in agreement with the local
                              communities and accordance with a remediation plan of the disposal site. The same applies to
                              potential borrow pits for materials, if any.

                              The project is not expected to have any large scale negative social impacts resulting from land
                              acquisition and resettlement. Expropriation is expected to have marginal effects on most
                              households as majority will only be losing a part of their land and, in the case of Neum-Stolac
                              expropriation, the majority of affected land is uncultivated forest land. Land owners affected by
                              land acquisition will receive replacement land of equal or higher value or monetary compensation


                                                                        Page 6 of 10
                          at replacement costs. The few families dependent on agricultural production for their livelihoods
                          (3 identified so far) and affected businesses will receive livelihood restoration assistance as
                          appropriate. At the time of Appraisal, physical displacement of 6 households and 2 businesses is
Public Disclosure Copy




                          identified as necessary for completing proposed rehabilitation works (17 businesses will likely
                          experience access restrictions). In addition to replacement of property or compensation at
                          replacement cost, the households and businesses affected by physical displacement will be receive
                          relocation assistance. A project specific entitlement matrix has been prepared as part of the RPF to
                          ensure that all relevant categories of losses are compensated adequately. All site-specific RAPs
                          must be developed in with the RPF.

                          Land acquisition has been completed on sections (12km in total) of the Neum-Stolac road. 855
                          land owners were affected by already completed expropriation.

                           Construction and rehabilitation works in component 1 and 2 will most likely create opportunities
                           for local contractors and suppliers of the construction materials therefore stimulating income
                           generation opportunities for local businesses and temporary employment for the low-skilled local
                           workers.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Long-term socio-economic effects of the project are anticipated to be positive as they will improve
                           safety of the road for the users and local communities. The improved connectivity will facilitate
                           access to jobs and social services, especially for the city of Neum which is currently isolated from
                           the rest of the country by two borders. Enhanced access to the seaside tourist area will potentially
                           make Neum more attractive for business and investments thus stimulating economic growth and
                           employment opportunities. The road will improve accessibility to agricultural land, a natural
                           reserve (Hutovo Blato) and numerous cultural sites. Persons affected by expropriation will benefit
                           from additional income and affected municipalities are expected to generate increased income
                           from the real estate sector.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The M 17.3 corridor has been set since the development of the Physical Plan of the Socialist
                           Republic of BH in the 1980s. Alternatives were considered for a section between Brocanac and
                           Hutovo in the context of optimization of technical and economic parameters. Several adjustments
                           were made to reflect the priorities of the local community, such as, inclusion of a tunnel despite
                           increases in costs, axis adjustments to bypass olive groves, improvement of landscape positioning
                           and Shrine accessibility.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           For Neum-Stolac, the Public Company Roads of FBH (FBH-PC Roads) prepared an ESIA and a
                           RAP to address impacts specifics for this site. For other project sub-sections with available
                           detailed design and land ownership data (9 sections in total), an integrated RAP was prepared.
                           For the locations without final detailed design or reliable ownership data at the time of Appraisal,
                           an ESMF and a RPF have been prepared to guarantee safeguards risk management. The ESMF
                           includes three template ESMP’s for three different type of sub-projects which will serve as models
                           for development of future site specific ESMP’s for the remaining sub-projects. For completed
                           expropriation, a Resettlement Review and Audit (RRA) was prepared. The RRA concluded that
                           the completed expropriation process had been conducted entirely in line with the relevant local


                                                                     Page 7 of 10
                           legislation (i.e., Law on Expropriation of FBH) and no serious or major gaps in terms of OP 4.12
                           compliance were identified.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Neum-Stolac ESIA presents a review of the status on the ground as compared to the
                           Environmental Impact Study prepared for the road section in 2009. The ESIA lacks a portion of
                           site-specific information and details, that will be reflected in the site-specific ESMP that shall be
                           prepared prior to the start of works. This provision has been integrated into the PAD, as well as the
                           Loan Agreement for the project. In this manner the ESMP shall be prepared, preferably prior to
                           the development of bidding documents for works, and definitely prior to the start of works on the
                           ground, while the specific responsibilities and actions shall be assigned within the ESMP and
                           reflected in contractual documentation for the contractor to implement. Supervision shall be
                           carried out by a selected Supervision company, the in house specialists of FBH-PC Roads, and
                           through World Bank supervision. Apart from regular reporting, FBH-PC Roads shall prepare an
                           annual report on environment, health and safety (AEHS), including monitoring indicators and
                           reports on implementation of requirements given in ESMP, and deliver it to the WB for review.

                           The current safeguards capacity at FBH-PC Roads needs reinforcement for both environmental
                           and social aspects. The FBH-PC Roads does have a resident environmental specialist on board,
                           and will also hire additional project-specific environmental specialists to assist with the site
                           specific ESMPs or EAs. Supervision of the environmental impacts and their mitigation will be
                           assigned to the hired Supervision company, but will also be supervised by the in-house and project
                           specialists. Preparation of ESMPs for site specific activities, that may correspond to a Category B
                           can be completed by PC Roads, while the Category A component (Neum-Stolac) has been subject
                           to an ESIA prepared by an independent consultant. The ESMP for Neum-Stolac shall also be
                           prepared by an independent consultant.

                           FBH-PC Roads has appointed an employee to be trained as a Social Specialist. An experienced
                           Social Specialist was hired on a short term contract and is expected to additionally support the
                           FBH-PC Roads employee to ensure preperation of social safeguards instruments in accordance
Public Disclosure Copy




                           with national and Bank policies and procedures. The Social Specialist appointed will be trained in
                           the implementation and monitoring of WBG's safeguard policies. The Bank's Social Safeguards
                           Specialist will provide additional training and support in preparing the remaining site specific
                           RAPs and will supervise resettlement implementation in course of the regular supervision
                           missions.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Stakeholders are direct and indirect project beneficiaries, all groups and institutions that have an
                           interest in the construction and rehabilitation of roads in FBH. Safeguards instruments were
                           disclosed 10 days in advance of public consultations. At the moment of disclosure, the public was
                           informed about the purpose, availability of the documents (e.g., copies available for consultation at
                           the local municipality) and duration of the disclosure as well as the place, date and time of
                           scheduled consultations for the safeguards instrument. Public notifications about disclosure were
                           made by means of frequently and commonly used communication channels - local newspapers,
                           and public notice board at the Municipality. Due to the dispersed nature of sub-sections, a
                           localized approach to RAP public consultations was taken with several smaller community
                           consultations organized for each site. Records of the consultations are kept by the PIU, and
                           included in the relevant documentation in the form of Minutes of Meeting and List of Attendees.
                           For the purposes of public consultations, apart from public announcements, the PIU also sent


                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                           targeted invitations to the representatives of local and FBIH Ministry of Environment, academia,
                           non-governmental organizations, local community groups and other pertinent stakeholders.
                           During project implementation all stakeholders will have access to grievance redress mechanisms
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and all complaints or issues will be formally noted and addressed.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      01-Apr-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   01-Apr-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      01-Apr-2016
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bosnia and Herzegovina                                           01-Apr-2016
                           Comments: Disclosed on implementing agency's website in local language. http://www.jpcfbih.
                                         ba/ba/aktivnosti/program_modernizacije.shtml
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      14-Mar-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   21-Mar-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bosnia and Herzegovina                                           10-Mar-2016
                           Comments: Disclosed on implementing agency's website in local language, http://www.jpcfbih.
                                         ba/ba/aktivnosti/program_modernizacije.shtml
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement



                                                                    Page 9 of 10
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                             545 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [    ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)

                             82 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Liljana Sekerinska
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                              Date: 18-Apr-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Juan Gaviria (PMGR)                            Date: 18-Apr-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 10 of 10
