                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC15873

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Dec-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Ukraine                        Project ID:      P158091
                            Project Name:        Ukraine: Conflict Response and Recovery Pilot and Capacity Building
                            Team Leader(s):      Holly Welborn Benner,Klavdiya Maksymenko
                            Estimated Date       02-May-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GSU03                          Lending          Lending Instrument
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           Information technology (10%), Other social services (90%)
                            Theme(s):            Social Safety Nets/Social Assistance & Social Care Services (10%), Conflict
                                                 prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (60%), Other social development
                                                 (10%), Social Inclusion (20%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 3.6                           Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              State and Peace Building Fund                                                                3.6
                            Environment        B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The goal of the project is to build Government capacity for recovery planning and oversight and to
                           pilot knowledge building, recovery and peacebuilding activities in response to the ongoing conflict
                           and displacement crisis in Ukraine.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project is organized in three inter-related components to support knowledge
                           generation, pilot displacement response activities and capacity building.

                           Component 1– SADR Capacity Building, Project Management, and Monitoring and Evaluation
                           (Recipient Executed US$ 900,000)
                           This component will build the capacity of the State Agency for Donbas Recovery to fulfill its
                           strategy, planning and coordination mandate as well as to effectively manage, monitor and evaluate
                           proposed RE activities. As a new State Agency, and with the GoU’s continuing budget crisis and
                           competing reform process, SADR faces challenges in establishing itself as the focal point for
                         recovery activities. Component 1 would include the following types of activities designed to both
                         enable SADR to manage Component 3 activities and to more broadly build the capacity of SADR to
                         coordinate future national and international programming and financing for peacebuilding and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         recovery. Capacity building will also include attention to building SADR presence and reach in
                         eastern Ukraine and support for municipal/local level capacity building for recovery and
                         peacebuilding planning and program implementation. The grant will also support SADR in
                         establishing coordination and consultation mechanisms that engage donors and other national/
                         international partners to lay the groundwork for future investments and recovery programming.
                         Capacity building activities would include:
                         --Establishment and training of a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) with fiduciary, procurement and
                         safeguard capacity.
                         --Basic computing and office equipment to enable SADR functioning at national level and in eastern
                         Ukraine.
                         --Incremental operating costs for SADR agency staff and facilitators as required.
                         --Support for development of a monitoring and evaluation system for component 3 activities and
                         funds for an independent evaluation at the close of activities to gather evidence and lessons to inform
                         future programming.
                         --Training program/workshops for SADR and local partners in eastern Ukraine in project planning,
                         design, management and implementation of sub-projects and a range of sectoral/thematic issues
                         based on demand – e.g. displacement response, gender sensitivity, combatant re-integration,
                         monitoring and evaluation.
                         -- Support for the development of a national and international stakeholder coordination and
                         information-sharing mechanism and donor dialogues.
                         --Knowledge exchanges with other countries/regions to share relevant experiences and approaches.
                         --Strategic communication support, including information management systems and dissemination of
                         SADR products and information on services.

                         Component 2 – Building knowledge on the socio-economic impacts of displacement and combatant
                         return (Bank executed, US$ 400,000)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will support the design and implementation of new research and analysis to assess
                         the socio-economic impacts of displacement and combatant return in order to provide robust data to
                         underpin future planning and programming. The overall goal is to identify policy and program
                         responses that mitigate the potential negative socio-economic impact of conflict-affected population
                         presence on host communities and maximize the social-economic benefits of conflict-affected
                         population presence for host communities and the Ukrainian economy as a whole. Two main
                         analytic products are envisioned:
                         --A representative household survey of IDPs and host communities to assess the impact of
                         displacement on issues such as labor markets/livelihoods, housing, municipal services, education,
                         healthcare, welfare, and social cohesion. This may be accompanied by a complementary qualitative
                         assessment focused on perceptions and experiences of the informants, their priorities as well as
                         exploration of factors contributing to the trends identified through the quantitative work.
                         --A survey to assess psychosocial and economic reintegration needs of former combatants to include
                         a baseline assessment of the population of returning combatants from eastern Ukraine to identify
                         potential areas for psychosocial and economic reintegration support. The assessment would cover
                         both combatant needs, family/community needs and potential opportunities for socioeconomic
                         integration based on needs, skills, available support services and structures, labor market, and private
                         sector investment opportunities.
                         This analytic activities will directly inform the design and implementation activities outlined in
                         Component 3.
                         This component would also include capacity building and technical assistance to the relevant GoU
                         agencies in survey design, implementation, and data analysis in order to facilitate future GoU
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ownership of survey efforts. This component would be carried out in close cooperation with IFC who
                         are considering options for generating private sector development and employment generation
                         programming in communities hosting large numbers of conflict-affected persons. The surveys would
                         also be developed in close cooperation with the Poverty and Social Protection and Labor GPs with
                         experience in survey design in conflict setting and in the case of SPL, with existing skills and labor
                         market surveys for Ukraine that could complement SPF data. The data generated from this
                         component would be utilized as part of the Conflict and Recovery Monitoring System that is being
                         financed through the Programmatic Approach on Peacebuilding and Recovery and for use by the
                         SADR in later targeting of pilot activities. This system (supported by the WB and the UN) aims to
                         provide an information platform of relevant and timely data on conflict and displacement, impacts on
                         poverty and shared prosperity and progress of peacebuilding and recovery activities.

                         Component 3: Piloting activities to respond to the development challenges of displacement
                         (Recipient executed, US$ 2.3 million)
                         Based on the results of the analytic work described above, Component 3 would include pilot
                         activities to respond to the developmental needs of the internally displaced persons (IDPs), former
                         combatants and host communities as a complement to ongoing humanitarian response efforts. The
                         goal of Component 3 is to build GoU capacity to implement innovative development-oriented
                         programming that could be brought to scale through future national and international financing. This
                         component would target select communities with high concentrations of combatants or IDPs to pilot
                         an integrated set of activities to respond to the unique needs of Ukraine’s displaced (e.g. large
                         numbers of pensioners; repeat returns; availability of high-skilled labor force), former combatants
                         and host communities. The specific set of interventions to be delivered would be tailored based on
                         assessment results but would likely include livelihood opportunities, housing support, municipal
                         services and social assistance, health and psychosocial support as well as activities to promote social
                         cohesion and community revitalization. The pilot would also explore possible joint programming
Public Disclosure Copy




                         with the IFC to promote private sector development and job creation in areas with high IDP or
                         former combatant populations.

                         Lessons from the pilot activities and capacity building would then be utilized to inform a more
                         comprehensive GoU strategy and budgeting as well as to help in the better targeting and design of
                         investments by the Bank and other development partners. For the Bank, these pilots will directly
                         inform the Community Social Support project under preparation as well as projects focused on
                         health, urban development, and district heating that operate in communities with IDP populations.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Under Component 3, the project will finance pilot activities to support IDPs and host communities.
                         The types of activities will be decided as part of project preparation but could include small civic
                         works and private sector development that may have environmental impacts—and thus trigger OP/
                         BP 4.01. As specific grant activities are not yet known, an appraisal stage ISDS will be developed to
                         ensure project activities are in line with relevant safeguards policies. Operations Manuals (OMs)
                         will be developed for component 2 activities to include an ESMF instrument that will detail specific
                         eligibility criteria and a screening checklist for pilots to ensure safeguards compliance. The OM/
                         ESMF will also make clear that activities that trigger OP 4.12/other relevant safeguards policies will
                           not be eligible for funding. These Operations Manuals, acceptable to the Bank, will be developed
                           before the grants’ implementation and would be a disbursement condition for the grant funding.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The recipient - SADR - has limited capacity for safeguards management. However, the capacity
                           building activities envisioned under Component 3 would include the development and training of a
                           PIU that includes safeguards competencies. Through the grant, opportunities would be provided for
                           safeguards staff assigned to the project to train with and exchange with other established PIUs for
                           World Bank projects in Ukraine. As part of the Project, the safeguards specialist in the PIU will
                           access available safeguards trainings and resources and receive support from Bank safeguards
                           specialists. Through these measures, the PIU is expected to have sufficient capacity to ensure that all
                           Safeguards policies are respected throughout implementation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (GSU03)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             Depending on pilot activities agreed to under
                           BP 4.01                                              component 2, OP 4.01 may be triggered due to
                                                                                the possibility of small civil works and support
                                                                                for development or expansion of business
                                                                                enterprises that have potential environmental
                                                                                issues such as waste water effluents,air
                                                                                emissions etc. As part of proposed OM, an
                                                                                ESMF instrument will be developed that will
                                                                                also make clear that activities that trigger OP
                                                                                4.12/safeguards policies beyond OP/BP 4.01
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                will not be eligible for funding.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No              Any potential pilots that trigger OP 4.12 will be
                           4.12                                                 excluded per the ESMF.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No
                           Projects on International            No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP     No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                           A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?: Yes
                                i. Explanation
                                   Yes. An appraisal stage ISDS will be prepared to ensure safeguards compliance as the pilot acti
                                ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
Public Disclosure Copy




                                   01-Feb-2016
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.
                              Component 1 includes survey work that includes attention to social dynamics/social assessment
                              and potential conflict at community level. No stand-alone safeguard-related studies are planned at
                              this stage.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Holly Welborn Benner,Klavdiya Maksymenko
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler (SA)                              Date: 18-Dec-2015
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Nina Bhatt (PMGR)                                            Date: 18-Dec-2015
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
