                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA14766
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Aug-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Aug-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           South Africa                       Project ID:    P149521
                            Project Name:      Development Carbon Capture and Storage in South Africa (P149521)
                            Task Team          Nataliya Kulichenko
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          22-Jun-2016              Estimated     16-Sep-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEE08                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        36.50           Total Bank Financing:       0.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                                    13.50
                              Carbon Fund                                                                                 23.00
                              Total                                                                                       36.50
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to assess the feasibility of, and build expert capacity
                           for, carbon capture and storage in South Africa.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed Technical Assistance Project (TAP) will include the implementation of two
                           independent components: (1) the preparation and implementation of the Pilot Carbon Storage Project
                           (PCSP); and (2) the preparation of a Front End Engineering Design (FEED) for the Carbon Capture
                           Pilot Plant (CCPP). The PCSP constitutes the majority of the project activities and costs, because the


                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                         priority is to demonstrate that CO2 can be stored in the South African geological formations.
                         Component 1: Pilot CO2 Storage Project. Component 1 of the proposed TAP, the PCSP, will involve
                         the investigation and characterization of a suitable CO2 storage site and the subsequent injection,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         storage, and monitoring of CO2 in the identified storage site. The selected geological site formation
                         must have sufficient capacity for the designed volume of CO2 to be stored, be able to keep the CO2
                         contained under a cap-rock and through other trapping mechanisms, have sufficient permeability to
                         allow the CO2 to be injected, and be somewhere in the order of 800 meters or deeper below the
                         surface. Before, during, and after the geological storage, the CO2 will be monitored to ensure that it
                         is behaving as modeled and projected. The volume of CO2 to be stored as part of the PCSP is
                         between 10,000 -50,000 tCO2. The location considered for storage investigation will be in the
                         Zululand geological basin in the Umkhanyakude District Municipality (DM) in the KwaZulu-Natal
                         Province of South Africa. According to the CGS, the Zululand estimated theoretical storage capacity
                         is 500 MtCO2.

                         The primary aims of the PCSP are:
                         ➢❨¢ To demonstrate safe and secure CO2 handling, injection, storage, and monitoring activities
                         in the South African geological formations;
                         ➢❨¢ To enhance the South African expert and technical capacity, including technical capacity of
                         previously disadvantaged South African individuals and women, for the development and operation
                         of CO2 handling, injection, storage, and monitoring activities;
                         ➢❨¢ To raise awareness of the potential importance of Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS)
                         technology for greenhouse gas (GHG) mitigation to the Republic of South Africa; and
                         ➢❨¢ To facilitate the adoption of CCS legal and regulatory frameworks in the Republic of South
                         Africa.

                         The Government of South Africa (GoSA) started the execution of the PCSP several years ago (as
                         part of the CCS Roadmap implementation). There are seven stages of the PCSP development, as
                         presented below. The stages three through six will be supported by Component 1 of the proposed
Public Disclosure Copy




                         TAP:
                         ➢❨¢ Stage 1: Project Initiation ➢❨ this stage has already been completed by SANEDI.
                         ➢❨¢ Stage 2: Data Analysis and Project Planning ➢❨ this stage is being undertaken with the
                         support of the Bank through the Programmatic Technical Assistance, PTA (P151193).
                         ➢❨¢ Stage 3: Geological Investigation and Site Selection;
                         ➢❨¢ Stage 4: Schematic and Detailed Engineering Design;
                         ➢❨¢ Stage 5: Procurement and Construction;
                         ➢❨¢ Stage 6: Storage Operation; and
                         ➢❨¢ Stage 7: The implementing agency, South Africa National Energy Development Institute
                         (SANEDI) and the GoSA will complete the closure of the PCSP after the completion of the TAP.

                         Stages 3 through 5, supported by the proposed TAP, will involve the exploration and shortlisting of
                         potential sites for the PCSP implementation, the confirmation of a final site, and the design, and
                         construction of the PCSP facilities. Stage 6, Storage Operation, will include the CO2 delivery (by
                         trucks) to the site, and CO2 injection into the selected geological formation. The injection will be
                         undertaken in accordance with an operational plan with the aim of meeting the objectives of the
                         PCSP. The Storage Operation Stage is expected to carry out a program of CO2 injections under
                         various conditions, such as short- and longer-duration injections, testing of different injection rates,
                         as well as testing of different monitoring technologies, protocols and operational conditions.
                         Throughout the Storage Operation Stage, comprehensive, best-practice monitoring and verification


                                                                        Page 2 of 8
                         protocols will be developed and applied to ensure that the project is operating within the safe
                         operating window and that the CO2 is behaving as expected and modeled. The injection of CO2 is
                         expected to last between 12 and 24 months. However, this may be extended if additional activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                         are needed and safe to perform to achieve further benefits. These additional activities could include
                         the continuation of the CO2 injection and/or monitoring and/or testing of the earlier stored CO2. A
                         decision to end the injection and complete the Operational Stage of the PCSP will be taken by the
                         SANEDI PCSP Technical Advisory Panel during a review of the Stage 6 performance.

                         In the course of implementation of the PCSP, a comprehensive project management program will be
                         developed and maintained, including the preparation of a PCSP execution plan and a PCSP risk
                         assessment and management plan. The PCSP will be delivered, utilizing an approach with decision
                         points, which are taken at the end of each stage.
                         Component 2: CO2 Capture Pilot Plant. This component involves the preparation of a FEED study
                         for a capture pilot plant to be built at a coal-fired power plant under construction in South Africa.
                         The CCPP will be designed to be a CO2 capture learning facility for the industry and academia and
                         to serve as a hub for capacity building on CO2 capture technologies across South Africa and in the
                         region.
                         The execution of the CCPP is being undertaken in five stages. Component 2 of the proposed TAP
                         will support only Stage 2, as outlined below. Stages 3 and 4 will be prepared and completed upon
                         securing additional financing from the GoSA and/or the donors.
                         ➢❨¢ Stage 1: Pre-Feasibility ➢❨ this Stage is supported through the PTA.
                         ➢❨¢ Stage 2: FEED (to be supported by the proposed TAP);
                         ➢❨¢ Stage 3: Pilot Capture Plant Procurement and Construction;
                         ➢❨¢ Stage 4: Pilot Capture Plant Operation and Testing; and
                         ➢❨¢ Stage 5: Pilot Capture Plant Decommissioning.
                         Stage 2 will involve design of a CO2 capture plant and its cost refinement, including the technical
                         integration of the pilot capture plant into the host Kusile Power Plant. Stage 2 will be completed with
                         the sign-off of the FEED study by SANEDI and the owner of the host plant, EESKOM. Stages 3 to 5
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will be undertaken after the completion of the FEED study, if and when sufficient funding has been
                         secured.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
                         For Component 1, the Zululand Basin has been selected between the two basins, which were under
                         consideration at the concept stage of the exploratory work. Exact locations for exploratory drilling
                         have not been identified or selected yet, but the traverses for seismic testing have been determined.
                         The traverses are located within the uMkhanyakude District Municipality, which hosts the
                         iSimangaliso Wetland Park, a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The traverses do not penetrate the Park
                         boundary. Approximately half of the traverses length is within the Park buffer zone, but always
                         along the roads or established public tracks. The seismic survey does not involve explosives and is
                         consistent with the activities permitted within the buffer zone. In addition to the Park, the area
                         contains extensive smaller wetlands and significant areas that have been disturbed by agricultural
                         activity. Approximately two-thirds of the seismic survey will be carried out in road reserves, where
                         little or no vegetation pruning will be necessary. More extensive pruning will be required for the
                         remaining one-third along public tracks and firebreaks, but root systems will not be disturbed. Up to
                         three wells will be drilled, intended to be located on disturbed land.

                         The preliminary design for the CO2 Carbon Capture Plant is for a 50 tons/day CO2 facility, to be


                                                                      Page 3 of 8
                         located on a 50m square plot, entirely within the footprint of the ESKOM owned Kusile coal-fired
                         Power Plant, which is under construction in the Emalahleni district, Mpumalanga province of the
                         Republic of South Africa. The US Export-Import Bank provided US$805 million to finance the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         construction of the plant. ESKOM has prepared a comprehensive Environmental and Social Impact
                         Assessment for the Kusile Power Plant that is found to be consistent with the Bank➢❨ s environment
                         and social safeguards policies. It is anticipated that the Kusile Power Plant will be completed in
                         2022. Component 2 of the TAP will only however cover the CCPP Front-End Engineering Design
                         but not the consecutive stages of the CCPP development.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Helen Z. Shahriari (GSU07)
                         Sanjay Srivastava (GEN01)
                         Thomas E. Walton (GEN01)

                         6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental              Yes           The PCSP (Component 1) could cause significant
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                    environment and social impacts due to injection of CO2
                                                                  into deep, permeable geologic formations. A site specific
                                                                  ESIA with ESMP for the storage facility will be prepared
                                                                  when the location is known, to analyze the risks and
                                                                  impacts associated with leakage of CO2 through the
                                                                  impermeable confining stratum (caprock); release of CO2
                                                                  via the injection well; induced seismicity; degradation of
                                                                  water quality in shallow aquifers as a result of drilling
                                                                  exploration and injection wells, or due to leaking CO2;
                                                                  and changes in soil chemistry and micro biota caused by
                                                                  leaking CO2. A separate ESIA with an ESMP has already
                                                                  been prepared for the seismic survey and test drilling that
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                  will provide the data necessary for storage site selection.

                                                                  Eskom has prepared an ESIA for Component 2, which is
                                                                  consistent with the requirement of OP4.01. Eskom will
                                                                  update this ESIA when more detail is available on the
                                                                  design of the CCPP and will incorporate the associated
                                                                  mitigation and monitoring measures in the ESMPs for
                                                                  construction and operation of the Kusile plant.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP     Yes           The site specific ESIA for the carbon storage site will
                         4.04                                     assess possible direct or indirect impacts on any critical or
                                                                  natural habitats once the site/location has been identified.
                                                                  The ESIA for the seismic survey and drilling has
                                                                  determined that there will be no impact on critical natural
                                                                  habitat, i.e., the iSimangaliso Wetland Park World
                                                                  Heritage Site and no significant conversion of other
                                                                  natural habitat.

                                                                  The CCCP does not impose any additional impact on
                                                                  habitat beyond that already associated with the Kusile



                                                                    Page 4 of 8
                                                                       power plant.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No             There is no possibility of presence or impacts on Forest
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       resources
                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No                 There is no possibility of involvement of pesticides

                            Physical Cultural           No             There is no possibility of presence or impacts on Physical
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                       Cultural Resources
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No             There is no possibility of presence or impacts on IPs
                            BP 4.10                                    community.
                            Involuntary Resettlement    No             The project is unlikely to involve any involuntary
                            OP/BP 4.12                                 resettlement
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Component 1 of the TAP has environment and social risks that will require mitigation.
                              Technically, large CCS projects run the risk of having significant environment and social impacts
                              due to injection of CO2 into deep, permeable geologic formations. If the operation is not planned
Public Disclosure Copy




                              properly, potential adverse events could include leakage of CO2 through the impermeable
                              confining stratum (cap-rock); release of CO2 via injection wells; induced seismicity; degradation
                              of water quality in shallow aquifers (as a result of drilling exploration and injection wells, or due
                              to leaking CO2); and changes in soil chemistry and micro biota caused by leaking CO2. Managing
                              the risks of these impacts depends on proper selection of an injection site based on extensive
                              geological data, application of good industrial standards in the design and installation of wells and
                              tanks, and implementation of adequate monitoring systems and procedures. As part of the
                              selection process for the proposed locations in the PCSP, sites will be pre-evaluated using a
                              number of specific criteria, including the identified potential environmental and social impacts.
                              Presently, available information indicates that the magnitude of these impacts will not be
                              significant. For example, because of the pilot nature of the project, local seismic events that might
                              occur when fluids are injected underground (similar to geothermal projects), will likely be small or
                              negligible. Workplace and community health and safety risks from a sudden CO2 release➢❨ either
                              from the well or a ruptured storage tank➢❨ are not expected to be an important issue, either, since
                              any release would involve a relatively small amount of gas, and it would be into an open rather
                              than into a confined space. Therefore, the gas would disperse in the atmosphere quickly.

                              Other impacts, not unique to CO2 injection, that will need to be managed are those associated with
                              exploration (temporary access roads and wells drilling); with the construction of facilities
                              (permanent access roads and storage, compression, and injection equipment); and with transport of


                                                                         Page 5 of 8
                           CO2 to the site by trucks. The potential impacts of the exploration identified in the ESIA include:
                           contamination of water supply aquifers during test drilling; contamination of surface waters and
                           wetlands by fuel or drilling fluid spills; chance finds of archaeological importance; and exposure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           of workers to noise and other workplace hazards. The ESMP provides measures to prevent or
                           mitigate these potential impacts. No large-scale or irreversible impacts are anticipated from the
                           exploratory activities or the pilot plant itself.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           No significant indirect or long-term impacts are anticipated from the seismic survey and drilling,
                           or from the pilot capture and storage facility. Should the pilot carbon capture plant prove
                           successful, larger-scale capture and storage projects may be constructed that would likely have
                           adverse environment and social impacts, and would require a comprehensive ESIA.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Initial plans considered using the cut lines cleared during the 1970➢❨ s seismic survey and
                           opening the existing oil exploration boreholes. However, the grown indigenous vegetation has
                           reclaimed the cut lines, and the positions of the old wells could not be located using the available
                           co-ordinates. The siting of new deep wells will only be confirmed on the basis of interpretation of
                           new digital seismic profile data. Siting of the deep wells will take into consideration the public
                           concerns over shallow groundwater, extensive wetlands, proximity of conservation areas,
                           homesteads and agricultural sites. If possible, the deep wells will be located in disturbed
                           commercial timber plantations that have well maintained road networks. The siting of the eventual
                           carbon storage site will take into account the findings of a separate ESIA that will be prepared
                           when a preferred area has been identified. Locating the CCCP within the Kusile Plant results in no
                           significant impacts beyond those of the power plant itself.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The proposed implementing agency is the South Africa National Energy Development Institute.
                           SANEDI is a legal entity responsible for the preparation and implementation of the TAP,
                           including the overall planning and implementation of the Pilot Carbon Storage Project and Carbon
                           Capture Pilot Plant. The ESIA prepared by SANEDI includes a detailed ESMP for the seismic
                           survey and drilling. The ESMP calls for an appointment of an independent Environmental Control
                           Officer (ECO) to monitor and report on ESMP implementation ➢❨ an arrangement that is
                           standard procedure in the South African safeguards system ➢❨ and contains terms of reference for
                           the ECO. It also outlines a training and awareness program for the contractors➢❨ impact
                           management for the capture plant. Mitigation and monitoring measures for the capture plant will
                           be incorporated into the ESMS that Eskom has put in place for the Kusile plant.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The South Africa Center for Carbon Capture and Storage (SACCCS), operating under SANEDI,
                           initiated a CCS Public Engagement Project (CCS PE) in May 2012. National and Local
                           Stakeholder Engagement Plans were prepared and rolled out in a phased manner in consultation
                           with key strategic stakeholders. The focus of stakeholder interaction with uMkhanyakude DM is
                           through their established community liaison network that was established during the public
                           participation around the Environmental Management Framework studies, prepared for the
                           municipality in 2010. Public participation is mainly through the ward committee system.



                                                                     Page 6 of 8
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      13-Jun-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   26-Jul-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           South Africa                                                     15-Mar-2016
                           Comments: "In country" Disclosure ➢❨ March 15, 2016 (Component 2 ESIA) and June 13,
                                         2016 (Component 1 ESIA).
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         n/a
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?



                                                                    Page 7 of 8
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Nataliya Kulichenko
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (SA)                    Date: 11-Aug-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Sameer Shukla (PMGR)                        Date: 13-Aug-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
