                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                          Report No.: ISDSA21372
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Feb-2017
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Mar-2015, 08-Feb-2017, 14-Feb-2017
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          China                            Project ID:   P132748
                            Project Name:     Developing Market-based Energy Efficiency Program in China (P132748)
                            Task Team         Todd M. Johnson,Xiaodong Wang
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         26-Sep-2016                      Estimated   17-Mar-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEE09                            Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                              Climate change
                            Area:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         17.80          Total Bank Financing:   0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                     Amount
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                      17.80
                              Total                                                                                  17.80
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           The objective of the project is to support development and implementation of China➢❨ s priority
                           energy efficiency and environment programs, with a focus on improving the results measurement and
                           verification system and developing market-based mechanisms.
                            3. Project Description
                           Component 1. Supporting Market-based Priority Energy Efficiency and Coal Cap Control Programs
                           (cost estimate: US$8.8 million GEF grant): This component will support the NDRC for the


                                                                     Page 1 of 7
                         development and implementation of market-based priority EE policies and programs during the 13th
                         FYP. This component consists of four sub-components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (a)      Supporting the development and implementation of priority EE and coal cap control
                         programs for the 13th FYP. This sub-component will provide analytical and technical support to
                         NDRC to help them achieve their energy intensity reduction target as well as the total energy and
                         coal consumption caps for the 13th FYP. The tasks include, but are not limited to: (i) developing
                         measures, policies, and verification protocols to reduce coal consumption in heavily polluted regions
                         such as the regionJing-Jin-Ji Region (Beijing, Tianjin, and Hebei Provinces, or JJJ Region); (ii)
                         developing new fiscal incentive policies to encourage EE during the 13th FYP; (iii) tightening EE
                         standards for industrial equipment and appliances, and promoting industrial energy efficiency
                         certification programs; (iv) developing energy management systems for priority enterprises; (v)
                         promoting energy efficient products and technologies; and (vi) scaling up ESCO industries.

                         (b)       Improving the energy savings MRV system. This sub-component will: (i) undertake
                         analytical studies to review and learn from international experiences on energy MRV; (ii)
                         recommend suitable principles for the development and refinement of MRV policy requirements,
                         including coordination between energy trading and ETS MRV; (iii) develop detailed and operational
                         MRV methodology and guidelines at provincial/city-, enterprise-, and project-levels; (iv) establish
                         the institutional system for MRV, including designing the management system of third-party
                         verifiers, recommending accreditation and regulation systems for third-party verifiers, and
                         establishing methodology working groups and expert pools; and (v) supporting the roll-out of energy
                         online monitoring system nationwide.

                         (c)     Designing market-based mechanisms for energy savings. This sub-component will provide
                         analytical and technical support to design and pilot the energy consumption trading scheme,
                         including determining its coverage, cap allocation, and compliance mechanisms, developing
                         implementation guidelines and trading regulations, establishing the registry and trading platform,
                         coordinating with the ETS, and conducting post-evaluation of the pilot energy trading systems.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (d)      Building the capacity for energy savings MRV and implementation of priority EE programs.
                         This sub-component will build capacity for: (i) energy savings MRV, including developing standard
                         training curriculum, training the trainers, and providing training to third-party verifiers, ESCOs,
                         priority enterprises and provincial EE centers; (ii) the pilot energy trading scheme, including
                         developing the relevant training curriculum, training the trainers, and providing training to key
                         stakeholders; and (iii) national and provincial EE officials on EE policy making, fiscal incentives,
                         and enforcement.

                         Component 2. Supporting Results-based Green Energy Financing in the JJJ Region (cost estimate:
                         US$ 4.5 million GEF grant): This component will complement at least $1.0 billion of investments in
                         EE, renewable energy (RE), and emission reduction in the JJJ region, of which $500 million will
                         come from IBRD loans and $500 million from Hua Xia Bank(HXB) loans. This component will
                         provide advisory services and technical assistance, build capacity, and verify results to help HXB
                         implement the World Bank-financed PforR operation-Innovative Financing for Air Pollution Control
                         Program in the Jing-Jin-Ji Region. It includes the following sub-components:

                         (a)     Undertaking marketing and business development for green energy finance: This sub-
                         component will support HXB in: (i) organizing marketing workshops among financial institutions,
                         enterprises, and government agencies; (ii) developing promotional materials; (iii) undertaking

                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                         analysis of targeted markets and policies to improve the effectiveness of marketing campaigns; and
                         (iv) contracting third parties such as industrial associations and ESCO associations to identify deals.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (b)     Verifying results for the JJJ PforR: Under the JJJ PforR, Hua Xia Bank is required to hire
                         independent and credible third parties to verify the six agreed-upon disbursement linked indicators
                         (DLIs:): (i) DLI-1: the sub-loans for eligible EE, RE, and pollution abatement subprojects disbursed
                         to sub-borrowers; (ii) DLI-2: the coal reduction from eligible EE and RE subprojects; (iii) DLI-3a
                         and DLI-3b: the reduction in SO2 and NOx emissions from desulfurization and denitrification
                         subprojects respectively;(iv) DLI-5: the number of different eligible innovative financial products for
                         green finan cing piloted; and (v) DLI-6: the number of ESCOs receiving sub-loans for eligible EE,
                         RE, and pollution abatement subprojects. This sub-component will support HXB to hire: (i)
                         independent verification agencies (IVA) selected from the 26 accredited verification agencies, to be
                         approved by the World Bank, to verify the results achieved against DLI-2 and DLI-3 over the
                         program lifetime, following agreed-upon methodologies; and (ii) an independent audit firm (IAF), to
                         be approved by the World Bank, to verify the results achieved against DLI-1, DLI-5, and DLI-6 over
                         the program lifetime.

                         (c)      Providing technical assistance and developing innovative financial products and models:
                         This sub-component will support HXB: (i) hire technical experts to undertake technical assessments,
                         fiduciary assessment of procurement and financial management, and compliance with the relevant
                         environment and social guidelines for sub-projects, following the guidelines outlined in the
                         Operational Manual; and (ii) develop and pilot innovative financial products and models for EE, RE,
                         and pollution abatement investments, such as project-based lending, securitization of project assets,
                         aggregation (bundling) of small-scale distributed generation sub-projects, green bonds, and other
                         related products as required under the DLI-5 of the JJJ PforR.

                         (d)     Building capacity for HXB and disseminating lessons learned from the JJJ PforR program:
                         This sub-component will: (i) provide training to HXB management and staff at HQ, particularly the
                         Green Finance Center, and branches/sub-branches in the JJJ region, on lending for EE, clean energy,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and pollution control sub-projects, and provide guidance to a bank-wide green lending business; (ii)
                         enhance mechanisms and infrastructure at HXB for green financing, purchase and maintain a
                         database for the implementation of sub-loans for EE, clean energy, and pollution control sub-
                         projects, and exchange knowledge with relevant stakeholders; and (iii) develop a case study of the
                         JJJ PforR, and disseminate knowledge and lessons learned from the program.

                         Component 3. Supporting the Results-based Environmental Program in Hebei Province (cost
                         estimate: US$4.5 million GEF grant): This component will complement at least $650 million of
                         investments in air pollution control in Hebei, of which $500 million will come from IBRD loans and
                         $150 million from the Hebei government. This component will help enhance the capacity of the
                         government to implement the Hebei PforR operation. It includes the following three sub-
                         components:

                         (a)    Providing analytical studies and technical assistance to support the Hebei PforR: This sub-
                         component will undertake analytical studies and provide technical assistance to the Hebei
                         government on: (i) comprehensive control of industrial enterprises and the reduction of emissions
                         from key industrial sectors; (ii) area source air pollution controls (such as from agricultural and open
                         burning); (iii) prevention and control of emissions from transport sources; and (iv) establishment of
                         monitoring and warning systems, and planning tools for pollution control.



                                                                       Page 3 of 7
                         (b)      Verifying results for the Hebei PforR: Under the Hebei PforR, the Hebei government is
                         required to hire independent and credible third parties to verify the seven DLIs: (i) DLI-1: the
                         number of EPBs at the provincial and prefecture level implementing standard protocols on
Public Disclosure Copy




                         continuous environmental monitoring (CEM) systems for air emissions; (ii) DLI-2: the percentage of
                         enterprises in State-controlled lists and municipal-controlled lists integrated in the improved CEM
                         and enforcement systems for air pollutants; (iii) DLI-3: the number of clean stoves installed that meet
                         technical emissions standards, acceptable to the Bank; (iv) DLI-4: the number of hectares with
                         increased nitrogen utilization efficiency (NUE) of at least 37 percent due to the application of
                         formula fertilizer based on soil testing; (v) DLI-5: the number o f Clean Energy Buses replacing
                         diesel buses, which are disposed of in accordance with National Regulations; (vi) DLI-6:
                         implementation of a comprehensive official emissions inventory system, acceptable to the Bank,
                         populated with emissions data of the year prior to the Effective Date; and (vii) DLI-7: approval of a
                         cost-effective comprehensive plan on air quality control for the next five years, acceptable to the
                         Bank. This sub-component will support the Hebei government to hire independent verification
                         agencies (IVA), to be approved by the World Bank, to verify the results achieved against the seven
                         DLIs over the program lifetime.
                         (c)      Building capacity for Hebei government and disseminating lessons learned from the Hebei
                         PforR: This sub-component will: (i) provide training to Hebei government officials, particularly
                         those at the DRC, EPB, Transport Bureau, and Agriculture Bureau, on emission reduction and
                         control policies and enforcement, and results monitoring; (ii) purchase environmental monitoring
                         software and equipment as needed; and (iii) develop a case study of the Hebei PforR, and
                         disseminate knowledge and lessons learned from the program.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)


                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Peishen Wang (GENDR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Youxuan Zhu (GSU02)
                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            The project is classified as Category B considering the
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     types of some TA activities, e.g. provide analytical studies
                                                                    and technical assistance to support Hebei PforR program
                                                                    on comprehensive control of industrial enterprises and
                                                                    reduction of emissions from key industrial sectors, area
                                                                    source pollution control and dust control, prevention and
                                                                    control of emission from mobile sources, establishment of
                                                                    monitoring and warning systems and planning tools for
                                                                    pollution. Given the nature of the activities to be
                                                                    supported by the project, no safeguards-specific
                                                                    instrument is required.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP     No             The proposed project will not have any physical activities
                          4.04                                      in any potential natural habitat areas, thereby the Natural
                                                                    Habitats Policy will not be triggered.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36         No             The proposed project will not have any physical activities




                                                                      Page 4 of 7
                                                                      in any potential forest areas, thereby the Forest Policy will
                                                                      not be triggered.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No                The proposed project will not lead to procurement of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      pesticide or change of pest management practice,
                                                                      therefore the policy is not triggered.
                            Physical Cultural           No            The proposed project will not have any adverse impacts
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                      on physical cultural resources, therefore, this policy is not
                                                                      triggered.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No            The proposed project will have no potential impacts
                            BP 4.10                                   envisaged on indigenous people. Therefore, this policy is
                                                                      not triggered.
                            Involuntary Resettlement No               The proposed project does not include any physical
                            OP/BP 4.12                                activities, and there will be no land acquisition and
                                                                      resettlement, therefore, this policy is not triggered.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No            The proposed project will not involve any new or existing
                            4.37                                      dams, therefore, this policy is not triggered.
                            Projects on International   No            The proposed project will not involve any international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      waterways, therefore, this policy is not triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed        No            The proposed project will not involve any disputed areas,
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                          therefore, this policy is not triggered.
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The proposed project consists of supporting market-based priority EE and coal cap control
Public Disclosure Copy




                              programs in China, supporting results-based green energy financing in the JJJ Region, and
                              supporting a results-based environmental program in Hebei Province. The project activities are all
                              technical assistance activities. It does not finance any physical investments. There is no direct
                              adverse environmental and social impact envisaged, and therefore, no other environmental and
                              social safeguards policies triggered.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The project will support development and implementation of China➢❨ s priority energy efficiency
                              and environment programs, with a focus on improving measurement and verification systems and
                              developing market-based mechanisms, which will have long-term positive impacts in terms of
                              energy efficiency, reduction of energy consumption, as well as global contribution of GHG
                              emission reduction.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The project is classified as Category B, and no safeguards-specific instrument is required.During
                              the project implementation stage, environmental and social considerations will be included in the


                                                                        Page 5 of 7
                           terms of reference. For any consultancies related to studies, assessments, and capacity-building
                           activities under the project. Simple environmental guidelines will be included in the TORs and
                           bidding documents of equipment procurement to ensure that installation of some of the equipment
Public Disclosure Copy




                           to be funded under this project meet the national and local guidelines and Bank policy.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The project is classified as Category B, and no EA instrument is required for project preparation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      12-Sep-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   23-Sep-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            14-Dec-2016
                           Comments: In-country disclosure was pulished on www. cresp.org.cn
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          report?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?




                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Todd M. Johnson,Xiaodong Wang
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Jie Tang (PMGR)                             Date: 14-Feb-2017
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
