INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA15394
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Jan-2016
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Feb-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Madagascar                  Project ID:  P151785
Project Name: MG-Electricity See Operations & Governance Improvement Project(ESOGIP)
(P151785)
Task Team       Maria Isabel A. S. Neto,Vonjy Miarintsoa Rakotondramanana
Leader(s):
Estimated        11-Jan-2016                Estimated    22-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEE01                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General energy sector (100%)
Theme(s):       Infrastructure services for private sector development (40%), State-owned
enterprise restructuring and privatization (40%), Debt man agement and fiscal
sustainability (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
O
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      65.00             Total Bank Financing:    65.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                  65.00
Total                                                                        65.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to improve the operational performance of the national
electricity utility (JIRAMA) and improve the reliability of electricity supply in the project area and,
in the event of an eligible crisis or emergency, to provide immediate and effective response to said
Page 1 of 11


﻿eligible crisis or emergency.
3. Project Description
1.     ESOGIP will provide support to key sector institutions to improve electricity sector planning
and address sector financial sustainability. Support will also be provided to strengthen the
governance and operational performance of JIRAMA. While the amount of funding provided for
these activities is not large, the actions supported are foundational to the robust development of the
sector going forward. The project also supports investments to enhance the reliability of electricity
a        services. Given the large investment needs , several criteria were used to determine which ones to
prioritize under this project, including economic return on investment based on reduction of
generation cost, cost of losses, and cost of currently unserved energy. The proposed project has four
components as described below.
Component 1. Improving electricity sector planning and financial sustainability (US$2.48 million
equivalent)
2.     This component will finance a combination of capacity building, action plans, roadmaps, and
studies that will: (i) ensure planning of the optimum investments needed to develop the power sector
in Madagascar, from electricity generation to the effective connection of end users, together with a
"glide path" for recovering costs; (ii) define mechanisms for effective implementation of the
outcomes of the planning process; and (iii) strengthen in a sustainable manner the capacity of the
government agencies responsible for planning the power sector and implementation of the outcomes
of the planning process. In order to meet these objectives, the component will support the following:
*      Preparation of a Least Cost Power Development Plan (LCPDP) (US$0.5 million). The
Government of Madagascar (GoM) is in need of an updated roadmap for the development of the
country's electricity sector over the next 15-20 years. To this end, the project will support
consultancy services for MEH to lead the preparation of a LCPDP in order to define the investments
needed in all the segments of the electricity supply chain (from generation, transmission, and
distribution to consumers' connection).
*      Definition of a Strategy and Action Plans to Increase Electricity Access (US$0.23 million).
Complementary to the LCPDP will be the definition of action plans to increase access to electricity
services ("electrification") until full grid coverage country-wide is achieved. The definition of a
strategy for electrification of the country is a government responsibility and should comprise setting
priorities, ensuring funding (grants, loans, national budget, tariff revenues, etc.), defining optimum
technical solutions for specific situations, and putting in place implementation arrangements (roles
and responsibilities of government agencies, the national utility, etc.). This component will finance
consultancy services required for the definition of a strategy and action plans to increase electricity
access in the whole Madagascar, both on grid and off-grid.
*      Studies to Address Sector Financial Viability (US$0.35 million). The component will
finance the execution of studies needed to improve the pricing system for electricity services in
Madagascar in order to ensure the financial viability of the power sector. Specifically, the component
will support consultancy services to (i) assess current average ability to pay for electricity services
and determination of the most adequate methodology for tariff setting to be applied in the short and
medium term; and (ii) design of a socially and politically acceptable "glide path" for the effective
application of the proposed methodology and related tariff charges, eventually complemented by a
social safety net aimed at protecting low income users unable to pay cost reflective rates.
Page 2 of 11


﻿*      Strengthening the capacity of government agencies responsible for planning (US$0.4
million). The component will include capacity building and technical assistance actions aimed at
strengthening the institutional and operational capacity of MEH and other government agencies
O
Q)        responsible for planning and implementation of the electrification strategy to ensure that they are
able to effectively carry out those critical tasks on a long-term basis.
*      Other complementary technical assistance (US$1 million). This component will finance
complementary technical assistance that will be needed for implementation of the LCPDP and/or the
Electrification Strategy once these are available. Other areas for support could include advice on how
to green existing mini-grids predominantly powered by diesel.
Component 2. Strengthening operational performance and governance of JIRAMA (US$12.56
million equivalent).
3.     This component will comprise the preparation and effective implementation of a
Management Improvement Plan (MIP) for JIRAMA for a three-year period, focused on improving
efficiency, transparency, and accountability of JIRAMA's performance in the key operations areas of
electricity supply, commercial functions, and management of corporate resources in a sustainable
manner, with specific emphasis on better service quality and non-technical loss reduction. The
component will support JIRAMA to implement actions in these areas. Key activities under this
component include:
*      Preparation of MIP for JIRAMA (US$0.16 million). The MIP is in the final stages of
preparation supported by the PPA. It will provide a roadmap for implementation of an optimal
organizational structure for JIRAMA (including description of functions and responsibilities of
positions at all levels and definition of skills required for each position), followed by the selection of
staff to occupy top management positions through competitive and transparent processes, with the
support of specialized consultants. The MIP will also include the incorporation of modem, integrated
management information systems at JIRAMA (more below) to provide the tools for JIRAMA
management and staff to better run the company and the sector. The MIP will also address the
implementation of a revenue protection program (more below) and urgent investment needs in
rehabilitation and upgrade of facilities to reduce technical losses and bring service quality to
a acceptable levels (see component 3).
*      Implementation of JIRAMA organizational structure (US$0.4 million). Based on the
recommendations in the MIP, this component will support implementation of the recommended
organizational structure for JIRAMA. Support will be provided for the services of specialized
consultants that will support the company in selection of staff to occupy positions at the top
management level through competitive and transparent (publicly disclosed) processes.
*      Incorporation of management information systems (MIS) (US$9 million). In line with the
MIP, the component will support the purchase and installation of the MIS, which will include a
commercial management system (CMS), an integrated distribution management system (IDMS), and
an enterprise resource planning (ERP) system, to make more efficient, transparent, and accountable
the development of processes and activities in all business areas. This includes operation and
maintenance (O&M) of assets for electricity supply, attention to customer claims, commercial
functions, and management of corporate resources. The installation and use of the MIS must be
complemented with the update of respective databases (customers, assets, etc.) supported by a
Page 3 of 11


﻿geographic information system (GIS).
*      Implementation of a revenue protection program (RPP) (US$3 million). The component will
support the implementation of a RPP for sustainable reduction of non-technical losses in supply
O
U         (unmetered consumption) through systematic remote recording and monitoring of consumption of
large users - as designed in the MIP. The initial phase of the RPP will include a "high value"
segment formed by 6,000 customers (around one percent of JIRAMA's total customers) who
represent around 50 percent of total physical sales (kWh) in 2014. The segment is composed of all
the customers supplied in MV (around 1,000), and the users connected to LV networks with monthly
demand above 1,000 kWh (around 5,000).
Component 3. Investing in enhanced reliability of electricity (US$48.62 million equivalent)
4.     This component will finance priority investments regarding the reinforcement of an existing
138/63kV substation, the construction of new 63kV transmission line for the looping of the network,
the rehabilitation and/or reinforcement of distribution networks in Antananarivo, and the upgrading
of existing distribution systems in selected districts of the country in order to increase the reliability
of the networks. This component will also provide financing for the rehabilitation of auxiliaries of
generation plants, and for the design and supervision of works. Detailed description of goods, works,
and services in the scope of the component, and related investment amounts, is provided in Annex 2.
Component 4. Project Management (US$1.34 million)
5.     This component will support project management. It will finance the recruitment of social
and environmental safeguards experts to provide support to JIRAMA as necessary to prepare and
monitor the project safeguards studies as well as the recruitment of a financial management specialist
and a procurement specialist. In addition, this component will include the financing of the project
audits, purchasing of office selected equipment, and financing of incremental operating costs.
Moreover, this component will provide financing for capacity building through training focused on
MEH and JIRAMA staff.
0
Component 5. Contingent Emergency Response (US$0 million equivalent)
6.     This component will provide immediate response in the event of an eligible crisis or
o        emergency. By including a "zero-dollar" Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC)
the project can finance emergency works in case of a disaster event
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Project will have a nationwide coverage with a specific focus around the large cities in throughout
the country.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Paul-Jean Feno (GENO7)
Vincent Roquet (GSUGL)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         Under component 3, the proposed project plans to conduct
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               civil works to rehabilitate/construct or upgrade existing
Page 4 of 11


﻿facilities for electricity supply (generation, transmission,
distribution). The project proposes the reinforcement of
an existing 138/63kV substation, the construction of new
63kV transmission lines for the looping of the network,
the rehabilitation and/or reinforcement of distribution
networks in the capital city Antananarivo, and the
upgrading of existing distribution systems in selected
districts of the country in order to increase the reliability
of the networks. For those investments, the technical
studies need to be prepared or updated. The project will
finance: (i) transformers and auxiliaries replacement on
the existing substation; (ii) construction of about 25 km of
lines that will connect the substations of Tana Nord and
Tana Sud; (iii) construction of about 8 km of lines
between the substations of Tana Nord and Ambodivona;
(iv) rehabilitation and/or upgrading of existing
distribution networks and (v) rehabilitation of auxiliaries
of generation plants mainly purchasing of spare parts,
including power transformers, switchgear and cables for
connection to the network. The detailed locations of the
works proposed for extension of transmission lines and
upgrading of existing substations and distribution lines are
not known at the present time. The main foreseen
environmental and social adverse risks and effects are
related to: (i) noise over the acceptable standards for
residential areas; (ii) air pollution and contribution to
greenhouse gas emission from the generating units
smokes; (iii) liquid waste (used oil) generation inducing
the pollution of surrounding area and underground water;
(iv) occupational health and safety risks in case
employees are not equipped with appropriate protective
materials; (v) any machinery accidental risks; (vi)
permanent or temporary resettlement of informal vendors
along distribution lines to be rehabilitated, resettlement
requirements related to transmission line extensions; (vii)
hazardous solid waste from the old equipment to be
replaced (transformers) ... etc.
Considering the nature and magnitude of potential
environmental and social impacts from relatively limited
scale of rehabilitation and upgrade works, in addition,
activities supported by the proposed operation are
expected to have some site specific adverse environmental
and social impacts.
An ESMF has been prepared.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   No           There is no vegetation coverage in the potential project
4.04                                  site location. The current land occupation picture shows
human settlements and degraded land in the surrounding
Page 5 of 11


﻿areas.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           There is no vegetation coverage in the potential project
site location. The current land occupation picture shows
human settlements and degraded land in the surrounding
areas.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           The project will not purchase or use pesticides
 Physical Cultural     Yes          A "Chance-Finds" approach, embedded in the ESMF will
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 be adopted to ensure adequate management of such
encounter
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           There are no indigenous peoples living in the project
BP 4.10                              targeted areas.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         The social and environmental category of the proposed
OP/BP 4.12                           project is B due to the low size and site specific nature of
its foreseen social and environmental risks and impacts.
Project activities in component 3 will lead to the
acquisition of land, loss of assets and/or means of
livelihood that will result in permanent and temporary
small-scale involuntary resettlement. The detailed
locations of the works proposed for extension of
transmission lines and for upgrading of existing
substations and distribution lines are not known at the
present time. The Borrower has prepared a Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF) that sets forth the basic
principles and procedures that both the Borrower and the
World Bank must follow to mitigate any potential adverse
social impacts once the physical locations of the proposed
o                                              activities are known.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project will not include construction or utilization of
-         4.37                                 dams.
Projects on International  No        N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No           N/A
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Project is classified as category B in the World Bank's Environmental Assessment
classification due to the low size and site specific nature of its foreseen social and environmental
risks and impacts. The environmental and social Safeguard Policies triggered by this operation are:
OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment); Physical Cultural Resources OP 4.11; and OP/BP 4.12
(Involuntary Resettlement).
There are no potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts expected to arise from
Page 6 of 11


﻿this project. Under component 3, the proposed project plans to conduct civil works to rehabilitate/
construct or upgrade existing facilities for electricity supply (generation, transmission,
distribution). The project proposes the reinforcement of an existing 138/63kV substation, the
construction of new 63kV transmission lines for the looping of the network, the rehabilitation and/
or reinforcement of distribution networks in the capital city Antananarivo, and the upgrading of
existing distribution systems in selected districts of the country in order to increase the reliability
of the networks. For those investments, the technical studies need to be prepared or updated. The
detailed locations of the works proposed for extension of transmission lines and upgrading of
existing substations and distribution lines are not known at the present time. The project will
finance: (i) transformers and auxiliaries replacement on the existing substation; (ii) construction of
about 25 km of lines that will connect the substations of Tana Nord and Tana Sud; (iii)
construction of about 8 km of lines between the substations of Tana Nord and Ambodivona; (iv)
rehabilitation and/or upgrading of existing distribution networks and (v) rehabilitation of
auxiliaries of generation plants mainly purchasing of spare parts, including power transformers,
switchgear and cables for connection to the network. The ESMF indicates that the proposed
Project could potentially induce adverse environmental and social impacts, including the effects
related to: (i) noise over the acceptable standards for residential areas; (ii) air pollution and
contribution to greenhouse gas emission from the generating units smokes; (iii) liquid waste (used
oil) generation inducing the pollution of surrounding area and underground water; (iv)
occupational health and safety risks in case employees are not equipped with appropriate
protective materials; (v) any machinery accidental risks; (vi) permanent or temporary resettlement
of informal vendors along distribution lines to be upgraded, resettlement requirements related to
transmission line extensions; (vii) hazardous solid waste from the old power transformer replaced;
viii) harm to potential chance finds of physical cultural resources during the civil works of
transmission line extension. These impacts are, however, expected to be site specific with no large
scale impacts. In addition, the environmental and social impacts of anticipated activities are
expected to be moderate, site-specific, and manageable to an acceptable level, and the proposed
project requires no exceptions to the World Bank's policies on environmental and social
safeguards. The technical studies of these activities under component 3 will still be prepared or
updated when the financing are available.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
No long term risks or impacts are anticipated as a result of potential future project activities.
Overall project impacts are considered modest and will be site specific. Potential impacts are
related to the civil works during the construction of new 63kV transmission lines for the looping
of the network, the rehabilitation and/or reinforcement of distribution networks. No potential
indirect and/or long term impacts could be induce on the anticipated future activities to this
proposed operation.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
There are no alternatives to the present project design.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
At the national level, Madagascar has a legislative and regulatory framework which is conducive
to good environmental management. Jirama is actively responsive in addressing safeguards issues.
It was recorded the availability of Environmental and Social Management Plan for some
investments in compliance with the Malagasy Environment National Law under D6cret No
Page 7 of 11


﻿2004-167 (MECIE) that mentions the requirement to prepare an Environmental assessment for
both private and public development investments. The national environmental law will be
reinforced by the World Bank safeguard policies for this proposed project. The Jirama has
engaged the services of a consultant to prepare two separated safeguards instruments. These
O
Q)          instruments have assessed the potential impacts of all activities to be supported by the proposed
operation, the expected adverse environmental and social impacts, and identified mitigation
measures, including the principles, procedures to be followed for the safeguards policies triggered:
OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment); Physical Cultural Resources OP 4.11 and OP/BP 4.12
(Involuntary Resettlement).
Since the precise locations and potential impacts of future subprojects cannot be identified prior to
appraisal, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared to be
used to screen sub-project proposals for environmental, social, gender, and health and safety
impacts by using the ESMF screening form and checklist. The ESMF includes an Environmental
and Social Management Plan (ESMP), has taken into account the environmental and social
profiles in the project areas on the potential activities to be supported by the project. The ESMF/
ESMP outlines an environmental and social screening process for future sub-projects to ensure
that they are environmentally and socially sound and sustainably implementable, in line with
GOM and World Bank policies and guidelines on environmental and social impact management.
The screening outcomes will determine if sub-projects will need to prepare an Environmental and
Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), a freestanding Environmental and Social Management Plan
(ESMP), and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or if no action will be needed. The screening of
the sub-projects will be done by the Environment and Risk Prevention Department in Jirama level.
In frame of this proposed operation, the technical studies of activities under component 3 will be
prepared or updated when the financing are available. The ESMF has considered of ToRs for
specific environmental and social studies with the related ESMP for each group of activities that
Jirama could launch in parallel with the technical studies. Jirama under its Environment and Risk
Prevention Department will be responsible for the procurement of consultants to prepare them,
supervise the consultants and it will be responsible for the monitoring of the implementation of the
ESMPs and RAPs in the project areas. It will ensure that all contractor contracts include
environmental and social clauses, which are attached as an annex to the ESMF, in order to ensure
adequate environmental and social management practices during project implementation phase.
The ESMF contains also the screening guidelines to be used to implement Project-supported
works. Funds to prepare and implement these potential ESIAs, ESMPs have been included in the
a          project costs (US$ 500,000).
The solid waste assessment in Jirama has noted that the National Company had stopped to import
transformers with PCB since 1985. It was reviewed an operational secured site In Antananarivo to
collect and storage of the old Transformers with PCB that Jirama is in waiting of Malagasy
measures to eliminate correctly with the National law on the hazard waste.
Concerning infrastructure subprojects mainly the construction of new 63kV transmission lines, the
rehabilitation and/or reinforcement of distribution networks, and the upgrading of existing
distribution systems, no archaeological vestiges will be impacted following the socio-economic
survey developed in the ESMF. For more assurance, the ESMF has made provisions for cultural
resources management in the event the Physical Cultural Resources OP 4.11 is triggered during
the implementation phase and includes "chance finds" procedures for inclusion in the contractors'
contract.
Since the precise physical locations and impacts of the proposed activities are unknown at this
stage and the Project activities in component 3 may lead to the acquisition of land, loss of assets
and/or means of livelihood that could result in the involuntary resettlement of people, the
Page 8 of 11


﻿Borrower has prepared a detailed Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) that sets forth the basic
principles and procedures that both the Borrower and the World Bank must follow to mitigate any
potential adverse social impacts. Because some project activities may lead to the acquisition of
land, loss of assets and/or means of livelihood that could result in the involuntary resettlement of
O
people. The RPF includes details information on legal and institutional framework, eligibility
criteria, assets evaluating methods, implementation arrangements, grievances redress mechanism,
resettlement budget totally covered by the Government and monitoring and evaluation. The RPF
contains the basic principles and procedures/directives to be followed by the Borrower for the
preparation of the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) once the physical locations of the proposed
activities are known. The result of socio- economic studies have characterized different forms of
compensation. Since the technical studies of activities under component 3 will be prepared or
updated when the financing are available, the RPF has proposed specific RAP ToR for each group
of activities that Jirama could launch in parallel with the technical studies. The Malagasy
Government proposed to finance the costs of resettlement (land acquisition costs; compensation on
crops, trees, shelter, habitat, structures, etc.) for a provision of approximately US$400,000 on the
RAPs.
Monitoring of Environmental and Social Management Framework: JIRAMA with its Environment
and Risk Prevention Department will be in charge of the project safeguard environmental and
social compliance. This department will carry out ESMP/RAP, to ensure that the mitigation
measures are being effectively implemented, and will conduct field visits on a regular basis.
Monitoring checklists will be prepared on the basis of the mitigation plans for this purpose.
Progress Reports (PR) shall document the progress of ESMF implementation. Finally, the project
will engage specialists/firms to conduct detailed environmental and social studies (ESIA/ESMP;
RAP).
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
With respect to the applicable safeguards policies and instruments, the project preparation process
sought to identify and analyze the interests, concerns, and effects of project activities on major
stakeholders and vice-versa. During project preparation, the GoMthroughout JIRAMA with the
Regional Departments concerned and a Consultant has conducted public consultations and
meetings on the project in the regions. Extensive public consultations were also conducted during
the preparation of ESMF and RPF to take into account the local populations and communities
views on the project activities and impacts.
Likewise, during project implementation, JIRAMA is expected to consult project-affected groups,
and local governmental and nongovernmental organizations on all environmental and social
aspects of the project and take their views into account accordingly. Public consultations will be
carried out as early as possible and provide, in a timely manner prior to consultation, all the
relevant materials in the form and language(s) needed to be understandable and accessible to the
groups being consulted. Preparation of stand-alone environmental and social safeguards
instruments of potential sub-projects (ESMP/RAP) and when needed will also be prepared through
a consultative and participatory process involving all stakeholders at the regional and national
levels. The draft ESMF and RPF have been received at the Bank in October 27, 2015. All the
environmental and social safeguards instruments have been approved by the Bank and disclosed
before appraisal in-country and in Infoshop on January 15, 2016, in compliance with the relevant
World Bank safeguards and national policies and Disclosure Policies.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Page 9 of 11


﻿Date of receipt by the Bank                                27-Oct-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             15-Jan-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Madagascar                                                 15-Jan-2016
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                27-Oct-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             15-Jan-2016
"In country" Disclosure
Madagascar                                                 15-Jan-2016
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
o         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?            Yes [X] No [     ]  TBD [   ]
150 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Page 10 of I1


﻿Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [ X] No [ ] TBD [ ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
100 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
a          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ]  No [X]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Maria Isabel A. S. Neto,Vonjy Miarintsoa Rakotondramanana
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)             Date: 18-Feb-2016
Practice Manager!      Name: Lucio Monari (PMGR)                  Date: 18-Feb-2016
Manager:
Page 11 of 11


