                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC1134

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Apr-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Apr-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Gambia, The                       Project ID:      P152659
                            Project Name:       Gambia Electricity Sector Support Project (P152659)
                            Task Team           Daniel Camos Daurella
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           25-Jun-2015                       Estimated        01-Sep-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GEEDR                             Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          General energy sector (34%), Thermal Power Generation (33%), Transmission
                                                and Distribution of Electricity (33%)
                            Theme(s):           City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (99%), Rural services and
                                                infrastructure (1%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     18.50                       Total Bank Financing:          18.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                    18.50
                              Total                                                                          18.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to increase the availability and reliability of electricity supply.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project will finance a combination of investments and technical assistance activities to
                           improve services and help reestablish the financial equilibrium of the sector. Investments support
                         will focus on urgent investments to rehabilitate and expand generation and transmission to remove
                         electricity supply bottlenecks. The investments will also complement and facilitate the import of less
                         expensive power through the OMVG interconnection coming on line in 2017. At the same time, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         technical assistance will support improved management practices and strengthen the capacity of
                         NAWEC’s which is critical and urgent to help improve cash flow and reduce losses.

                         Component 1: Institutional Strengthening and Project Implementation Support ($US5.00 million)

                         This component will finance a service contract for NAWEC for a period of approximately three
                         years; including a service fee for the permanent mission of the service contractor (with key as
                         technical, financial and commercial experts) to assist the Managing Director and his team to improve
                         NAWEC’s technical, financial and management capacity. The Service Contractor will also provide
                         support NAWEC in the implementation of the project. One of the priorities of the reform is the
                         unbundling of NAWEC’s accounts and later its operations by separating electricity operations from
                         water and sanitations ones to allow a better focus on electricity services and avoid cross subsidies
                         among the three services. In addition to the technical and management support, the service
                         contractor will also play a significant role in supporting NAWEC in ensuring the pre-requisites for
                         such separation. This component will also finance technical assistance to the Ministry of Energy and
                         the Regulator (for instance in selecting priority investment projects). The scope of this support will
                         be determined during project preparation.

                         Component 2: Increase generation capacity ($US9.00 millions)

                         This component will finance rehabilitation and modernization of a major thermal power plant which
                         requires rehabilitation and provision of spare parts for regular and overhaul maintenance. This
                         component will also finance an owner's engineer to assist NAWEC in supervising the works.

                         Component 3: Reinforcement of transmission network ($US4.50 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will finance the reinforcement of the transmission system to establish the (n-1)
                         criterion as a planning principle at least at the transmission level and help establish key redundancies
                         to protect system stability. Based on the results of load flow analysis, the overloaded substations will
                         be upgraded. This will include installation of new transformers with high capacities and cabins in the
                         distribution network. The same component will also supply the system protection equipment and
                         meters at substations to measure power input and outputs and be able to establish grid losses.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         To be determined

                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The borrower’s institutional capacity in managing environmental and social safeguard measures, as
                         of the standard required by the Bank, is weak and needs to be strengthened. A safeguard expert
                         should be recruited. Further, capacity building efforts could be provided to: (i) ensuring that the
                         Department of Quality, Safety and Environment (DQSE) of NAWEC is effective and fully functional
                         with adequate structural resources; (ii) the Ministry of Energy staff for the integration of
                         environmental measures in the workplans, and the monitoring of environment related issues in
                         energy activities. To support that, budget earmarked to support the implementation of the safeguards
                         measures and recommendations.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Fatou Fall (GSURR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Serigne Omar Fye (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment       Yes        The implementation of the project activities will
                           OP/BP 4.01                                have both positive and negative environmental and
                                                                     social impacts. The negative impacts which need
                                                                     specific attention will occur during the operation of
                                                                     the power plants are related to pollution from wastes
                                                                     mismanagement, noises, occupational risks and
                                                                     safety at work, socio-economic damages in the
                                                                     occurrence of accidental fire in the facilities.

                                                                     An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                                                                     (ESIA) for each power plant and an Environmental
                                                                     and Social Framework (ESMF) will be prepared.
                                                                     These should include appropriate technical and
                                                                     institutional measures. These documents will be
                                                                     consulted upon and will be disclosed at the InfoShop
                                                                     and in-country prior to appraisal.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No         The project activities will not be implemented in
                                                                     areas with natural habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36             No         The project will not support activities related to
                                                                     forest exploitation or management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Pest Management OP 4.09        No         The project will not finance pesticides and none of
                                                                     the supported activities will indirectly induce use of
                                                                     pesticides.
                           Physical Cultural Resources    Yes        The exploitation of quarries and borrow pits may
                           OP/BP 4.11                                affect or involve physical cultural resources, while
                                                                     the delineation and clearing of the right-off-way of
                                                                     the transmission lines may affect sacred sites. The
                                                                     ESMF will provide information on such risks and
                                                                     include proposed mitigation measures. The chance
                                                                     find procedure will be integrated in the contract of
                                                                     the enterprises and monitored.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No         There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                           4.10                                      intervention areas.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes        The power plants in component 2 are expected to be
                           BP 4.12                                   on lands owned by NAWEC and therefore
                                                                     involuntary land acquisition is not required. For
                                                                     component 3, since the beneficiary communities
                                                                     have not been determined yet it is not known
                                                                     whether involuntary land-take leading to involuntary
                                                                                                                        resettlement and/or restriction of access to sources of
                                                                                                                        livelihood or to resources and/or restriction to legally
                                                                                                                        designed parks would take place.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        To address all potential adverse impacts under OP
                                                                                                                        4.12 over the lifetime of the project, the client will
                                                                                                                        prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).
                                                                                                                        The RPF will include resettlement principles and
                                                                                                                        processes, eligibility criteria, institutional and
                                                                                                                        funding arrangements, grievance redress
                                                                                                                        mechanisms, and a legal framework that reviews the
                                                                                                                        fit between the Borrower’s laws and Bank policy
                                                                                                                        requirements.

                                                                                                                        If and when there are known adverse impacts
                                                                                                                        Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) will be prepared
                                                                                                                        and include mitigation measures. The RPF will be
                                                                                                                        consulted upon and will be disclosed at InfoShop and
                                                                                                                        in-country prior to appraisal. The potential RAPs will
                                                                                                                        also be consulted upon, disclosed at InfoShop and in-
                                                                                                                        country and implemented prior to any construction.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         The project will not finance any dams.

                                 Projects on International      No                                                      No activity of the project is implementing in
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   watershed or is affecting any water course.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      There is no dispute on the potential locations of the
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                project intervention.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Jun-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The following documents will be prepared, consulted upon and disclosed at the InfoShop and in-
                                      country prior to appraisal expected around June 30, 2015:

                                      - An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for each power plant and an
                                      Environmental
                                      - A Social Framework (ESMF) will be prepared.
                                      - A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                                      - Potential RAPs (or ARAPs)
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Daniel Camos Daurella
                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                             Date: 27-Apr-2015
                                 Advisor:


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Practice Manager/   Name: Meike van Ginneken (PMGR)   Date: 27-Apr-2015
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
