                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC11020

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Nov-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Multi-Regional                  Project ID:      P153585
                            Project Name:   FCPF-Capacity Building on REDD+ for Forest-Dependent Indigenous Peoples
                                            in EAP and SAR Project
                            Team Leader(s): Haddy Jatou Sey
                            Estimated Date 29-Feb-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GSU02                           Lending          Lending Instrument
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           Forestry (100%)
                            Theme(s):            Participation and civic engagement (30%), Indigenous peoples (30%), Social
                                                 Inclusion (40%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.49075                        Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility                                   0.49075
                            Environment        B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the project is to build the capacity of targeted forest-dependent indigenous peoples
                           in the EAP and SAR regions to enhance their knowledge and understanding of REDD+, thereby
                           allowing them to increase their participation in REDD+ processes at the national level.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project will finance the following three main components (detailed implementation
                           arrangements are included under Implementing Agency Information):

                           Component 1: Capacity Building Activities for Forest-Dependent Indigenous Peoples (Approx. US
                           $294,450)

                           This component will support the implementation of capacity-building activities for forest-dependent
                           indigenous peoples to (i) enhance their understanding and knowledge of REDD+, (ii) promote their
                           participation in the preparation and implementation of REDD+ activities, (iii) enhance their
                         participation in discussions of the role of REDD+ in climate change mitigation, (iv) support capacity
                         building/enhancement of forest-dependent indigenous peoples’ platforms and networks at the
                         national level that engages with REDD+ and climate change, and (v) enhance indigenous women’s
Public Disclosure Copy




                         participation in REDD+ activities. Capacity building activities under this component include the
                         carrying out of training and workshops and the preparation of studies, analytical reports, and learning
                         materials.

                         Under this component, forest-dependent indigenous people’s organizations/institutions are eligible
                         for the implementation of capacity building activities (through direct implementation and/or sub-
                         grants) in their respective FCPF countries (Bhutan, Cambodia, Fiji, Indonesia, Lao PDR, Nepal,
                         Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Thailand, Vanuatu and Vietnam). Eligible countries will be selected
                         based on criteria and procedures, acceptable to the World Bank. This criteria will included
                         provisions to ensure coordination within the World Bank, including, inter alia, that REDD+ countries
                         benefitting from the Dedicated Grant Mechanism (DGM) of the Forest Investment Program (FIP),
                         will not be eligible for support from the project. This approach is an attempt to ensure that as many
                         eligible organizations and countries can benefit from the DGM and CBP, while avoiding any
                         potential duplications under the two programs.

                         Component 2: Regional level activities and Dissemination of Project results (Approx. US $147,225)

                         This component will finance regional-level activities and the design and implementation of a
                         communication strategy to disseminate at the country and regional level, the results of activities
                         carried out by the project, including the preparation of good practices and lessons learned, aimed at
                         addressing capacity building needs of forest-dependent indigenous peoples at all levels so as to foster
                         their effective engagement in REDD+. The dissemination of results will target fellow indigenous
                         peoples’ organizations and networks in countries in the region participating in the FCPF.
                         Communication strategies will draw upon existing resources, relationships, and networks to the
                         maximum extent possible this will include a regional learning and exchange forum.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Activities under this component will finance dissemination of information, regional level network
                         forums on REDD+, and the publication of materials (produced in appropriate languages, where
                         necessary). Data on women and youth participation will be highlighted at the regional level.

                         Component 3: Management and Administration (Approx. US$49,075)

                         Under this component, support will be provided for Tebtebba’s day-to-day project implementation
                         and management including, procurement, financial management, preparation of annual work plans
                         and organization of audit reports. It will also support overhead incremental costs incurred as a result
                         of the implementation of the project.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Under component 1, forest-dependent indigenous people’s organizations/institutions are eligible for
                         the implementation of capacity building activities (through direct implementation and/or sub-grants)
                         in their respective FCPF countries (Bhutan, Cambodia, Fiji, Indonesia, Lao PDR, Nepal, Pakistan,
                         Papua New Guinea, Thailand, Vanuatu and Vietnam). Eligible countries and activities will be
                         selected based on criteria, processes and procedures, acceptable to the World Bank. This criteria will
                         included provisions to ensure coordination within the World Bank, including, inter alia, that REDD+
                         countries benefitting from the Dedicated Grant Mechanism (DGM) of the Forest Investment Program
                           (FIP), will not be eligible for support from the project. This approach is an attempt to ensure
                           coordination between the FIP’s Dedicated Grant Mechanism and the CBP, and to ensure that as
                           many eligible organizations and countries can benefit from the DGM and CBP, while avoiding any
Public Disclosure Copy




                           potential duplications under the two programs.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Recipient organization has been contracted by the Bank in the past as a vendor in 2008 to deliver
                           the first FCPF Asia Region consultation with indigenous peoples, and in 2011 to deliver the Global
                           Conference on Community-Based Mapping in Mexico, Tebtebba implemented all activities in a
                           manner fully satisfactory to the World Bank. In moving forward this project, Tebtebba would
                           continue to receive capacity building and training to ensure further understanding of the World
                           Bank's environmental and social safeguard policies and its responsibilities regarding compliance. In
                           addition, the task team will work on assessing the capacity of the Recipient to screen, scope and
                           oversee compliance with the safeguard policies, and to incorporate relevant elements of the polices to
                           ensure the participation of stakeholders in the design and implementation of the capacity building
                           activities.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The Project will not finance physical investment
                           BP 4.01                                              activities on the ground, and it will therefore not
                                                                                have any direct environmental or social impacts.
                                                                                OP 4.01 is triggered as the umbrella policy to
                                                                                ensure that the Bank’s safeguard policies are
                                                                                considered in thesestudies and analytical work.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                The project is only supporting upstream studies
                                                                                and analytical work to build the capacity of
                                                                                targeted forest-dependent indigenous peoples in
                                                                                the EAP and SAR regions to enhance their
                                                                                knowledge and understanding of REDD+. None
                                                                                of these activities will be implemented by
                                                                                government entities.
                                                                                For purposes of carrying out the activities,
                                                                                eligibility criteria, processes and procedures,
                                                                                acceptable to the Bank will be prepare to ensure
                                                                                that Bank’s safeguard policies are considered in
                                                                                these studies and analytical work. In addition,
                                                                                policy provisions/requirements will be reflected
                                                                                in ToRs and reports for the relevant studies and
                                                                                analytical work. Examples of the type of
                                                                                activities that will be financed under the project
                                                                                are included below (please note that this is just
                                                                                an indicative list)
                                                                                •         Research and analytical studies on
                                                                                social and environmental issues related to
                                                                 REDD+;
                                                                 •        Analytical studies on sustainable
                                                                 livelihoods in the context of REDD+ Readiness;
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 •        Analytical studies on community-level
                                                                 monitoring and other reporting related to REDD
                                                                 + process (to enhance transparency/
                                                                 accountability).
                                                                 The criteria for eligible organizations,
                                                                 acceptable to the Bank, will be further refined
                                                                 and included in the project paper (and included
                                                                 in the operational manual). At this stage it has
                                                                 been agreed that target beneficiaries to be
                                                                 selected under component 1 are not-for-profit
                                                                 organizations of indigenous peoples or local
                                                                 communities, based in a FCPF participant
                                                                 country. Organizations applying for grants
                                                                 should be non-state actors and have legal status
                                                                 under relevant domestic laws. In addition, for
                                                                 organizations receiving sub-grants the Bank will
                                                                 conduct due diligence work to assess the
                                                                 organization’s technical and fiduciary capacity.
                                                                 The Recipient will prepare an operational
                                                                 manual, acceptable to the Bank, which will
                                                                 include the criteria, procedures and processes
                                                                 for the selectin of activities under the Project,
                                                                 including relevant provision to ensure that the
                                                                 Bank’s safeguard policies are considered in
                                                                 accordance to OP 4.01.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    Activities would be screened using OP 4.01 to
                                                                 ensure that the Bank’s safeguard policies are
                                                                 considered in these studies and analytical work.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    Activities would be screened using OP 4.01 to
                                                                 ensure that the Bank’s safeguard policies are
                                                                 considered in the proposed studies and
                                                                 analytical work under the project.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    Activities would be screened using OP 4.01 to
                                                                 ensure that the Bank’s safeguard policies are
                                                                 considered in the proposed studies and
                                                                 analytical work under the project.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    Activities would be screened using OP 4.01 to
                         BP 4.11                                 ensure that the Bank’s safeguard policies are
                                                                 considered in the proposed studies and
                                                                 analytical work under the project.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   OP/BP 4.10 is triggered as the majority of direct
                                                                 beneficiaries are indigenous peoples as per the
                                                                 criteria of the Policy. In any case, a separate
                                                                               IPPF and site-specific IPPs will not be prepared
                                                                               since the project targets indigenous peoples. It
                                                                               is expected that the implementation of this
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               project will result in significant positive benefits
                                                                               to indigenous peoples, as activities to be
                                                                               implemented include capacity building training
                                                                               and enhancing their knowledge base for their
                                                                               active participation in REDD+ processes within
                                                                               their respective countries. Activities would be
                                                                               screened using OP 4.01 to ensure that the
                                                                               Bank’s safeguard policies are considered in the
                                                                               proposed studies and analytical work under the
                                                                               project (as per the operational manual). In
                                                                               addition, all of the proposed activities are
                                                                               upstream, focusing on building the capacity of
                                                                               indigenous peoples, and are not undertaken by
                                                                               government entities. The project is only
                                                                               supporting upstream studies and analytical work
                                                                               to build the capacity of targeted forest-
                                                                               dependent indigenous peoples in the EAP and
                                                                               SAR regions to enhance their knowledge and
                                                                               understanding of REDD+. None of these
                                                                               activities will be implemented by government
                                                                               entities.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No              The program will not involve any physical
                           4.12                                                infrastructure or civil works and will therefore
                                                                               not involve physical displacement or land
                                                                               acquisition. Activities would be screened using
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               OP 4.01 to ensure that the Bank’s safeguard
                                                                               policies are considered in the proposed studies
                                                                               and analytical work under the project.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No              This safeguard policy was not triggered because
                                                                               the project will not support activities involving
                                                                               the construction or operation of new or existing
                                                                               dams.
                           Projects on International           No              This safeguard policy was not triggered because
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                the project will not support activities which
                                                                               affect international waterways.
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 This safeguard policy was not triggered because
                           7.60                                                the project will not support activities which
                                                                               affect international waterway in disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                             Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):             Name: Haddy Jatou Sey
                         Approved By:
                         Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                                           Date: 01-Dec-2015
                         Practice Manager/                Name: Bassam Ramadan (PMGR)                                        Date: 01-Dec-2015
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Manager:



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                         InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                         affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
