INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
,2   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Jul-2015
6                                              Report No.: ISDSC13372
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        China                      Project ID:   P153115
Project Name:   Hunan integrated Management of Contaminated Agricultural Land (P 153115)
Task Team       Wendao Cao,Qing Wang
Leader(s):
Estimated          06-Apr-2016             Estimated     08-Dec-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEN2                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%), Irrigation and drainage
(20%), Agricultural extension and research (15%), Pu blic administration-
Agriculture, fishing and forestry (15%)
Theme(s):       Pollution managem      en vironmental health (50%), Environmental policies
and institutions (50%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     200.00            Total Bank Financing:  100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
Borrower                                                       100.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development          100.00
Total                                                         200.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
16.   The project development objective is to improve environmental management of agricultural
land contaminated with heavy metals and other pollutants for safe agricultural production in selected
counties in Hunan.


﻿17.    The project is part of Hunan's efforts to improve the quality and safety of its agricultural
product area, and also the part of the national efforts to reduce heavy metal pollution under the 12th
Five Year Plan on Integrated Prevention and Control of Heavy Metal Pollution. Hunan is one of the
14 key provinces selected for heavy metal pollution management under the Plan. The project will
O
U       contribute to sustainable agriculture and food safety in Hunan and China.
18.    The total cost of the project is estimated as RMB 1.237 billion Yuan (US$200 million),
including US$100 million from the World Bank, and RMB 620 million of counterpart funding from
provincial government and participating county governments.
C. Project Description
Component 1: Management of Contaminated Agricultural Land. . This component aims to reduce
concentrations or manage risks of heavy metals (Cd in particular) and other toxins in the crops
(mainly rice) and soils in participating counties by applying different approaches and technologies
(such as phytoremediation , inactivation, comprehensive agronomic control technologies , less costly
than conventional treatments for heavy metal contamination in soils) in three categories of
contaminated farmlands: highly-contaminated area, medium-contaminated area and low-
contaminated areas. The approaches and technologies will be assessed and selected during project
preparation based on soil and crop contamination risk assessment, taking into account those that are
being demonstrated under the national program and other remediation technologies that have been
used internationally, and have potential for scale-up in China.
In highly-contaminated area, cropping systems will have to be shifted towards new or alternative
crops more resilient to accumulating heavy metals, or even stop cropping altogether. There is
therefore a need to explore alternative uses of land, and the benefits/costs to farmers. The project will
identify and demonstrate a suitable level of compensation to farmers for the changes in cropping
systems which would affect their livelihood or restricted access to land. This will be addressed
through an environmental and social management framework.
Component 2: Sustainable Soil Management. This component aims to improve environmental
performance of agriculture production operations for restoring and maintaining soil quality. To
increase the efficiency of soil remediation investments under Component 1 there is a need for
simultaneous improvement in agricultural soil management to protect soil organic matter, nutrients,
organisms, and structure. Sustainable soil management practices will help limit the activity of heavy
metals in the soil and dissolve excess nitrogen and phosphorus.
This component will support soil management practices including (i) soil health assessment; (ii)
organic matter management: leaving crop residues in the field, choosing crop rotations that include
high residue plants, using optimal nutrient and water management practices to grow healthy plants
with large amounts of roots and residue, growing cover crops, applying manure or compost, using
low or no tillage systems, using sod-based rotations, growing perennial forage crops, and mulching;
(iii) tillage management - avoiding excessive tillage; (iv) chemical management - testing and
monitoring soil and pests, applying only the necessary chemicals at the right time and place, taking
advantage of non-chemical approaches to pest and nutrient management such as crop rotations, cover
crops, and manure management; (v) prevention of soil compaction; (vi) residue management -
keeping the ground covered; and (vii) diversification of cropping systems using buffering strips,
small fields, or contour strip cropping. These sustainable soil management practices will be detailed
during project preparation, taking into account international good practices. All or part of these
practices will be applied depending on the soil situation in different locations, especially the level of


﻿heavy metal pollution land areas.
This component may also support techniques and practices to control agricultural non-point source
(NPS) pollution from the three key water pollutants including total chemical oxygen demand (COD),
O
total nitrogen (TN) and total phosphorus (TP) . NPS pollution is possibly caused by (i) fertilizers and
agrichemicals, and other agricultural inputs (e.g. plastic film), (ii) crop residues (e.g. straws), (iii)
livestock wastes, (iv) contaminated irrigation water, (v) aquaculture discharges, and (vi) rural
household wastes. Some of these sources (e.g. i, ii, iii) will be addressed through sustainable soil
management. During project preparation, more detailed baseline data on the other sources will be
collected to prioritize and justifyproject support for specific activities on (iv), (v) and (vi).
This component will also raise awareness of farmers on environmental impacts of poor farming
practices; transfer knowledge and international good practices on soil management; and establish
ecological compensation mechanisms, such as establishment of an incentive mechanism to help
farmers adopt sustainable soil management practices to preserve soil quality.
Component 3: Environmental Management and Agricultural Environmental Monitoring (AEM).
This component aims to assist the participating county-level governments in (i) regulating
(compliance and enforcement) heavy metal and other toxic pollutants entry into the soil; (ii)
improving AEM to guide agricultural land pollution management and agricultural pollution source
control.
The focus of effective environmental management is the use of a systematic approach to planning,
controlling, measuring, and improving an industrial enterprise's environmental impact i.e. the
International Standards Organization (ISO) 14000 series of environmental management standards.
Clean production and cost savings can be achieved by improving the environmental management
processes. The component will support (i) development and issuance of local regulations, technical
guidelines and standards for controlling industrial heavy metal emissions and limiting heavy metal
entry into soil by application of industrial waste or sewage sludge and agrochemicals , (ii) training
for government officials to improve their enforcement capacity and for technical service providers on
compliance assistance, (iii) training and technical assistance for key highly-polluting enterprises on
establishment of Environmental Management Systems (EMS).
o       This component also aims to improve existing AEM system in participating counties, in
collaboration with the local Environmental Protection Department and Bureaus, to enable
agricultural land pollution risk mapping and risk assessment, which will help identify areas that are
more or less vulnerable to land pollution and crop pollution and display this information graphically.
Combining risk assessment with maps would help local governments to identify the main sources of
pollution and get the highest food safety impacts for money spent. The other objective of the AEM is
to assess how agriculture and changes in agricultural practice affect the environment. Continuous
soil, water and air monitoring and mapping of results would be required for meeting the monitoring
objectives . The results of this monitoring, together with statistical data from the agricultural sector
and results from special research and evaluations should be the basis for taking decisions on
assessing and developing agricultural policy and helping direct resources and land use activities to
appropriate areas, and assisting in protection and remediation efforts. The monitoring system is not to
replace site-specific investigations, but rather to be used as a planning and management tool. This
will also mark the beginning of effective and comprehensive agricultural soil pollution and soil
quality management planning. This component will finance development, revisions and issuance of
technical guidelines and procedures for AEM and procurement of monitoring and data processing/


﻿presentation equipment in participating counties.
Component 4: Project Monitoring & Evaluation, Capacity Building and Management. This
component aims to support monitoring and evaluation of the project outcome indicators and results
O
U       by collecting evidence-based information and data, summarizing and disseminating lessons and
experiences derived from project implementation, and organizing the project launch and completion
workshops. This component will also support capacity development of all levels of AC in Hunan,
agriculture technical service providers, and farmer field schools through study trips and training, and
provision of international and national technical experts to support project implementation. This
component will also support project management,including day-to-day project implementation,
procurement and financial management, and environmental and social safeguards functions carried
out by the PMU, and coordination and collaboration among local government agencies, non-
government agencies and the farmer??s professional organizations
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The number of participating counties is estimated at up to 10, during the preparation the selection of
the counties will be confirmed.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Provincial Government of Hunan is setting up a Project Steering Committee (PSC) to be chaired
by a vice governor and composed of the Department of Finance, Agricultural Commission (AC), and
Departments of Environmental Protection, Water Resources, Land Resources, as well as the
Provincial Development and Reform Commission. The PSC will coordinate overall project
preparation and implementation in the province. Under the PSC, AC will be the implementing
agency of the project. It will host a Project Management Office (PMO), which will be expanded from
the PMO established under the Bank-financed Eco-farming Project (was closed in 2014). The
safeguard performance of the AC PMO under the previous project was satisfactory, and the PMO
and the AC high-level managers expressed strong commitment for this proposed project.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Meixiang Zhou (GSURR)
O
Yiren Feng (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project is designed to improve environmental
OP/BP 4.01                              management of agricultural land contaminated with
heavy metals and other pollutants for safe
agricultural production in project counties in Hunan.
The Project is proposed as a 1oCategory A1+ project
based on types, locations, sensitivity and scales of
the proposed activities as well as the nature and
magnitude of positive and negative environmental
impacts associated with these project activities:
possible handling of heavy metal (HM) contaminated
agricultural waste under Component 1, and possible
exposure to HM contaminated soils and water under


﻿Component 1 and 2.
During the identification stage, the project counties
have not been decided, it is expected that totally up
to 10 counties will be selected for the project. In this
sense, an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) and site-specific EMPs for
participating sites will be appropriate EA tool. The
ESMF will include an analysis of key environment
and social risks of the project, a robust screening
process for each farmland to be supported under the
project including specific guidance or ToR for the
preparation of site-specific EMPs. During project
preparation, the ESMF and site-specific EMPs for
identified and confirmed sites for the first year
implementation will be prepared, consulted upon and
disclosed prior to project appraisal. Site-specific
EMPs for other sites will be prepared during project
implementation following the ESMF when they are
confirmed. The RSS will review the TORs for ESMF
and site-specific EMPs to be prepared during
preparation.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No            Since the proposed project activities are located in
rural areas with intensive agricultural activities, no
sensitive locations are expected, and the policy is not
triggered
Forests OP/BP 4.36           No           The Project doesn't involve forests resources. This
policy is not triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09      Yes          The component 2 will support sustainable soil
management practices to restore and maintain soil
quality, including chemical management, the policy
is therefore triggered. A Pest Management Plan
(PMP) will be prepared to describe range of pest and
disease control and management methods,
emphasizing integrated pest management (IPM)
approaches, and the scope of the recommended
application under various conditions. The PMP also
should provide a list of fertilizers, pesticides and
herbicides that may be required under the project in
compliance with World Health Organization's
recommended categories. The PMP should include
detailed provisions for training for project
stakeholders and a monitoring program.
Implementation of the training and monitoring
programs should be budgeted in the project cost.
Physical Cultural Resources  No           Chance finds during contaminated land remediation
OP/BP 4.11


﻿engineering work or soil management engineering
work, to be detailed during project preparation, may
occur and relevant clauses will be included in all
bidding documents and construction contracts.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     TBD         The list of project sites is not determined at the PCN
4.10                                     stage. It is therefore not clear whether there is any
presence of ethnic minority people in this project
according to the criteria of Banki s IP identification.
There are some ethnic minority groups like Miao
people in the western part of this project province-
Hunan. The applicability of Banki s indigenous
people policy (OP 4.10) is to be determined only
after the project sites ?counties and villages are
selected and indigenous people 1s presence is
confirmed. A social assessment (SA) will be
undertaken by hiring professional consultants via the
PMO. It will assess local social economy in project
sites through intensive public consultation with
project stakeholders and other investigation and
review activities. The SA will screen the presence of
ethnic minorities against the Bank IP term to confirm
whether this policy is triggered or not. The social
assessment will collect and analyze the needs and
opinions of project potential beneficiaries and key
stakeholders, and identify social risks and impacts
such as issues about farmers 1 participation and
cooperation, and come up with social action plan to
mitigate the risks and promote positive social
impacts. Once it is confirmed that the Bank IP policy
is triggered through the SA, an IPP will be prepared
to address the needs, rights and interest of the IPs in
project design and implementation.
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes      The project has component 1 on Management of
BP 4.12                                  Contaminated Agricultural Land and component 2 on
Sustainable Soil Management. There may be a need
for land acquisition and involuntary resettlement.
Under component 1, cropping systems is likely to be
shifted to alternative non-food crops from traditional
food crops, or entirely stopped cropping in highly-
contaminated farming area. Under component 2:
there may be civil works in improving irrigation
facilities which are likely done within project
villages and land could be adjusted within village
without change to land ownership. Land acquisition
cannot be fully ruled out under the project according
to information available at this stage. The Banki s
involuntary resettlement policy (OP4.12) is seen to


﻿be triggered in some project sites by taking a
cautious approach. Further confirmation will be
sought during project preparation. To address any
possible involuntary resettlement in the project, a
resettlement policy framework will be prepared by
professional consultants. Other relevant social
safeguards instruments like due diligence review
report and resettlement action plan can be also
prepared accordingly once there are needs confirmed
in relation to land demands for the project. The RPF
will include transitional and permanent looses
occurred as a result of changing farming systems.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    TBD          Since the project is at identification stage, there is no
sufficient information to determine whether the
policy triggered or not. Once more information
available in project preparation, triggering of the
policy will be determined. If the policy is triggered,
damsafety evaluation will be conducted by an
independent dam safety expert.
Projects on International    No           The project will not involve trans-boundary rivers.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      The policy is not triggered.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         The project will not involve trans-boundary rivers.
BP 7.60                                   The policy is not triggered.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 29-Apr-2016
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Launching in July 2015 and completing in April 2016 the safeguard-related studies.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Wendao Cao,Qing Wang
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                        Date: 18-Jun-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Frank Van Woerden (PMGR)                  Date: 16-Jul-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


