                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA16220
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Feb-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kenya                              Project ID:   P153349
                            Project Name:      National Agricultural and Rural Inclusive Growth Project (P153349)
                            Task Team          Ladisy Komba Chengula,Christopher Finch
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          15-Feb-2016                        Estimated   28-Apr-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GFA07                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%), Sub-national government
                                              administration (20%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (10%), Public
                                              administration- Other social services (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Social Inclusion (30%), Micro, Small
                                              and Medium Enterprise support (30%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     219.00           Total Bank Financing:                  200.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          19.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                200.00
                              Total                                                                                      219.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed development objective is to increase agricultural productivity and profitability of
                           targeted rural communities in selected counties.



                                                                       Page 1 of 13
                         3. Project Description
                         Introduction
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1.      A key premise of NARIGP is the importance of linking rural smallholder farmers’ CIGs and
                         VMGs organized along selected priority VCs to markets. Thus the technical Components 1-3 of
                         NARIGP are interlinked. Component 1 entails: (i) mobilizing smallholder farmers into CIGs and
                         VMGs; (ii) building their capacities to plan, implement, manage, and monitor community-level
                         micro-projects along their priority VCs; and (iii) providing primary production TIMPs (e.g., inputs,
                         animal husbandry, and agronomic practices) and advisory services to improve productivity.
                         Component 2 focuses on: (i) federating CIGs and VMGs capacitated under Component 1 to join
                         existing POs (or form new ones in cases where none exist) along priority VCs; (ii) providing
                         technical (value addition), business (planning and management), financial (access to credit/finance),
                         and organizational (leadership and governance) advisory services; and (iii) linking them to markets
                         and value addition opportunities. Component 3 provides: (i) technical advisory services (e.g., public
                         extension services) facilitated by counties; (ii) an enabling environment for the private sector and
                         public-private partnerships (PPPs) to operate; and (iii) multi-community (e.g., catchment or
                         landscape-wide and larger rural infrastructure) investments based on priorities identified under
                         Components 1 and 2. Component 4 supports national and county-level project coordination and
                         management activities, including establishment of monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and
                         management information (MIS) systems, an ICT-based Agricultural Information Platform, and
                         fiduciary (financial management and procurement), human resources, communication and citizen
                         engagement, and environmental and social safeguards compliance. In addition, a contingency
                         emergency response facility was built under this component to respond to a natural disaster affecting
                         the sector.

                         Project Beneficiaries

                         2.       The primary beneficiaries of the project will be targeted rural smallholder farmers, including
Public Disclosure Copy




                         VMGs and other stakeholders, organized in CIGs, of which 70 percent are expected to federate into
                         POs along VCs, and selected county governments. It is envisaged that NARIGP will be implemented
                         in 21 selected counties with a total of 140 sub-counties. Each sub-county will have at least three
                         (maximum of five) participating wards. Within these sub-counties, the project will cover about 420
                         out of the existing 696 wards, which is equivalent to 60 percent coverage. It is estimated that each
                         CIG/VMG will have up to 30 registered farmers who pay membership and annual fees, as detailed in
                         the Project Implementation Manual (PIM).
                         3.       Under Component 1, the project will support CIGs/VMGs through four investment windows:
                         micro-projects on sustainable land management (SLMW) and VCs (60 percent); VMGs (10 percent);
                         livelihood (25 percent); and nutrition (5 percent). The CIGs/VMGs on SLM/VC and VMG are
                         expected to federate into POs, which will receive further support from the project under Component
                         2. Each PO will have up to 100 registered CIGs/VMGs, which pay membership and annual fees (as
                         detailed in the PIM), trained on SLM/VC and covering at least two wards. Thus on average, there
                         will be four POs (400 CIGs/VMGs) per county. Adding the CIGs/VMGs on livelihood and nutrition
                         (a total of 30 percent) translates to an average of 571 CIGs/VMGs with 17,143 direct beneficiaries
                         per county or a total of 360,000 in the targeted project area.

                         Project Components

                         Component 1: Supporting Community-Driven Development (US$80 million of which IDA US$75


                                                                      Page 2 of 13
                         million)

                         4.       The overall objective of this component is to strengthen: (i) community-level institutions’
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ability to identify and implement investments that improve their agricultural productivity, food
                         security, and nutritional status; and (ii) linkages to selected VCs and POs.

                         Subcomponent 1.1: Strengthening Community-Level Institutions (IDA US$12 million)

                         5.       The project will finance activities aimed at building the capacity of community-level
                         institutions, such as Community-Driven Development Committees (CDDCs), CIGs, and VMGs, to
                         plan, implement, manage, and monitor agricultural and rural livelihood development interventions.
                         Specifically, the project will finance costs related to: (i) facilitation of community institutions,
                         including community mobilization and awareness creation of the PICD process, through which
                         priority interventions will be identified; (ii) development of and training on standardized training
                         modules for PICD, VC development, fiduciary management (i.e., community financial and
                         procurement management, and social audits), and environmental and social safeguards monitoring (i.
                         e., use of checklists in micro-project identification and implementation); (iii) payments to
                         competitively selected advisory service provider (SP) consortia (i.e., to provide technical and
                         extension advisory services, micro-project planning and implementation support, and local value
                         addition, and to link CIGs/VMGs to POs; and (iv) facilitation of County Technical Departments
                         (CTDs) to provide oversight and quality assurance at the sectoral level.

                         Subcomponent 1.2: Supporting Community Investments (US$68 million of which IDA US$63
                         million)

                         6.       This subcomponent will finance physical investments in the form of community micro-
                         projects identified in the PICD process that increase agricultural productivity, include a strong
                         nutrition focus, improve livelihoods, and reduce vulnerability. Micro-project investments will fall
                         under four windows: (i) SLM interventions and VCs’ development; (ii) market-oriented alternative
Public Disclosure Copy




                         livelihood interventions; (iii) targeted support to VMGs; and (iv) nutrition mainstreaming through
                         three pathways: consumption (e.g., nutrient-dense crops and livestock products), income (e.g., home-
                         based value addition, storage, and preservation), and women’s empowerment (e.g., on- and off-farm
                         activities, labor-saving technologies, and savings and credit schemes). Priority will be placed on
                         micro-projects that have: (a) the potential to increase agricultural productivity and incomes, value
                         addition, and links to markets via POs, and for livelihoods to SACCOs; and (b) sustain natural
                         resources base and returns to targeted communities, rather than simply providing inputs.

                         Component 2: Strengthening Producer Organizations and Value Chain Development (US$50 million
                         of which IDA US$45 million)

                         7.       The objective of this component is to build POs’ capacity to support member CIGs and
                         VMGs to develop selected priority VCs in targeted rural communities. Under Component 2, CIGs
                         and VMGs formed under Component 1 and facilitated to federate into POs will be strengthened to
                         become viable and profitable, and attractive not only to existing and additional members, but also to
                         business partners in input, output, and service markets. POs will integrate member CIGs and VMGs
                         into input and service markets to: (i) further improve production; and (ii) take advantage of market
                         opportunities available along the selected VCs determined to be of high priority in the development
                         of the respective counties. Targeted investments will also be made towards value addition and
                         improved harvest and post-harvest management of produce to reduce the high post-production losses,

                                                                      Page 3 of 13
                         which range from 30-50 percent depending on the VC. Targeted POs will comprise inter-community
                         cooperatives, farmers’ associations, or other forms of market-oriented farmers’ organizations
                         (including companies), primarily formed by federated CIGs and VMGs supported under Component
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1. Each CIG and VMG joining a PO will pay members hip and annual fees, as detailed in PIM.

                         Subcomponent 2.1: Capacity Building of Producer Organizations (IDA US$7 million)

                         8.       The objective of this subcomponent is to build the capacity of business-oriented POs formed
                         by federated CIGs and VMGs organized under Component 1 so that they become profitable.
                         Through their POs, CIG and VMG members can: have a stronger say in the VCs in which
                         theyparticipate; access improved farm inputs, technologies, and agricultural services (including rural
                         finance and extension); and negotiate prices in input and output markets. Project support to POs will
                         be structured around two pillars: (a) organization and capacity building; and (b) financing for
                         enterprise development tailored to the needs of POs and their subscribing member CIGs and VMGs.
                         At the start of the project, each selected PO will be supported to prepare a five-year Enterprise
                         Development Plan (EDP) that will be the main instrument for guiding project investments at the PO
                         level.

                         Subcomponent 2.2: Value Chain Development (US$43 million of which IDA US$38 million)

                         9.       The objective of this subcomponent is to upgrade competitive VCs for integration and
                         economic empowerment of targeted smallholder farmers (organized into CIGs and VMGs) through
                         their respective POs. Project support will be used to finance activities related to: (i) selection,
                         mapping, and organization of competitive nutrition-sensitive VCs for smallholder development; and
                         (ii) VC upgrading through a matching grants mechanism targeted at addressing key investment gaps,
                         including: strengthening of input supply systems (e.g., foundation seed by research institutions,
                         commercial seed production by the private sector, and community-based seed multiplication);
                         development of farm mechanization technologies for CSA practices; value addition and processing;
                         and post-harvest management technologies and facilities (e.g., drying, storage, and warehousing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         receipt system).

                         Component 3: Supporting County Community-Led Development (US$72 million of which IDA US
                         $65 million)

                         10.      The objective of this component is to strengthen the capacity of county governments to
                         support community-led development initiatives identified under Components 1 and 2. This includes:
                         provision of technical advisory services (e.g., public extension services); supervision of SPs; creation
                         of an enabling environment for the private sector and PPPs to operate; and financing of inter-
                         community (e.g., catchment or landscape-wide and larger rural infrastructure) investments based on
                         priorities, as well as employment programs related to O&M of these investments. This component
                         will also enable county governments to establish mechanisms for effective citizen engagement
                         through consultations, sensitizations, capacity building, and partnerships.

                         Subcomponent 3.1: Capacity Building of Counties (IDA US$10 million)

                         11.     This subcomponent will finance the capacity building of participating counties in the area of
                         community-led development of agricultural and alternative livelihoods. The objective is to enable
                         them to support activities under Components 1 and 2. The project will ensure that activities under
                         this subcomponent are coordinated and harmonized with those financed by the National Capacity

                                                                      Page 4 of 13
                         Building Framework (NCBF). In particular, this subcomponent will finance activities related to: (a)
                         stakeholder engagement through sensitization and awareness creation to become familiar with
                         project objectives and “philosophy”; (b) county-level Capacity Needs Assessments (CNAs) and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Capacity-Building Plans (CBPs); (c) training and capacity building, including the development of
                         relevant standard training manuals and Information, Education and Communication (IEC) materials;
                         technical assistance (TA); and logistical support and facilitation of County Technical Departments
                         (CTDs) staff.

                         Subcomponent 3.2: County Investment and Employment Programs (US$60 million of which IDA
                         US$55 million)

                         12.      This subcomponent will finance investments in key agricultural and rural development
                         infrastructure that span across multiple targeted communities, as well as landscape-wide
                         environmental and natural resource management (NRM) investments. It will also finance short-term
                         employment during off-season, particularly for VMGs and unemployed/out-of-school youth.
                         Employment opportunities will largely be created under public works using a cash-for-work
                         approach managed by county governments. Typical investments would include: construction of rural
                         roads, small multipurpose dams, earth pans, small-scale community-managed irrigation systems, and
                         market and storage facilities (under PPP arrangements); restoration of degraded catchments and
                         water courses; and rehabilitation of similar existing infrastructure. Co-financing and the presence of a
                         satisfactory O&M plan, including arrangements for cost recovery or sharing (e.g., through collection
                         of user fees/charges and membership dues), will be prerequisites for counties to access project funds.
                         Component 4: Project Coordination and Management (US$17 million of which IDA US$15 million)

                         13.     This component will finance activities related to national and county-level project
                         coordination, including planning, fiduciary (financial management and procurement) and human
                         resources (HR) management, safeguards compliance and monitoring, development of the MIS and
                         ICT, regular M&E, impact evaluation, and communication and citizen engagement. In addition, in
                         the event of a national disaster affecting the agriculture sector, the project through this component
Public Disclosure Copy




                         would respond via a built-in contingency emergency response facility.

                         Subcomponent 4.1: Project Coordination (US$12 million of which IDA US$10 million)

                         14.      This subcomponent will finance the costs of national and county-level project coordination
                         units (NPCU and CPCUs), including salaries of the contract staff, and O&M costs, such as office
                         space rental, fuel and spare parts of vehicles, office equipment, audits, furniture, and tools, among
                         others. It will also finance the costs of project supervision and oversight provided by the National
                         Project Steering Committee (NPSC) and CPSCs, and any other project administration costs.

                         Subcomponent 4.2: Monitoring & Evaluation and ICT (IDA US$5 million)

                         15.      This subcomponent will finance activities related to routine M&E functions (e.g., data
                         collection, analysis, and reporting) and development of an ICT-based Agricultural Information
                         Platform for sharing information (e.g., technical or extension and business advisory services, market
                         data, agro-weather, and others); it will also facilitate networking across all components. It will
                         finance baseline, mid-point, and end-of-project impact evaluations. The Platform is intended to
                         provide the project and other stakeholders with the ability to: (i) capture real-time geo-referenced
                         data from ongoing project activities using mobile phones connected to network servers; and (ii)
                         geospatially aggregate uploaded data and information received from community, county, and

                                                                      Page 5 of 13
                         national levels, including agricultural statistics.

                         Subcomponent 4.3: Contingency Emergency Response (IDA US$0 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         16.      This zero budget subcomponent will finance natural disasters risk management (DRM)
                         activities in the agriculture sector. The contingency emergency response financing would be
                         triggered: (a) through a formal declaration of a national emergency by the authorized agency of GoK;
                         and (b) upon a formal request from the National Treasury (NT) on behalf of GoK. In such cases,
                         funds from the unallocated expenditure category or from project components would be reallocated to
                         finance emergency response expenditures to meet agricultural crises and emergency needs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will cover areas with high agriculture potential. The specific project area would be
                         determined during the project implementation. The initial scoping of the proposed project
                         interventions suggests that the potential environmental and social impacts will be minimal to
                         moderate, largely reversible and site-specific due to the nature of proposed activities. Minimal
                         adverse social risks are anticipated under this project and no resettlement is expected under any
                         component of this project.

                         Based on the initial screening of the proposed project investments in rural infrastructure (e.g.
                         irrigation, local markets, water conservation structures, etc.) and agriculture value chains (e.g.
                         storage facilities, local level value addition, limited use of agro-chemicals, etc.) the project is likely
                         to trigger four Bank's environmental and social safeguard policies: (i) Environmental Assessment
                         (OP/BP 4.01); (ii) Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); (iii) Pest Management (OP 4.09); (iv) Indigenous
                         Peoples (OP/BP 4.10); and (v) Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The triggering of policies on
                         Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) and Forests (OP/BP 4.36) will be confirmed after the preparation of
                         the environmental and social safeguard instruments is complete.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Given the nature of the proposed interventions with specific micro-project designs and locations not
                         known at the time of project preparation, the project will take a framework approach to managing
                         safeguards. There are three framework reports that will need to be developed by GoK:

                         a)      Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF);
                         b) Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF); and
                         c)      Vulnerable and Marginalized Group Framework (VGMF).
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Gibwa A. Kajubi (GSU07)
                         Svetlana Khvostova (GEN01)

                          6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental                Yes             Proposed project investments in rural infrastructure (e.g.
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                        local markets, water conservation structures, etc.) and
                                                                       agriculture value chains (e.g. storage facilities, local level
                                                                       value addition, limited use of agro-chemicals, etc.), are
                                                                       likely to have negative environmental and social impacts,
                                                                       which however are expected to be small-scale, site-



                                                                         Page 6 of 13
                                                        specific and largely reversible. The area of project
                                                        investments and the design of micro-projects will not be
                                                        known during project preparation, since the project has
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        adopted a Community Driven Development approach.
                                                        The GoK has prepared an ESMF which takes into account
                                                        the natural environment (air, water, and land); human
                                                        health and safety, and social aspects (involuntary
                                                        resettlement, vulnerable and marginalized groups, and
                                                        physical cultural resources). The ESMF describes the
                                                        process of environmental and social assessment, which
                                                        will help the implementing agencies at the national,
                                                        county and local levels to identify, assess and avoid or
                                                        mitigate the potential negative impacts of the proposed
                                                        interventions. The ESMF defines uniform screening
                                                        mechanisms and monitoring procedures for identification
                                                        and management of potential adverse environmental and
                                                        social impacts. The ESMF also includes a capacity
                                                        building and training program to assist the project in
                                                        mainstreaming the safeguards implementation, based on
                                                        the lessons learned from Western Kenya Community
                                                        Driven Development and Flood Mitigation Project
                                                        (WKCDD/FMP) and Kenya Agriculture Productivity
                                                        Project (KAPAP) implementation. The ESMF report also
                                                        provide a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) with
                                                        guidance on the reception, recording, handling, and
                                                        reporting of complaints that may be encountered during
                                                        project implementation. During project implementation
                                                        and based on the environmental and social screening
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        process provided in the ESMF, Environmental and Social
                                                        Impact Assessments/Environmental Social Management
                                                        Plans (ESIAs/ESMPs) shall be developed and relevant
                                                        environmental assessments undertaken where necessary.
                                                        Monitoring and reporting formats have been provided in
                                                        the ESMF and shall be customized to the respective
                                                        micro-projects. The ESMF has gone through public
                                                        consultations during their preparation and will be
                                                        disclosed locally and in the Bank Info Shop prior to
                                                        project appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   A specific focus of the project will be rehabilitation of
                         4.04                           degraded areas to improve rural livelihoods. Some project
                                                        activities for improving catchment management may
                                                        directly or indirectly result in the conversion or
                                                        degradation of natural habitats, such as wetlands and
                                                        streams. The ESMF provides for screening and measures
                                                        to mitigate adverse impact of any activities in the project
                                                        intervention areas.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    Although there may be a need for replacement of trees


                                                         Page 7 of 13
                                                        that may be removed along existing Rights of Way,
                                                        micro-projects will be screened to ensure that they do not
                                                        traverse natural forests. Some project activities, such as
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        small irrigation infrastructure, may indirectly affect
                                                        forested areas. The ESMF provides for screening and
                                                        management measures to mitigate adverse impact of any
                                                        activities in the project intervention areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes    The project activities may indirectly incentivize the
                                                        pesticide and other agro-chemicals use. Overall, the
                                                        project is neither expected to have significant pest
                                                        management issues, nor finance substantial quantities of
                                                        pesticides. However, to guide the project in procurement,
                                                        management and disposal of these chemicals, the ESMF
                                                        includes a chapter on the chemical management and use,
                                                        guide their safe handling, storage and disposal, and
                                                        include training and capacity building activities for
                                                        farmers.
                         Physical Cultural        No    The micro-projects are not expected to traverse areas of
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           cultural or historical importance. In addition, due to the
                                                        community-driven nature of the project activities, the civil
                                                        works are expected to be small scale and localized.
                                                        However, ESMF includes a procedure for handling
                                                        “chance finds”. Chance find procedures will be included
                                                        in contracts and ESMPs.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   The OP. 4.10 is being triggered for Components 1, 2 and
                         BP 4.10                        3. Some of the identified counties (Transnzoia, Kwale,
                                                        Kilifi, Baringo, and Nakuru, among others) have known
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        populations of groups that meet the criteria of OP 4.10.
                                                        Since the location of the micro-projects is as yet
                                                        unknown, a Vulnerable and Marginalized Framework
                                                        (VMGF) is being prepared to guide the preparation of
                                                        plans to mitigate any negative effects and to enhance
                                                        benefits of the NARIGP micro-projects. The VMGF,
                                                        which will be disclosed before project appraisal outlines
                                                        the processes and principles of: (a) screening to determine
                                                        if a proposed sub-project investment will be undertaken in
                                                        the vicinity of vulnerable and marginalized communities;
                                                        and (b) the preparation of a VMGP, including the social
                                                        assessment process, consultation and stakeholder
                                                        engagement, disclosure procedures, communication and
                                                        grievances redress mechanism. A detailed VMGP will be
                                                        prepared for each micro-project once the location is
                                                        identified and screening conducted has determined that
                                                        VMGs are present in the area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   Although no physical resettlement is envisaged, OP4.12 is
                         OP/BP 4.12                     triggered given that some proposed project interventions



                                                         Page 8 of 13
                                                                      are likely to require limited land acquisition especially
                                                                      with regard to the county levels value addition
                                                                      interventions, which will have to be compensated. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      micro-project sites for Components 1, 2 and 3 cannot be
                                                                      identified in advance, therefore a Resettlement Policy
                                                                      Framework (RPF) has been prepared to cover aspects of
                                                                      potential land loss, loss of livelihood, and displacement of
                                                                      land use. The RPF provides guidance during
                                                                      implementation (and prior to any civil works) for
                                                                      determining the necessity of Resettlement Action Plans
                                                                      (RAPs) for micro-projects and the procedures for their
                                                                      preparation, including consultations with potentially
                                                                      affected individuals and households in the project areas.
                                                                      Based on the RPF guidance, each micro-project will be
                                                                      screened, and if RAPs are found to be necessary, they will
                                                                      be prepared, cleared, disclosed and implemented prior to
                                                                      the commencement of any civil works, in accordance with
                                                                      World Bank OP 4.12. The MoDP has experience in the
                                                                      preparation and implementation of the social safeguards,
                                                                      including under the WKCD/FMP. However, since the
                                                                      projects will be implemented at County and Community
                                                                      levels provision has been made for training and capacity
                                                                      building of the NEMA and County officers designated
                                                                      with the implementation of the environmental and social
                                                                      policies and instruments.

                                                                      The RPF will undergo a set of public consultations and
                                                                      will be disclosed in Kenya and in the InfoShop before the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      project appraisal.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No            The project investments do not include dams or irrigation
                            4.37                                      structures that would require application of the policy.
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The NARIGP is assigned EA category B, based on the screening during project preparation. There
                              are no significant and/or irreversible adverse environmental and social issues anticipated from the
                              investments to be financed under the Project. Civil works (small scale irrigation infrastructure,
                              community level value addition processing plants) may lead to relatively minor air and water
                              pollution during the construction phases and, once the works are completed, limited loss of non-
                              critical animal and plant habitats.


                                                                        Page 9 of 13
                           The envisaged environmental risks at project implementation include: (i) new production
                           technologies, which may involve intensified use of fertilizers and pesticide may increase social
Public Disclosure Copy




                           acidity and water pollution; (ii) skills on safe use of agro-chemicals and fertilizers is also limited
                           among smallholder farmers; and (iii) technical capacity to handle implementation and monitoring
                           of the projects’ safeguards instruments is limited and especially at County level.

                           The project impacts were assessed through a screening process and appropriate mitigation
                           measures were proposed in the ESMF prepared by MoDP. The ESMF also contains an
                           environmental and social screening process, including impacts related to natural habitats, pest
                           management and physical cultural resources, as well as mitigation guidelines at the micro-project
                           level.

                           Social risks envisioned in the implementation process include: (i) possibility of elite capture at the
                           community and county levels, thus excluding target groups; (ii) political capture as the project is
                           being launched in the lead up to the national elections in 2017; (iii) leakages of inputs and
                           resources as funds are to be channeled to community groups. These risks will be mitigated through
                           the following: (a) sequencing of project so that in first year focuses on building capacity of farmer
                           organizations at community levels; (b) lobbying and advocacy skills to understand and influence
                           the country integrated development plans use of PICD approach; and (c) applying social
                           accountability tools at community and county levels for transparency.

                           A key principle of the project is inclusion and therefore the VMGF will focus on how to ensure
                           that VMG are aware of the project and can participate. The project is therefore triggering the OP
                           4.10 Indigenous Peoples, which will require the preparation of a VMGF. The VMGF will include:
                           (i) screening to determine presence of VMGs (Indigenous Peoples per OP 4.10 criteria) in the
                           project areas and, if present, (ii) measures to ensure they benefit from the project activities through
                           the preparation of a VMGP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Other risks at the county level include weak capacity to implement and monitor safeguards at the
                           county level as this is a recently devolved function. A training component is included into the
                           project design targeting counties to address this, as well as training for communities and provision
                           for the ESMF, RPF and VMGF to guide development of plans and legal requirements for national
                           gender policy. Socio-cultural issues in some target communities hinder resource allocation/
                           sharing, resource access and use, and equity issues in project implementation, particularly the
                           inclusion of women and youth in the decision-making structures and access to project benefits. For
                           example in some communities a woman can not own a cow. The project will require gender
                           analysis as part of the PICD process and development of the action plan. The functions of
                           managing land acquisition have been devolved to the County land boards, resulting in relays in
                           some counties related to land transactions. In addition, compensation for community land and/or
                           donations of community land for investments may also be challenging. The project has prepared
                           an RPF, which lays out the principles for compensation. As noted, the bulk of the investments are
                           CDD-type, small in size and their impacts are not likely to result in physical resettlement or land
                           acquisition. The investments for value addition will also be sited in a way as to avoid resettlement.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Farmer organizations, communities and County governments will have strengthened their ability
                           to manage their resources in a sustainable manner; will be able to lobby and influence their


                                                                      Page 10 of 13
                           development priorities in the CIDPs and in their own CIGs.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The project builds on lessons-learned and strengths of various existing and on-going operations of
                           the GoK and development partners, including the Bank, especially, the WKCDD/FMP and
                           KAPAP that are both expected to be completed by March 2016. Good practices will also be drawn
                           from the Accelerating Rural Women's Access to Agricultural Markets (GROOTS-Kenya) project
                           being implemented in Nakuru and Kitui Counties. Overall, project coordination and monitoring
                           would be conducted at the national level at the MoDP and Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and
                           Fisheries. However, micro-project level implementation is envisioned to be handled at the County
                           and community level given the CDD focus of the project. While at the national level there is
                           sufficient experience and expertise of handling safeguards related aspects, local level entities are
                           not likely to have such capacity. The county level implementation agencies will be strengthened to
                           provide quality services to the community institutions. As the counties were formed relatively
                           recently, there is still a considerable variation in capacity and resources among the counties
                           (including capacity to manage safeguards), which will take a concerted effort to address. The
                           project has made provision for capacity building and training in the safeguards for County and
                           project staff. The project will work closely with the Devolution Trust Fund and proposed
                           devolution Program-for-Results to ensure capacity building at national and County level agencies
                           and staff tasked with monitoring of environment and social safeguards.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The NAGRIP is a national project targeting rural small and marginal farmers, including women
                           and VMGs and others stakeholders, organized in common interest groups (CIGs).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        18-Dec-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     11-Feb-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        11-Dec-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     11-Feb-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure

                          Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework


                                                                     Page 11 of 13
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       18-Dec-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    11-Feb-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Kenya                                                             11-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       18-Dec-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    11-Feb-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?

                                                                   Page 12 of 13
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ladisy Komba Chengula,Christopher Finch
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)              Date: 21-Mar-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (PMGR)          Date: 21-Mar-2016
                            Manager:

                                                                        Page 13 of 13
