INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA15017
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Sep-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-Oct-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Zimbabwe                    Project ID:  P154861
Project Name: Zimbabwe National Water Project (P154861)
Task Team       Chloe Oliver Viola
Leader(s):
Estimated       05-Oct-2015                 Estimated    23-Nov-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWA01                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Water supply (80%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (20%)
Theme(s):       Rural services and infrastructure (60%), Municipal governance and institution
building (20%), Water resource management (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      20.00             Total Bank Financing:     0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
Borrower                                                                      0.00
Zimbabwe Reconstruction Fund (ZIMREF)                                        20.00
Total                                                                        20.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The proposed project development objective is to iimprove access and efficiency in water services in
selected growth centers and to strengthen planning and regulation capacity for the water and
sanitation sector.
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 15


﻿The project will have three components with indicative costing as below:
Component 1: Growth Center Water and Sanitation Improvements ($14 million)
Component 2: Technical Assistance ($5 million), including (2.1) National Water Resources
Master Plan; (2.2) TA for a Water Services Regulator; (2.3) TA to Local Authorities; (2.4)
Institutional Strengthening of ZINWA; and (2.5) Training
*      Component 3: Project Management ($1 million)
o
Component 1: Growth Center Water and Sanitation Improvements (US$ 14 million): This
component will finance investments in water supply and sanitation rehabilitation and upgrading in 7
growth centers. Detailed designs (including bills of quantities and tender documents) and preliminary
Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA's) were completed for all 7 growth centers in 2014 (with
funding from the A-MDTF) in order to address all short, medium and long term investment needs.
Investments will include physical expansion (within the same public landholding) and rehabilitation
of water treatment works, boreholes, transmission mains, storage and service reservoirs, distribution
system, connections and meter installation and replacement. The works will also include minimal
works to restore operation of the wastewater treatment systems in the project areas. The works
planned will include clearing and desludging, repairs of inlet works and fencing and operators
facilities. The investments are estimated at about US$ 14 million. A summary of the costs for each
growth center (and the respective catchment in parenthesis) is presented below:
Guruve (in Manyame catchment)      $1,507,300
Gutu (Runde) $ 949,200
Lupane (Gwayi)       $2,969,900
Madziwa (Mazowe      $2,698,800
Mataga (Mzingwane    $1,575,400
0
Nembudziya (Sanyati) $2,590,800
Zimunya (Save)$1,772,900
Total $14,064,300
The seven highest priority stations for the purposes of this Project are all termed "Growth Centers"
were selected from the 50 stations, one per water catchment area based the number of beneficiaries
and the expected economic benefit of the Project. The most important consideration for selection of
priority stations was to address underserved areas where mostly the poor live, including where new
communities have come up, or schools and clinics and other public institutions that need a supply of
good, safe water. Practical considerations were also factored in such as the readiness of ZINWA
designs, priority stations needing attention particularly for expansion of networks, as well as taking
into consideration ZINWA's own recommendations. Financial and economic viability was also taken
into account.
Component 2: Technical Assistance (US$ 5 million): Technical Assistance (TA) will be provided to
Page 2 of 15


﻿strengthen the capacity of the relevant national and local institutions needed to ensure the
sustainability of the investments and improve the overall planning, regulation and reform of the
sector. There will be five sub-components of TA:
O
Sub-component 2.1: National Water Resources Master Plan: The Government has requested TA
under the Project to develop a national water resources master plan. The Master Plan will build on
the National Water Master Plan of the early 1990s and the subsequent Catchment Outline Plans
developed in the mid-2000s. The Master Plan is expected to cover the following key areas: a full
understanding of the quantity, quality and spatial distribution of the water resources available in
Zimbabwe (surface water and groundwater); a characterization of the different uses (consumptive
and non-consumptive) and users (energy, domestic, recreational, environment, agriculture, industry,
mining) and an assessment of the varying demands (across catchments, national, sub-national and
trans-boundary); assessment of the resilience of the water resources to climatic variability and
indicative adaptation measures to climate change. The master plan will assess the gap between
supply and demand and update previous supply assumptions using the latest climate change
modelling data. Investment needs for the sector will be assessed as well as other measures needed to
restore meet national development goals. The Terms of Reference for the Master Plan will be
prepared to include due attention to environmental considerations, including (among others) adequate
in-stream environmental flows; protected areas and aquatic habitats of high conservation priority;
environmental criteria for future site selection of dams or other new water infrastructure; and
watershed catchment management. It is expected that MEWC will analyze and outline the
institutional mechanism necessary to manage the TA including the option of strengthening the Water
Resources Sub-Committee of the National Action Committee (NAC) to assume the role of a Steering
Committee for the TA.
Sub-component 2.2: TA for a Water Services Regulator: The Government has decided to set up a
water and wastewater services regulatory authority and has approved a Cabinet Memorandum in
April 2015 to this effect. The memo proposes the setting up of a single sector regulator that would
cover both water resources regulation as well as water and sanitation services. The main purpose of
the regulator will be to balance the interest of the consumer - whose interest is best service at least
cost - with that of providers who are generally a monopoly position, but need to receive predictable
periodic tariff adjustments that are cost reflective and sustainable along with adequate access to water
resources. The regulator will thus ensure that the agreed rules are fairly implemented and that all
a        people are served with at least a basic service and at a minimum acceptable standard. MEWC
requested the Bank to support the setting up of the regulator. Bank support will be through the
proposed Project and through TA from the Water and Sanitation Program. The following areas of
support were proposed:
(i) developing a roadmap for the establishment of the regulator based on international good
practice detailing: institutional options; required legislative amendments; a business and financial
plan for the regulator;
(ii)   south-south learning exchange;
(iii)  integrating or interfacing Service Level Benchmarking (SLB) currently being practiced by
32 municipal councils into the regulatory process; and
(iv)   office setup costs as appropriate.
Sub-component 2.3: TA to Local Authorities: Two activities have been proposed by the Ministry of
Local Government, Public Works and National Housing (MLGPWNH) for consideration under this
sub-component.
Page 3 of 15


﻿TA to support Local Authorities and ZINWA formalize water service agreements: Six of the
proposed investments under this project are all in the jurisdiction of Rural District Councils. The
seventh, Lupane, was re-categorized as an Urban District Council in 2015. As the capacity of these
councils is limited - most not having or being in a position to hire an engineer - MLGPWNH and
O
MEWC confirmed that the councils would need to develop a service provision agreement with an
operator to ensure the sustainability of the proposed investments. In line with the 2013 National
Water Policy all of these Local Authorities - as the Water Service Authority - will need to develop a
water service provision agreement with a service provider for the investment, operation and
maintenance of the water production operations. In some cases this service provision agreement
should also cover sewerage. The project will assist Local Authorities and ZINWA pilot these
agreements, either through formal Water Service Agreements or through Memoranda of
Understanding between both parties. The clear separation of roles between the Water Service
Authority (the Local Authority) and the Water Service Provider (in this case ZINWA) will also allow
for future potential private sector participation through local operators or other.
Promoting Sanitation Improvements in Small Towns: Sanitation in small towns is a major challenge
and institutional responsibility for it is unclear. It is proposed that MLGPWNH will develop a TOR
for a sanitation assessment to be carried out. Based on this assessment, some investments would then
be channeled towards improving identified sanitation needs as appropriate, taking care to avoid any
environmentally sensitive activities or site s, or any involuntary taking of land. In two of the small
towns (Gutu and Zimunya) existing waste stabilization ponds, currently under the management of
ZINWA, will be rehabilitated. Options for community mobilization for sanitation will be identified,
and where necessary potential for community revenues using wastewater implemented (small-scale
irrigation, growth of duckweed, etc). Sanitation promotion and hygiene education will also be
considered during project preparation.
Sub-component 2.4: Institutional strengthening of ZINWA: In 2014, at the request of ZINWA, the
Bank financed a skills audit and strategic gap analysis to identify key areas to strengthen ZINWA.
Three key areas were identified as priorities:
(i) a need to separate the utility and water resources function of ZINWA - as identified in the
National Water Policy;
(ii)   a lack of commercial orientation and
(iii)  a lack of customer focus and poor stakeholder management.
The following areas have been proposed for support under the project.
Improving the commercial and customer care orientation and functions of ZINWA: Financial records
of ZINWA indicate that it is currently not in a good financial situation and is making losses. Some of
the key drivers for ZINWA to be in this situation include high non-revenue water and low revenue
collection. The assessments carried out on ZINWA highlight the institutional inadequacies of
ZINWA as one of the key issues needing attention. There is no full-fledged commercial department
in ZINWA that is charged with managing its day-to-day commercial functions that include (i)
customer care, (ii) dedicated debt management (iii) connections, and (iv) metering; (v) non-revenue
reduction and (v) billing. ZINWA has recently established a "commercial unit", however the
mandate of this unit is to explore new business opportunities for ZINWA. Under the project it is
proposed that a consultant be hired to assist ZINWA to design and setup an effective commercial
services department which shall have as its main functions revenue generation through connections,
metering, billing, and revenue collection including debt management. The consultant will assist
ZINWA in developing/refining its service and customer charters, set up a customer care unit and
Page 4 of 15


﻿propose a road map for a fully-fledged modern and responsive customer care unit. The improvement
in customer care functions will improve the image of ZINWA and lead to better complaints handling
resulting in enhanced willingness to pay by customers. The commercial services department will also
manage customer care function.
o
Citizen Engagement: There is a realization that effective engagement of citizens will lead to better
service delivery and accountability. The Beitbridge Impact Assessment, for example, makes a
number of general recommendations on how to maximize state building dividends in infrastructure
projects, such as: (i) identify and address inequalities that may be long-standing or that have emerged
during recent crises; (ii) support local authorities (in this case RDC/ULA and ZINWA) to clearly
brand improvements in service delivery to ensure citizens recognize that it is government institutions
that are delivering results; and (iii) collect base-line and end-line data on citizen attitudes and
confidence in domestic institutions to assess whether investment has changed citizens perceptions.
Government is moving towards requesting state enterprises including ZINWA to provide people-
centered services. It is also pressing for greater citizen engagement and accountability. The National
Water Policy also states the need for customer and stakeholder involvement as a way of increasing
acco untability in the water sector. In recent months ZINWA has established water committees in
areas where it supplies water including some of the project areas. The project will finance a TA to
develop a citizen engagement and commercialization strategy for ZINWA building on current
initiatives by ZINWA and drawing from the general guidelines and recommendations of the water
policy and other government policy documents. This activity will require close consultation and
collaboration between ZINWA and local authorities. The strategy should address among other things
gender and vulnerable groups including HIV and Aids. The TA should also propose possible
institutional arrangements/realignment of ZINWA to be able to effectively deal with citizen
engagement. Activities including under citizen engagement, which will most likely fall under the
commercial department, will also need to be complementary with the stakeholder consultation under
the safeguards work.
Gender: The Bank will assist the Government to develop a gender strategy for the Project, and
suggested that the Government consider involving the Ministry of Gender in the appropriate way.
Sub-component 2.5: Training: MEWC will develop a training plan, together with ZINWA and other
relevant agencies, for support under the Project. The training plan will include training needs of all
a        project implementing entities, such as MEWC, MLGPW, and Local authorities in the project areas,
but will focus on the operational training needs required by ZINWA to implement the project and
ensure sustainability of the investments. There will also be on-the-job training through mentoring by
consultants hired to support the PIU. The needs assessments have identified capacity gaps in the
areas of utility management (commercial and customer care functions, non-revenue water
management), asset management, project management, procurement, safeguards and, monitoring and
evaluation. From the assessments and discussions with ZINWA and other key stakeholders it is
evident that there is need to strengthen ZINWA, and other agencies, in these areas. ZINWA is also
not familiar with World Bank procedures and policies for project implementation. This is due to the
absence of World Bank support for nearly two decades during which period most government
entities including ZINWA has not implemented Bank financed projects.
Component 3: Project management (US$ 1 million): ZINWA will set up a Project Implementation
Unit (PIU) to manage the project. The PIU will directly manage component 1 and act as secretariat to
the various lead ministries for sub-component 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3. The PIU will be staffed with 5-7 staff,
including a Project Manager and include competence in engineering, procurement, financial
Page 5 of 15


﻿management, safeguards and monitoring and evaluation. The PIU may also have secondees (focal
point officers) from other entities participating in the project. The Project Manager, shall be the link
person with the World Bank and will work closely with each Project Implementation Team (PIT)
established in the catchments. The PIU shall be responsible for monitoring progress in each
O
U         catchment and shall be responsible for all procurement. The PIU shall also be responsible for: (i)
overall coordination of project activities; (ii) managing the project's special account and ensuring
proper and timely project accounting and reporting of project expenditures (iii) preparing
consolidated progress reports. The Project Manager will use the quarterly reports from the PITs in
the catchments to prepare a consolidated progress report. The report should cover: (i) progress to date
in the implementation of the project; (ii) challenges and proposed actions to address them; (iii) status
of the procurement process of key goods and materials; and (iv) status of disbursement and
projection (v) the environmental and social safeguards and (vi) monitoring and evaluation. The PIU
shall submit the report to the Government and the Bank. The PIU will also serve as its Secretariat
and shall coordinate the PSC meetings and prepare minutes of the PSC meetings.
Project Implementation Team: A Project Implementation Team (PIT) will be established at
catchment level to implement the sub-project in the catchment and coordinate all other project
activities that will involve the catchment. The PIT shall comprise the Operations Engineer, financial
support staff, environmental and social staff, secondees from the Local Authorities, and other staff as
appropriate. The Operations Engineer shall be the PIT Team leader and shall report to the Project
Manager and the Catchment Manger via the Operations Manager. The Catchment Manger shall be
tasked with overseeing progress on works in the catchmen t. The PIT will be responsible for day-to-
day activities related to the project. It shall be responsible for drawing/approving specifications of
goods, works and services in the catchment including preparing procurement requests to be
forwarded to the PIU. The PIT shall also be responsible for daily supervision and certification of
works, preparation of payment certificates, receiving and verifying material specifications as well as
maintaining accurate project records (materials, work done and labor and equipment returns). The
PIT shall also oversee the consultants working on activities in the catchment. The PIT is expected to
meet regularly and shall prepare progress reports covering progress to date, disbursement progress ,
update on procurement, safeguards compliance, monitoring and evaluation aspects, bottlenecks
affecting progress and proposed measures to address them and plan of action for remaining works
and, progress and disbursement projection.
o         Monitoring and Evaluation: The project will play close attention to M&E as this is the first
investment project in Zimbabwe in over a decade, and can inform future investments in the water
sector and other sectors. ZINWA will set-up an M&E system in the PIU that will report to the Project
Steering Committee and the Bank. The PIT in each catchment will conduct regular (monthly)
reviews to assess physical progress, progress towards targets including connections, identify
implementation bottlenecks and propose solutions to speed up progress and a program. The PIT will
prepare monthly reports based on these reviews and forward to the PCU. The Project Coordinator
will use the quarterly reports from the catchments to prepare a consolidated progress report. A
consultant will be hire d to assist the PCU and PIT in conducting periodic monitoring and evaluation
and preparing M&E progress reports. The PCU should send the monthly progress report to the SC
and share the same with the Bank.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Water resources in Zimbabwe are managed by the Zimbabwe National Water Authority (ZINWA)
based on the seven national catchment boundaries corresponding to the seven major rivers in
Page 6 of 15


﻿Zimbabwe. The proposed project will be implemented at seven priority water supply schemes
selected, one from each catchment out of a combined fifty assessed schemes. The seven schemes are
Madziwa (Mazowe Catchment), Guruve (Manyame Catchment), Nembudziya (Sanyati Chatchment),
Gutu (Runde Catchment), Mataga (Mzingwane Catchment), Zimunya (Save Catchment) and Lupane
(Gwayi Catchment). These schemes are operational and the local environment is already impacted by
the earlier developments of the schemes and also other related land developments projects by the
local Rural District Councils (RDCs).
The sources of water for the above schemes vary from boreholes (Lupane), rivers (Madziwa, Guruve,
Gutu) and existing dams (Lupane, Zimunya, Mataga and Nembudziya). The schemes fall within
specific districts that are administered by the District Administrators (DA), while development is
championed by the Rural District Council (RDC). The source rivers and dams are multi-purpose,
combining domestic water supply, animal drinking, irrigation water and environmental uses under a
stakeholder-driven water allocation and management system of the Sub- catchment Councils. In all
the cases, the water available is believed to surpass the current combined water demand; this will be
confirmed during appraisal. The targeted project interventions will be implemented in the RDCs'
high- and medium-density planned residential areas. In some cases, the planned areas are already
built up while other areas are not yet built up, although the layouts for the land developments are
already finalized and approved. ZINWA used these approved layouts to develop the distribution
networks.
The exact footprints of the project will be limited to existing transmission routes while the
distribution networks will be limited to the servitude areas provided in the development layouts. In
all project areas, there will be no resettlement due to the planned nature of the targeted distribution
areas. Physical inspections of the project areas showed that the building lines are clear and there are
no physical structures that could have obstructed the installation of the water distribution networks.
There is a minimum of four meters between houses and the internal roads are nine meters wide plus
servitude areas, thereby giving adequate work room for manual trenching without interfering with
household activities. The land on which the project treatment plants and ancillary works will be
located belongs to the RDCs and ZINWA. Where the land belongs to the RDCs, the respective RDCs
have consented to the utilization of such land since the project interventions also benefit the RDCs.
In two of the seven scheme-related RDCs (Gutu and Zimunya), the sanitation services are managed
a         by ZINWA through stabilization ponds. In the other five RDCs, the sanitation systems vary from
septic tanks for institutional and low density areas to pit latrines in some high density areas. The
increased water supply in Gutu and Zimunya is likely to result in direct increase in effluent
generated. In the case of Zimunya, the current stabilization ponds are underutilized; thus the expected
increase in effluent generation is within the existing treatment system capacity. The mitigation for
effluent increase for the Gutu ponds rests in desludging and removal of weeds to restore holding
capacity.
Despite the high level of planning in the project areas, the adequacy of the water sources and the
rehabilitation nature of the project scope, the following issues will be critical for sustainable
implementation of the project:
*      Occupational safety and health considering the heights or depths of the water treatment
infrastructure (treatment plants, sedimentation tanks and storage tanks) and water treatment
chemicals handling. ZINWA has put in place an occupational safety and health management system
to help ensure that employees are attentive to the applicable risks and an emergency preparedness
Page 7 of 15


﻿plan.
*      Public safety and convenience during trenching (along public roadways). The community
was engaged during ESMP formulations and were sensitized to the potential impact. Barricades and
notifications on the ground will be made as part of the ESMP implementation.
O
)         *      Rehabilitation of trenched areas. The requirements were highlighted in the respective ESMPs
and the documents are part of the bidding documents for potential contractors to ensure that the
rehabilitation requirements are part of the project costing for respective contractors.
*      Accommodation facilities on ZINWA or RDC land at subproject sites; currently, in one of
the sites the chemical dosing room is used as office, laboratory, and sleeping room. As part of the
project implementation, ZINWA will ensure sustainable housing arrangements for the operators
staffing the respective water supply stations. Resources have been allocated for Nembudziya and
Madziwa, where the accommodation issue is critical.
* Consultation with water users and efficient allocation during water shortage periods. Key
stakeholders were consulted during project preparation and will continue to be part of the citizen
engagement agenda, during the project life cycle. Arrangements for continuing stakeholder
engagement have been put in place.
*      Water quality management through staff training, adequate equipment and water quality
monitoring. ZINWA will prioritize water quality management in the operational phases of the
respective water supply stations. Procurement of water quality equipment has also been provided for
as part of project preparation.
*      Citizen engagement and feedback.
* Backwash effluent treatment and disposal at environmentally suitable sites. Upgrading of the
backwash effluent handling facilities are provided for in the ESMPs.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
George Campos Ledec (GENDR)
Kristine Schwebach (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental          Yes         This is a Category B project because it involves
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               rehabilitation and expansion of existing rural water supply
infrastructure with only minor negative environmental
and social impacts. An environmental assessment was
carried out through the preparation of an Environmental
and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for each of the
seven sub-projects. The potential adverse impacts were
determined to be localized, of low significance, and
manageable. With respect to water abstraction and use,
there would be no real cumulative impact from the 7
water supply subprojects, because each one is (by design)
in a different watershed catchment. The ESMPs have been
reviewed and cleared by both the Bank Safeguards
Advisor and the national competent authority on EIAs, the
Environment Management Agency (EMA). The ESMPs
were also disclosed locally and in the World Bank's
public information center (InfoShop).
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes         This policy was triggered on a precautionary basis
4.04
Page 8 of 15


﻿considering that the raw water sources include dams and
rivers that constitute a natural habitat for aquatic life. The
project's impact on natural habitats was assessed as part
of ESMP preparation for each subproject. In all project
areas, the water transmission pipelines will not disturb
any sensitive ecosystems like wetlands and marshes. The
transmission mains will follow planned alignments, some
of which traverse areas of natural vegetation although
most would follow existing pipeline routes and road
rights-of-way. In all project areas, the expected impacts
on natural habitat are considered to be minimal. The water
abstraction systems will prevent fish entrainment through
the use of fine mesh wire at the inlet pipes.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No           The project is not expected to affect the health and/or
quality of forests, or bring about changes in forest
management. There are no gazetted forest areas that
would be affected by the project. There will be very
minimal impacts upon non-gazetted wooded areas from
the new rights-of-way for transmission mains. The
ecological assessments of the transmission routes show
that the targeted transmission routes are already impacted
through earlier land developments for housing and road
construction. The Forestry Company of Zimbabwe was
also consulted and indicated that they have no objections
to the project.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No            Construction and operation of the project is not expected
to require any pest, vector, or weed management, other
than periodic manual (non-chemical) removal of aquatic
weeds from around water intake areas. This will be
verified during project appraisal.
Physical Cultural        No           Consultation with traditional leaders and the National
Resources OP/BP 4.11                  Museums and Monuments of Zimbabwe confirmed that
there are no know physical cultural resources within the
project areas. The project area are known and show that
they have already been affected by earlier development
activities, such that any physical cultural resources would
likely have been observed and reported earlier.
Arrangements for close liaison with the traditional
leaders, the Zimbabwe Republic Police, District
Administrator, National Museums and Monuments of
Zimbabwe and the RDCs Chief Executives have been
made for smooth management of chance finds procedures
and implementation of the ESMPs. Contractors will be
informed of the chance finds procedure as precautionary
measure.
Page 9 of 15


﻿Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          There are no people within the project area who meet the
BP 4.10                             Indigenous Peoples criteria of OP 4.10.
Involuntary Resettlement No         The project areas are well planned and have no need for
OP/BP 4.12                          resettlement. There are no encroachments on the road
reserves (rights-of-way) where the water mains would be
installed and the building lines between houses were
observed in all constructed areas. There are no temporary
structures within building lines. Rehabilitation and
expansion of water treatment works would be on existing
ZINWA and RDC landholdings. Some of the targeted
areas are actually new developments that are being
developed and not yet inhabited. Recent field visits have
confirmed that the specific locations of all project-
supported civil works lack human habitation (including by
squatters) and that no private property that would need to
be taken for project works.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    Yes         Following further consultations with the MEWC, review
4.37                                of the project scope, and review of the SADC protocol on
shared water courses in relation to requirements of
OP7.50, it was concluded that this policy is not triggered.
The shared international watercourses applicable to
Zimbabwe and its neighbors are the: (a) Zambezi River,
(b) Limpopo River, (c) Save River, (d) Mazowe River,
and Pungwe River. The raw water sources for the seven
water supply schemes under the project are not directly
from an international waterway, nor are they directly from
a tributary to an international waterways. The raw water
sources are from internal river systems, dams, and
underground sources that are indirectly and distantly
connected to the international waterways through a
minimum of three other larger tributaries, and a minimum
of one hundred kilometers from the international
waterways. This remote relationship between the targeted
water source and the potentially affected international
waterways, together with the scope of the abstraction
volumes give adequate room for natural volumetric
recharge; making the impact of intended raw water
abstraction truly negligible compared to the remaining
flow downstream.
As an example, the Zimunya water supply scheme would
abstract 0.05 megaliters per day from Zimunya Dam (912
mega liters capacity) on Mpudzi River which, in turn,
discharges into Odzi River which eventually discharges
into Save River (an international waterway). The dam
capacity is almost 20,000 times the daily abstraction rate,
making the abstraction negligible in comparison with the
Page 10 of 15


﻿source. The Mpudzi river flows are small when compared
with what is discharged into the Odzi and Save Rivers by
other downstream tributaries (Nyazvidzi, Tanganda,
Devure and Nyanyadzi just to mention a few) to these two
rivers. The water supply station is more than 200
kilometers away from the nearest border point between
Zimbabwe and Mozambique along the Save River. The
above situation of negligible impact on downstream flows
is reflected in all the subproject areas.
Zimbabwe is a signatory to the SADC Protocol on Shared
Water Courses. Article 4 of the Protocol requires
notification of the riparian states whenever the member
state is implementing a planned activity that has
significant negative effect on the water course member
states. The requirement hinges on the "significance" of
the impact of the proposed activity. In this project, the
anticipated negative impact on the quantity or quality of
any international water course is expected to be
insignificant. ZINWA has in place mechanisms to
measure or estimate the impact of the project in terms of
flows while the Environmental Management Agency has
mechanism in place to measure the pollution impacts of
the proposed project on international waterways. These
two organizations, together with the Ministry of Water,
Environment and Climate, are part of the institutional
arrangement under the SADC Protocol to ensure adequate
monitoring and reporting of impacts of individual riparian
states' activities on international waterways. The
institutional arrangement includes the ZAMCOM for
Zambezi River, LIMCOM for Limpopo River and the
Save River Management Strategy. This institutional
arrangement is consistent with the requirements of OP
7.50 Paragraph 3 on Arrangements.
Projects on International  No       Following further consultations with the MEWC, review
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                of the project scope, and review of the SADC protocol on
shared water courses in relation to requirements of
OP7.50, it was concluded that this policy is not triggered.
The shared international watercourses applicable to
Zimbabwe and its neighbors are the: (a) Zambezi River,
(b) Limpopo River, (c) Save River, (d) Mazowe River,
and Pungwe River. The raw water sources for the seven
water supply schemes under the project are not directly
from an international waterway, nor are they directly from
a tributary to an international waterways. The raw water
sources are from internal river systems, dams, and
underground sources that are indirectly and distantly
Page 11 of 15


﻿connected to the international waterways through a
minimum of three other larger tributaries, and a minimum
of one hundred kilometers from the international
waterways. This remote relationship between the targeted
water source and the potentially affected international
waterways, together with the scope of the abstraction
volumes give adequate room for natural volumetric
recharge; making the impact of intended raw water
abstraction truly negligible compared to the remaining
flow downstream.
As an example, the Zimunya water supply scheme would
abstract 0.05 megaliters per day from Zimunya Dam (912
mega liters capacity) on Mpudzi River which, in turn,
discharges into Odzi River which eventually discharges
into Save River (an international waterway). The dam
capacity is almost 20,000 times the daily abstraction rate,
making the abstraction negligible in comparison with the
source. The Mpudzi river flows are small when compared
with what is discharged into the Odzi and Save Rivers by
other downstream tributaries (Nyazvidzi, Tanganda,
Devure and Nyanyadzi just to mention a few) to these two
rivers. The water supply station is more than 200
kilometers away from the nearest border point between
Zimbabwe and Mozambique along the Save River. The
above situation of negligible impact on downstream
flows is reflected in all the subproject areas.
Zimbabwe is a signatory to the SADC Protocol on Shared
Water Courses. Article 4 of the Protocol requires
notification of the riparian states whenever the member
state is implementing a planned activity that has
significant negative effect on the water course member
states. The requirement hinges on the "significance" of
the impact of the proposed activity. In this project, the
anticipated negative impact on the quantity or quality of
any international water course is expected to be
insignificant. ZINWA has in place mechanisms to
measure or estimate the impact of the project in terms of
flows while the Environmental Management Agency has
mechanism in place to measure the pollution impacts of
the proposed project on international waterways. These
two organizations, together with the Ministry of Water,
Environment and Climate, are part of the institutional
arrangement under the SADC Protocol to ensure
adequate monitoring and reporting of impacts of
individual riparian states' activities on international
Page 12 of 15


﻿waterways. The institutional arrangement includes the
ZAMCOM for Zambezi River, LIMCOM for Limpopo
River and the Save River Management Strategy. This
institutional arrangement is consistent with the
requirements of OP 7.50 Paragraph 3 on Arrangements.
Projects in Disputed   No           The project is not located in a disputed area.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Safeguards Policies that were triggered by the project are explained above, together with the
planned management measures. There are no large scale, significant or irreversible negative
impacts accompanying this project, owing to the small scale and rehabilitation focus of the
proposed project. The project would be implemented on existing water supply and treatment
schemes, all of which are relatively small-scale. Physical inspections of the seven project areas
confirmed that there will be no involuntary resettlement.
While no significant negative impacts are expected from the project, there are tremendous positive
impacts in the form of improved water supply for a combined population of more than 50,000
people across the seven project areas. The significance of this positive impact is made more vivid
by the fact that it will especially be felt by the women and girls who usually have the
responsibility for fetching water, sometimes over long distances.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The increase in the water supply has a direct relationship with increase in wastewater. Indirectly,
O
)           the proposed project will increase the potential for water pollution from sewage. The project
provides for the assessment of sanitation needs for the local authorities; it is anticipated that the
sanitation needs arising from the increased water supply will be assessed and plans to address
them will be made, for funding through future projects.
Trench digging for pipeline installation is likely to raise the potential for erosion, in the absence of
adequate rehabilitation. The ESMPs provide for adequate rehabilitation through specific
requirements for civil works contractors to follow.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
In accordance with the recommendations of Zimbabwe's Environmental Management Agency
(EMA), the project's water treatment plants will discharge their effluent indirectly, through
irrigation of bananas or other crops, or discharge onto a grassy lawn. ZINWA will make
arrangements for implementation of indirect effluent discharge back to the water courses.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Measures to address safeguards issues include the following: ZINWA formulated an ESMP for
each of the seven project areas. The ESMPs were reviewed and cleared by both the Zimbabwe
Environment Management Agency (EMA) and the World Bank Safeguards Advisor. The ESMPs
Page 13 of 15


﻿covered all applicable World Bank Safeguard Policies. ZINWA has conducted dam safety
inspections on all project-related dams (Lupane, Zimunya, Mataga and Nembudziya). . These dam
safety reports were submitted to the World Bank. ZINWA has put in place a Project
Implementation Unit (PIU) that includes a full time safeguards expert personnel at head office
O
Q)         level. There is a Project Implementation Team (PIT) at each of the seven catchment offices who
will be responsible for the day to day running of the project on the ground. The PIT also includes a
safeguards specialist The deployment of safeguards personnel at both the project and sub-project
levels will ensure the cohesion of safeguards processes from planning to implementation to
monitoring and evaluation. The personnel at both the head office and the catchment offices are
qualified, with a minimum bachelor of Science degree in natural sciences. The personnel all have a
minimum of 5 years in water quality management and participate in Environmental and Social
Impact Assessments (ESIA) for ZINWA projects. These personnel are also involved in the review
of other developers' ESIAs through ZINWA stake holding to the Environment Management
Agency (EMA) ESIA processes. The project team is satisfied that ZINWA has capacity to plan,
implement and monitor the safeguards issues pertaining to the project.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Stakeholder listing and consultation was conducted extensively with the approval of the regulatory
authority (EMA). The stakeholder listing included clusters of government departments, local
leadership, Local RDCs, NGOs where applicable, womens groups and targeted beneficiaries. Each
of these clusters participated in the formulation of the respective ESMPs and will be continually
involved in the monitoring process for the ESMP implementation. Following the completion of
each safeguards instrument, they were distributed to each catchment office, EMA, District
Administrator and the RDC. Meetings were held with the local communities and beneficiaries as
part of disclosing the safeguards documents.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              30-Sep-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           02-Oct-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[X] No[      NA
report?
Page 14 of 15


﻿If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]   NA [    ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
Ifthe project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [ X]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                     Yes [ X] No [    ]  NA [    ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [    ]
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
O
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Chloe Oliver Viola
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)             Date: 01-Oct-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Alexander E. Bakalian (PMGR)         Date: 01-Oct-2015
Manager:
Page 15 of 15


