INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSAl 158
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Feb-2016
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Feb-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Guinea-Bissau             Project ID:  P151443
Parent       P090712
Project ID:
Project Name: Second Add. Fin, to Rural Community-Driven Development Project (P151443)
Parent Project Rural Community-Driven Development Project (P090712)
Name:
Task Team       Philippe Auffret
Leader(s):
Estimated       12-Dec-2014               Estimated    31-May-2016
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSPO7                      Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General education sector (30%), Other social services (25%), General
agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (30%), Water supply (1 5%)
Theme(s):       Social Safety Nets/Social Assistance & Social Care Services (60%), Other
human development (40%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP Yes
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     13.50            Total Bank Financing:    10.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         0.00
IDA Grant                                                                 10.00
Africa Catalytic Growth Fund (ACGF)                                        3.50
Total                                                                     13.50
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Page 1 of 9


﻿Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The Project Development Objective is to increase access to priority basic social and economic
infrastructures and services in participating communities in at least two regions of Guinea-Bissau.
B. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
3. Project Description
The proposed Additional Financing (AF) would finance the costs to scale-up the Project's
community-driven development activities, and pilot a Cash Transfer program.
More specifically, the proposed Second AF from IDA would:
(i) scale up the target number of community-development plans under the Capacity-building for
Community Development component (Component 1) and the number of micro-projects under the
Community-based Micro-Projects component (Components 2);
(ii) increase resources for the Project Coordination and Monitoring and Evaluation component
(Component 3); and
(iii) pilot a Cash Transfer program to targeted vulnerable households, in poor communities
(Component 6 - new).
The proposed ACGF Grant would: (i) scale up the target number of micro-projects under the
Community-based Micro-Projects component (Components 2); and (ii) increase resources for the
Project Coordination and Monitoring and Evaluation component (Component 3).
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Project location will include both rural and urban areas of Guinea Bissau across all nine regions.
The safeguard arrangements for the activities scaled up under the proposed additional financing
would remain identical to those used by the PCU for the implementation of the current Project: the
Rural Community-Driven Development Project (P090712) and Rural Community-Driven
Development Project - Additional Financing (P 146746), and will comply with the measures outlined
in the Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) prepared, cleared and disclosed in-country and at the WB InfoShop on 03-
Mar-2009 and updated and re-disclosed at the InfoShop and in-country for the AF in December 2013
and March 2014, respectively.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Upulee Iresha Dasanayake (AFCF 1)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The project will finance community determined sub-
Page 2 of 9


﻿Assessment OP/BP 4.01                projects (micro-projects) that will not be known until
implementation. Based on a broad environmental
assessment during preparation, an environmental and
social management framework (ESMF) was prepared and
disclosed both in-country and at the WB InfoShop prior to
the appraisal of the parent project. The ESMF was
updated (to accommodate changes to the project by the
first additional financing in 2013) and re-disclosed at the
WB InfoShop and in-country in December 2013 and
March 2014, respectively.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes          The sub-projects are expected to have benign impact on
4.04                                 natural habitats. All sub-projects are subjected to
approval according to an environmental and social
safeguard check list (ESSC), which has been prepared as
part of the ESMF during preparation of the parent project
and updated to include additional items during the first
AF.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           Not applicable
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes          Micro-projects using non-eligible pesticides are on the
negative list (list of ineligible micro-projects); the ESMF
includes a screening tool and steps to ensure ESMPs are
prepared and appropriate mitigating measures are taken
prior to the implementation of all sub-projects that
involve agricultural activities with potential use of
pesticides and mechanisms of pest control.
Physical Cultural       Yes          Though it is unknown which micro-project sites may
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 contain Physical Cultural Resources (PCR), as a measure
of prudence potential impacts on PCR are assessed in the
context of the ESMF and mitigation measures
commensurate to those impacts, including proper
handling of chance finds, are implemented in the design,
screening, implementation, monitoring of project
activities, in accordance with national and Bank policies
and procedures are included in the ESMF.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           There are no indigenous peoples in the project area.
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         The project interventions will avoid where possible
OP/BP 4.12                           adverse impacts on people, land and other economic
resources and livelihoods. In situations where this cannot
be avoided, the Borrower has prepared and disclosed in-
country and at the Bank InfoShop a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) to address the needs of persons who
will be affected by loss of economic activities, access to
resources, land acquisition and/or involuntary
resettlement. The RPF for the parent project was updated
Page 3 of 9


﻿(during the first AF in 2013) and re-disclosed at the WB
InfoShop and in-country in December 2013 and March
2014, respectively. In addition, where applicable, site-
specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) or
Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs) will be
prepared and disclosed prior to the implementation of
micro-projects.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           Not applicable
4.37
Projects on International  No        Not applicable
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No           Not applicable
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed second Additional Financing (AF) would maintain the Development Objectives
(PDO) of the original Project (P090712). All activities under the proposed AF will be governed by
the projects existing Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) that were prepared, reviewed, approved, and disclosed in-
country and at the Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal of the original project. The ESMF and RPF
were updated for the project's first AF in 2013 and were re-disclosed at the Bank InfoShop and in-
country in December 2013 and March 2014, respectively.
The proposed Additional Financing (AF) would finance the costs to scale-up the Project's
community-driven development activities, and pilot a Cash Transfer program. More specifically,
the proposed Second AF from IDA would: (i) scale up the target number of community-
development plans under the Capacity-building for Community Development component
(Component 1) and the number of micro-projects under the Community-based Micro-Projects
component (Components 2); (ii) increase resources for the Project Coordination and Monitoring
and Evaluation component (Component 3); and (iii) pilot a Cash Transfer program to targeted
vulnerable households, in poor communities (Component 6 - new).
The environmental and social impacts of the activities under the proposed AF would be identical
to those under the original Project and the first AF. Individual micro-projects are small and no
large scale, significant or irreversible impacts are expected as a result of their implementation. The
Environmental and social safeguard risks of micro-projects are the typical ones for a rural CDD
project supporting small scale basic social and economic infrastructures, and might include: (i)
localized degradation/encroachment of natural habitats and associated loss of biodiversity; (ii) soil
degradation and erosion; (iii) decline in water quality; (iv) improper disposal of waste; (v) cutting
of trees; (vi) use of pesticides; and (vii) potential public health concerns. Potential social issues
identified include: loss of/damage to cultural properties and involuntary resettlement, including
loss of access to resources. The environmental and social impacts of the proposed cash transfer
program would not require the preparation of any additional safeguards instruments and will be
Page 4 of 9


﻿subject to the same screening mechanisms currently employed by the PCU for micro-projects. A
project level Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was introduced to the project in 2014 to
receive, record, sort and respond to stakeholder/beneficiary concerns related to project activities.
The ESMF details the environmental and social screening criteria and the mechanisms to be used
during micro-project appraisal. This screening tool includes a checklist designed to detect any
potential negative environmental or social impacts linked to individual micro-projects and steps to
be taken to ensure that appropriate Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and/or
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) are prepared and appropriate mitigating measures are
implemented as necessary. In addition, there is a list of non-eligible micro-projects, which
includes inter-alia: (i) micro-project in natural habitats areas including natural parks; (ii) micro-
project using large quantities of wood coming from the communities and/or cutting trees to free
space for micro-project investments; (iii) micro-projects using non eligible pesticides for
agriculture activities; (iv) micro-projects supporting construction of dams more than three meters
in height; (v) micro-projects supporting private commercial endeavors, etc. The complete list is
included in the ESMF. The ESMF also includes provisions for an annual review for safeguard
compliance and to detect potential cumulative environmental impacts that might arise across
several micro-projects.
With respect to involuntary resettlement, it should be noted that resettlement due to land
acquisition for project activities is expected to be nil or negligible. In the event a micro-project
proposal triggers this policy, the community assisted by the project facilitators would try to avoid
any involuntary resettlement by exploring all viable alternative locations and designs for micro-
projects, and the extent of land acquisition will be kept to a minimum. In the event that land
acquisition cannot be avoided, the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), that was prepared for
the parent project and updated for the first AF in 2013/4, will address the needs of people who will
be affected by loss of economic activities, access to resources and land.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
No long term negative environmental or social impacts are anticipated to arise due to the scaling-
up of activities under component 1-3 and the piloting of the new cash transfer program (6). The
environmental and social screening procedures that are in place to identify and ensure appropriate
mitigation for the current project will apply to the scaled-up components 1-3 and the proposed new
pilot cash transfer program under Component 6.
Implementation will be closely monitored to ensure that these are effective.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not Applicable
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
During preparation of the original Project (P090712), the Government prepared an Environmental
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to
govern the project. These instruments were updated for the first additional financing in 2013/4 and
were re-disclosed both at the World Bank InfoShop and in-country in December 2013 and March
2014, respectively. The processes and procedures defined within the ESMF and the RPF are an
integral part of the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). The PCU has the institutional capacity
Page 5 of 9


﻿to manage the safeguard aspects brought about by the proposed scaling up of Components 1-3 and
the introduction of the new cash transfer pilot. The PCU ensures that micro-projects and LIPWs
activities are fully compliant with safeguard policies and that mitigation measures are
implemented during the micro-projects cycle. These measures include: (i) completion of a
checklist of possible environmental and social impacts prior to the implementation of each micro-
project; (ii) detailed Safeguards Procedures for inclusion in the technical specifications of
contracts; and (iii) specific environmental and social mitigation measures. The specific
environmental mitigation measures for each sub-project would be systematically integrated in all
bidding documents, including the preparation of ESMPs and RAPs.
For this second AF, safeguard compliance would continue to be assured through a three tiered
process. First, at the micro-project preparation stage, beneficiary communities assisted by trained
Facilitators would be required to complete an Environmental and Social Safeguards Checklist
(ESSC) as part of the micro-project funding application. This would help them identify any
safeguard issues of concern, and prompt the incorporation of appropriate mitigation measures into
the micro-project design. Provision exists under the Project to contract specialized technical
assistance to support the preparation of environmental and social management plans and
resettlement action plans when deemed necessary. Second, at the micro-project appraisal stage, the
Regional Advisors (RA) together with relevant regional technical representatives would conduct a
desk and field review of the proposal prior to its approval. The RA's role explicitly includes
verification of the appropriate identification and mitigation of safeguard concerns. Third, at the
Project level, a full-time Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist forms part of the PCU team, and,
working together with the RA and Facilitators in the field is responsible, inter alia, for tracking
safeguard compliance across the Project as a whole and identifying and addressing any issues that
arise during micro-project implementation.
The parent and first AF projects compliance with environmental and social safeguards policies has
consistently been rated as Satisfactory. In addition, recognizing the weaknesses of public
institutions to ensure Project compliance with the environmental and social safeguards, PCU staff
as well as central and local government representatives will continue to be sensitized and trained
on safeguard policies. Training would continue to be organized during Project implementation.
Furthermore, general sensitization of beneficiaries forms part of the formal project communication
strategy.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders include: (i) beneficiary communities, which would continue to identify, prepare
and implement the micro-projects and the LIPWs; (ii) local authorities (regional and sectoral
government, traditional authorities and civil society organizations), which would be participating
in the identification and definition of the LDP; (iii) technical sectoral ministries implicated in the
implementation and ongoing operation of the selected micro-projects, as appropriate, (iv) teachers
and health workers, and (v) hospitals, clinics, patients, care givers and health care works affected
by the Ebola epidemic. Development partners (donors, NGOs, religious organizations, etc.) active
at the local level are also considered important stakeholders. Preparation of the ESMF and RPF
included consultation with representatives of each of these stakeholder groups and discussion of
the safeguard processes and procedures. Particular attention was paid to identifying vulnerable
groups and potentially affected people (based upon the expected micro-project and cash transfer
program).
Page 6 of 9


﻿As part of the preparation of the Additional Financing for the project in 2013, both the ESMF and
the RPF prepared for the parent project were updated (following comprehensive public
consultations) and disclosed in the World Bank InfoShop and in country in December 2013 and
March 2014, Respectively.
In addition, during the December 2014 implementation support mission, a Grievance Redress
Mechanism (GRM) for the project was developed to receive, document and respond to feedback
from project beneficiaries and stakeholders.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              09-Dec-2013
Date of submission to InfoShop                           20-Dec-2013
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Guinea-Bissau                                            13-Mar-2014
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              09-Dec-2013
Date of submission to InfoShop                           20-Dec-2013
"In country" Disclosure
Guinea-Bissau                                            13-Mar-2014
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           NA
Date of receipt by the Bank                              NA
Date of submission to InfoShop                           NA
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [  ] No [ X]  NA[]
report?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Page 7 of 9


﻿Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ]  No [ X ]  NA [  ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA [    ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [  ]  No [ X ]  NA [  ]
Is a separate PMP required?                              Yes[   ] No[X]      NA [    ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a      Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [ X]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [    ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?            Yes [  ]  No [X]    TBD
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [  ]  No [  ]  TBD [X]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Page 8 of 9


﻿Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Philippe Auffret
Approved By
Regional Safeguards    Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)           Date: 12-Feb-2016
Advisor:
Practice Manager/     Name: Stefano Patemostro (PMGR)            Date: 12-Feb-2016
Manager:
Page 9 of 9


