                                  The World Bank
                                  Implementation of the International Comparison Program (ICP) in the Commonwealth of Independent States
                                  (CIS)




                                                    Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                  Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                               Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Feb-2018 | Report No: ISDSC24174




                         Feb 15, 2018                                                                                                Page 1 of 5
                                  The World Bank
                                  Implementation of the International Comparison Program (ICP) in the Commonwealth of Independent States
                                  (CIS)



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                      Project Name                   Environmental Category      Country
                                                           Implementation of the
                                                           International Comparison
                           P166845                         Program (ICP) in the           C - Not Required            World
                                                           Commonwealth of
                                                           Independent States (CIS)
                           Team Leader(s)                  Estimated Date of Approval     Managing Unit               Financing Instrument
                                                                                                                      Investment Project
                           Marko Olavi Rissanen                                           DECAE
                                                                                                                      Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Financing (in USD Million)

                           SUMMARY             -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                     0.26
                           Total Financing                                                                                                        0.26
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                          0.00


                           DETAILS  -NewFin2




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to ensure successful conduct of the ICP activities in the CIS region, and to further
                           institute the ICP as a permanent element of the regional and national statistical program, as per the UNSC
                           recommendation. Furthermore, through the conduct of various activities, the project aims to enhance statistical
                           capacity of the CIS NSOs, especially in relation to economic statistics.

                           C. Project Description
                           To achieve the development objective and key results, the project comprises the following components and
                           activities.

                           1. Arrangement of regional workshops




                         Feb 15, 2018                                                                                                        Page 2 of 5
                                  The World Bank
                                  Implementation of the International Comparison Program (ICP) in the Commonwealth of Independent States
                                  (CIS)




                           The component involves conducting regional workshops that cover the following topics: i) designing ICP
                           surveys; ii) compiling GDP expenditures; iii) conducting quality assurance; iv) sharing knowledge and best
                           practices relating to production of economics statistics; and (v) promoting the uses of PPPs.

                           2. Participation in international meetings and conferences

                           The component aims at ensuring that the national and regional economic statistics and PPP estimates are
                           produced according to the latest methodologies, techniques, guidelines and agreements.

                           3. Preparation of operational materials and calculation of PPP estimates

                           The component involves preparing operational materials for conducting ICP activities and producing PPP
                           estimates and related measures.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           4. Production of knowledge materials and publications

                           The component involves production of knowledge materials relating to economic statistics and publications
                           illustrating regional ICP results.




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          The project activities will not include any physical interventions. Project activities, such as meetings and
                          workshops, will be typically conducted at hotels and/or government offices in project countries' capital cities.



                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          In accordance with its statute regulation, CIS-STAT disposes all necessary institutional tools to carry out
                          safeguard policies.



                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Takeaki Sato, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
                          Aki Tsuda, Social Safeguards Specialist




                         Feb 15, 2018                                                                                                   Page 3 of 5
                                  The World Bank
                                  Implementation of the International Comparison Program (ICP) in the Commonwealth of Independent States
                                  (CIS)




                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project           Triggered?                   Explanation (Optional)
                                                                                                  The project is proposed to be as classified
                                                                                                  as Category C, given no environmental
                                                                                                  impacts are expected since the project
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              No
                                                                                                  consists of training activities that do not
                                                                                                  have potential negative environmental
                                                                                                  impact/risk associated issues.
                                                                                                  The project does not contemplate
                                                                                                  rehabilitation or new works in areas of
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                      No
                                                                                                  natural habitats or that would significantly
                                                                                                  impact natural habitats.
                                                                                                  The project will not finance activities in
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                               No                     forests or that could potentially affect
                                                                                                  forest resources or their management.
                                                                                                  The project does not involve purchase or
                                                                                                  use of pesticides or finance any activities
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                          No
                                                                                                  that could lead to changes in pesticide use
                                                                                                  or pest management practices.
                                                                                                  The project does not contemplate
                                                                                                  rehabilitation or new works that could
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11           No
                                                                                                  potentially affect physical cultural
                                                                                                  resources.
                                                                                                  The project will strengthen the statistical
                                                                                                  capacity of government institutions, and as
                                                                                                  such will not finance any activities affecting
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                    No
                                                                                                  areas where indigenous communities are
                                                                                                  present or to which they have a collective
                                                                                                  attachment.
                                                                                                  The project will strengthen the statistical
                                                                                                  capacity of government institutions and as
                                                                                                  such will not finance any activities that
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12              No
                                                                                                  might lead to land acquisition,
                                                                                                  resettlement, or the restriction of access to
                                                                                                  natural resources.
                                                                                                  The project will neither support the
                                                                                                  construction or rehabilitation of dams nor
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                        No
                                                                                                  will it support other investments which rely
                                                                                                  on services of existing dams.
                                                                                                  The project will not finance activities
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50   No                     involving the use or potential pollution of
                                                                                                  international waterways.
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60            No                     The project will not finance activities in


                         Feb 15, 2018                                                                                                    Page 4 of 5
                                   The World Bank
                                   Implementation of the International Comparison Program (ICP) in the Commonwealth of Independent States
                                   (CIS)



                                                                                                                      disputed areas as defined in the policy.


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? No


                              APPROVALS

                              Team Leader(s):                                  Marko Olavi Rissanen

                              Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Safeguards Advisor:                             Nina Chee                                         09-Feb-2018

                              Practice Manager/Manager:                       Grant James Cameron                               09-Feb-2018


                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.




                         Feb 15, 2018                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 5
