                                  The World Bank
                                  Support to the Preparation of Egypt’s First National Strategy for Development of Statistics




                                                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                    Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Feb-2018 | Report No: ISDSC24161




                         Feb 28, 2018                                                                                             Page 1 of 6
                                  The World Bank
                                  Support to the Preparation of Egypt’s First National Strategy for Development of Statistics



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                       Project Name                   Environmental Category        Country
                                                            Support to the Preparation
                                                            of Egypt’s First National
                           P166814                                                         C - Not Required              Egypt, Arab Republic of
                                                            Strategy for Development
                                                            of Statistics
                           Team Leader(s)                   Estimated Date of Approval     Managing Unit                 Financing Instrument
                           Nistha Sinha, Gabriel Lara                                                                    Investment Project
                                                                                           GPV05
                           Ibarra                                                                                        Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Financing (in USD Million)

                           SUMMARY             -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                        0.00
                           Total Financing                                                                                                           0.00
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                             0.00


                           DETAILS  -NewFin2




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of this activity is to support the national statistical agency in designing the NSDS.

                           C. Project Description
                           1. The project will support CAPMAS in preparing and designing an NSDS with a focus on certain sectors
                           relevant to the economic development of Egypt as outlined in the Egypt 2030. It will identify the challenges
                           and constraints to statistics development through sectorial and national diagnostics.

                           2. A Concept Note has been prepared that outlines the bottom-up or sectoral approach that will be used to
                           design the Egypt NSDS (available as a good practice note http://nsdsguidelines.paris21.org/node/725). Using
                           this approach, a number of sectors will be selected in different waves. In each of these sectors, three things
                           will be done. A high level and intensive advocacy will be undertaken to create awareness about the need for
                           production of good quality statistics and the need for using them to support policy, planning and decision-
                           making processes. Assessments of the state of statistics within sectors will include how the demand is
                           determined (coordination between data producers and users), who produces statistics in the sector and how

                         Feb 28, 2018                                                                                                           Page 2 of 6
                                  The World Bank
                                  Support to the Preparation of Egypt’s First National Strategy for Development of Statistics




                           they are produced, managed and disseminated to users, and how statistics are used in the sector and beyond
                           the sector. Sector Statistics Plan (SSP) will be designed to support further development and use of statistics in
                           the sectors. The Sector Statistics Plans will then be used as building blocks for the design of overall and
                           sector-inclusive NSDS.

                           3. The NSDS will align with global, national and sectoral development agendas. At the global level the NSDS
                           will align with the UN Fundamental Principles of Official Statistics and meet the needs for statistics arising
                           from the need to monitor the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). At the national level, the NSDS will
                           align with the Egypt Sustainable Development Strategy (SDS) 2030. Finally, the NSDS will be designed to meet
                           the statistical needs of sectoral development agendas.

                           4. As planned, the bottom-up approach to developing the NSDS is a time consuming and coordination
                           intensive exercise. The concept note outlines activities taking place over 1.5 years.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           5. A Supreme Council for NSDS will be established by a Decree from the Cabinet, and will outline the
                           roadmap of the NSDS and monitor the design and progress of NSDS design team and Sector Statistics
                           Committees. The responsibilities of this Council will include:

                                   Communication, including at political and highest executive levels, about the NSDS and its processes
                                    thereby ensuring political commitment to NSDS
                                   review and approval of the NSDS roadmap and design structures
                                   determine the nature and schedule of meetings/workshops required during the process
                                   adoption of the vision of the national strategy for the development of statistics
                                   set benchmarks, review and discuss work in progress
                                   propose modalities for feedback to sectors and agree on reporting mechanisms
                                   review and consolidate sectoral outcomes, identify gaps and feed these back to sectors;
                                   review planned outputs in line with international concepts, frameworks, standards, guidelines and
                                    experiences;
                                   participate in consultative meetings for integrating data/information from sectors;
                                   approve Sector Statistics Plans and the overall NSDS

                           6.. NSDS Design Team comprises of high level officials from CAPMAS, Central Bank of Egypt, Ministry of
                           Finance, and Ministry of Planning to design and execute the NSDS. The Under Secretary for Economic and
                           Mobilization Studies at CAPMAS is the NSDS coordinator to ensure smooth implementation of the NSDS
                           process. The responsibilities of the NSDS design team will include:

                                   identify the strengths, weakness, opportunities, and threats (SWOT) of the National Statistical
                                    Strategy (NSS) in Egypt;
                                   propose for approval by the Inter-Agency Statistics Committee the vision for the NSDS for Egypt;
                                   formulate reasonable goals and objectives for attaining the proposed vision and submitting to the
                                    President for approval;
                                   prioritize statistical activities over the lifespan of the NSDS;

                         Feb 28, 2018                                                                                               Page 3 of 6
                                  The World Bank
                                  Support to the Preparation of Egypt’s First National Strategy for Development of Statistics




                                   spearhead the design of the NSDS following internationally agreed standards and best practices;
                                   mobilize and sensitize sectors about the strategic planning process for statistics;
                                   support sectors in undertaking statistical advocacy; identifying core products and data gaps; and
                                    doing quality assessment of existing data in sectors;
                                   support the integration of statistics from the different sources (censuses, surveys, and administrative
                                    sources) into a comprehensive database;
                                   review and ensure adherence to international standards and initiatives in the production of statistics;
                                   promote internal technical coordination in the production of statistical information and the building
                                    of team spirit;
                                   provide for the interface between data users and producers to agree on data priorities and timely
                                    production and use of relevant statistical products;
                                   support the review and formatting of sector plans according to agreed standards and identify areas
                                    with duplication of effort;
Public Disclosure Copy




                                   identify existing capacity gaps in the sectors that call for technical backstopping by CAPMAS.

                           7. Sector Statistics Committees (SSC) will be set up. The NSDS will be sector-tailored in line with Egypt SDS
                           2030. Nine SSCs are envisioned to be created and these will cover the following entities: CAPMAS; Central
                           Bank of Egypt; Ministry of Finance; Ministry of Planning; Ministry of Education; Ministry of Health; Ministry of
                           Local Development; Ministry of Environment; and Ministry of Agriculture. Each SSC will assess the statistical
                           need of their sector and identify the gaps. Their responsibilities will include:

                                   advocate for statistics in the sector (with support from the NSDS design team);
                                   identify major data needs related to the sector – for informing sectoral policies, national
                                    development agenda and achievement of regional and international goals;
                                   prepare a formal inventory of the different data systems being operated by the different stakeholders
                                    in the sector;
                                   identify major offices in the sector currently collecting or compiling statistics;
                                   identify data gaps and priorities for addressing them in line with the sectoral policies, national and
                                    international goals;
                                   identify data collected, methodology and procedures used, coverage, availability and access, levels of
                                    disaggregation, data quality, frequency of updating and utility;
                                   work closely with the NSDS design team and consultants as per the work plan to:
                                         o conduct a stakeholder analysis;
                                         o identify the strengths, weakness, opportunities and threats (SWOT) of institutional statistical
                                            units/sections in line with those of the NSS;
                                         o develop vision, mission statements, and core values for statistical provision in sector; and
                                         o develop Sector Statistics Plans;
                                   Develop strategic actions: organizational development, human resource development, IT
                                    infrastructure development, data improvement and management, monitoring, evaluation and
                                    reporting; and budget development in the sector and any other issues as requested by the Inter-
                                    Agency Committee; and


                         Feb 28, 2018                                                                                               Page 4 of 6
                                  The World Bank
                                  Support to the Preparation of Egypt’s First National Strategy for Development of Statistics




                                   Present the plan at sectoral level to build consensus and prepare the final report to be submitted to
                                    the President of CAPMAS.

                           8. The NSDS preparation is estimated to cost USD 376,770. The TFSCB funds will cover USD 159,420 with the
                           balance being covered by government or funds from other agencies (mainly African Development Bank).
                           TFSCB funds will finance four components:

                                 1. Component 1 (US$ 55,000): Sectoral Assessment. This component will include an initial diagnostic of
                                    9 sectors and will include the preparation of Sectoral Assessments for areas that are critical for the
                                    role they play in Vision 2030 and monitoring of SDGs (such as those covered by Ministry of Finance,
                                    Ministry of Planning, CAPMAS, Ministry of Education, and Ministry of Health.)
                                 2. Component 2 (US$ 60,000): Under this component the preparation and costing of the National
                                    Strategy will be conducted. This will be the lead responsibility of the NSDS design team. This
Public Disclosure Copy




                                    component will also cover the publishing of communication materials. This component will also
                                    benefit from support by the African Development Bank.
                                 3. Component 3 (US$ 39,320): This component includes capacity building activities for core NSDS staff
                                    (NSDS Design Team and SSC). The component will cover the cost of workshops on: (i) NSDS concept
                                    and processes; (ii) effective assessment of statistics for specific sectors; (iii) strategic foundation
                                    (vision, mission, core values), and strategic directions (goals, objectives and initiatives); (iv)
                                    implementation, and monitoring and evaluation of the strategy; and (v) study tour to countries (such
                                    as Uganda and Jordan) where sector-inclusive NSDS has been successfully designed to expose the
                                    team to firsthand experience on the how NSDS are designed and implemented on the ground.
                                 4. Component 4: Project Implementation Support (US$ 5,100). The project will finance the cost of
                                    technical assistance, external financial audits, project management, and communication.




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          The statistics will cover all Egypt, however, no safeguards issues as the project will not involve any civil
                          works.



                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          Not applicable, as the project will not trigger any safeguards policy.




                         Feb 28, 2018                                                                                                    Page 5 of 6
                                   The World Bank
                                   Support to the Preparation of Egypt’s First National Strategy for Development of Statistics




                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Amal Nabil Faltas Bastorous, Social Safeguards Specialist
                          Mohammad Farouk Ibrahim Kandeel, Environmental Safeguards Specialist


                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project                          Triggered?                          Explanation (Optional)
                                                                                                                      The project is limited to technical
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                           No                            assistance and will not involve any civil
                                                                                                                      works.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                   No
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                            No
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Pest Management OP 4.09                                       No
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                        No
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                 No
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                           No
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                     No
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50                No
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                         No


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? No


                              APPROVALS

                              Team Leader(s):                                  Nistha Sinha

                              Approved By

                              Safeguards Advisor:                             Nina Chee                                         21-Feb-2018

                              Practice Manager/Manager:                       Ruth Hill                                         21-Feb-2018


                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.




                         Feb 28, 2018                                                                                                                              Page 6 of 6
