                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA19470
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Aug-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Aug-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Zambia                              Project ID:   P154683
                            Project Name:      Zambia - Mining and Environmental Remediation and Improvement Project
                                               (P154683)
                            Task Team          Sanjay Srivastava
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       06-Sep-2016                 Estimated     16-Dec-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GEN01                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        55.60           Total Bank Financing:     55.60
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                  55.60
                              Total                                                                                        55.60
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To reduce environmental health risks including lead exposure to the local population in critically
                           polluted mining areas in Kabwe, Kitwe, Mufulira and Chingola municipalities
                            3. Project Description
                           The Project includes the following components:

                           Component I ➢❨ Remediation of Contaminated Hotspots and Improvement of Environmental
                           Infrastructure: (Estimated budget US$ 24.6 million)


                                                                        Page 1 of 12
                         The component will finance specific remediation activities and associated environmental
                         infrastructure in Kabwe and Copperbelt areas. These interventions would be prioritized based on a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         standard set of social, environment and economic criteria including assessment of environmental
                         health risks. This component will finance prioritized investments to remediate contaminated hotspots
                         that present immediate and medium term environmental health risks to the community. As the target
                         sites will be identified, comprehensive environmental management plans will be prepared/updated,
                         detailing appropriate remediation plans for all contaminated sites in Kabwe and Copperbelt province.
                         A simple and straightforward methodology will be utilized under the project for evaluating and
                         comparing sites during sites identification, assessing environmental health risks and for prioritizing
                         cost effective interventions. Opportunities to collaborate with the private mining companies in legacy
                         clean-up operations will be explored. Some of the key investments include:

                         ➢❨¢ Sub component 1.1: Remediation of contaminated hotspots and improvement of
                         environmental infrastructure in Kabwe. (Estimated budget US$12m) This will include identification,
                         characterization and remediation of know hotspots of contamination in Kabwe, primarily sites that
                         are in the proximity of the communities. This will include a voluntary in-situ remediation program
                         for households that are highly exposed. An appropriate technique using a combination of preventive
                         and curative approach would be used, such as confinement, containment and treatment. A
                         consultative and voluntary approach would be used to prevent any displacement or land acquisition.
                         The subcomponent will also support associated environmental infrastructure designed to improve the
                         environmental health of the surrounding environment. There is a demand for improved
                         environmental infrastructure for better management of hazardous and solid waste that contributes to
                         exposure to contaminated material that was determined through a process of consultations with
                         affected communities. Two first potential priority areas identified for engineering interventions are:
                         1) The Kabwe Canal, which is a conduit for storm water containing hazardous material and wastes
                         from the closed mining areas, passing through densely populated residential areas. The canal is prone
                         to overgrowth and flooding on an annual basis, which results in overflow of hazardous material into
                         residential backyards; 2) The Kabwe solid waste dump site, which needs to be upgraded to into an
Public Disclosure Copy




                         integrated scientific hazardous and solid waste management facility to provide a location for safe
                         disposal of contaminated material from the residential areas.

                         ➢❨¢ Sub-component 1.2: Rehabilitation of Tailing Dams (TDs) and Mine Closure in Copperbelt
                         Province. (Estimated budget US$ 12.6m) This component aims to assist the GRZ to address some of
                         the accrued environmental liabilities, by piloting closure of a few old mine tailing dams. This would
                         be the first time such closure will be undertaken in Zambia and will allow the demonstration of
                         technical, economic, and institutional feasibility. The choice of the TDs would be determined by
                         GRZ during Year 1 of project implementation using an agreed criteria of ownership ; immediate
                         environmental health impacts and costs to communities; economics of closure; and potential benefits
                         and future use.

                         Component II ➢❨ Enhancing Institutional capacity to strengthen environmental governance and
                         compliance (Estimated budget US$ 13.5 million)

                         This component will strengthen the environmental governance of the mining sector and compliance
                         through a variety of interventions: a) policy support to the Ministry of Mines to improve the
                         effectiveness of the national Environmental Protection Fund (EPF) and prepare subsidiary legislation
                         to support the Mines and Minerals Development Act (2015); b) policy support to the Ministry of


                                                                     Page 2 of 12
                         Environment to prepare regulations to support the Environment Act (2011); c) strengthen the
                         capacity of Mine Safety Department (MSD) to implement the new Mines and Minerals Development
                         Act (2015) that has shifted new responsibilities to MSD, including assessment of environment health
Public Disclosure Copy




                         risks, and inspection of mine safety risks to communities; d) build capacity of the Radiation
                         Protection Agency (RPA) to improve identification and mapping of health risks in critical residential
                         areas where exposure to radioactive material (i.e. Uranium) may be high; e) strengthening the
                         capacity of Zambia Environmental Management Agency (ZEMA) to improve effectiveness of
                         monitoring, compliance, enforcement; and f) improve disclosure of environmental information and
                         public awareness of mining-environmental governance issues through GRZ and the Zambia
                         Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI).

                         ➢❨¢ Subcomponent ➢❨ 2.1: Improving environmental governance in the mining sector.
                         (Estimated budget US$ 5.5 million). This subcomponent will enhance Mining-Environmental
                         Governance and Operationalize Environmental Surety Mechanisms for Mine Closure. The activities
                         will comprise of a combination of interventions involving policy support; strengthening mining and
                         environmental regulations; capacity building support to assist the mining sector agencies, including
                         Ministry of Mines; MSD and RPA. The component will strengthen operational effectiveness of the
                         existing EPF, including mechanisms to identify, finance, implement and monitor feasible
                         environmental and social measures for prioritized contaminated hotspots related to past, present and
                         future mining operations in Central and Copperbelt provinces. Improving the EPF's
                         operationalization will help delineate roles and accountability for past, current and future
                         environmental and environmental-health risks from mining operations; accounting for financial
                         resources needed to meet government obligations to address environmental health risks and
                         liabilities; and clarify the distinction between government-owned liabilities verses private sector
                         responsibilities to regularly and progressively address environmental problems by financing the costs
                         of their mitigation. The policy support would involve review of the Mines and Minerals (EPF)
                         regulations with a view of identifying gaps and weaknesses in the legislation; identifying any
                         omissions, inconsistencies or errors; assessment of the performance and effectiveness of the
                         Environmental Protection Fund from its inception in terms of contributions to the fund, securing of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         bonds and investment of funds; assessment of accuracy of the EPF closure cost calculation guidelines
                         applicable to Zambian conditions; assess the criteria of allocating EPF performance categories. This
                         support would help set up a mechanisms on how to conduct and compile an Environmental
                         Protection Fund audit report for mining operations in Zambia; engagement of key stake holders on
                         improvements to be made on administering of the Mines and Minerals (EPF) Regulations; and
                         suggest measures to strengthen the Mines and Minerals (EPF) Regulations or changes to the
                         regulations.

                         ➢❨¢ The capacity of MSD will be strengthened to enable it to implement its new responsibilities
                         under the 2015 Mines and Minerals Development Act, including assessment of environment health
                         risks; providing guidance to mining companies on mine closure and progressive maintenance of
                         tailing dams so as to minimize risks to the neighboring communities. Capacity building in MSD will
                         consist of a range of training and a review of upgrading equipment and facilities. The activity would
                         assist the MoM to draft mining regulations supporting the 2015 Mines and Minerals Development
                         Act and would assist the Ministry of Environment and ZEMA to develop regulations to support the
                         Environment Act (2011). The activity will review international good practices with respect to benefit
                         distribution from extractive industries and propose regulation to support the Mines and Minerals
                         Development Act (2015). The RPA would be assisted to improve identification and mapping of
                         health risks in critical residential areas where exposure to radioactive waste material may be high.


                                                                     Page 3 of 12
                         Building a broad support base for improved environmental performance by mining companies
                         requires increased awareness and engagement in sector issues by the general public and policy-
                         makers. The activity will also provide support to Zambia EITI regarding mining-environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                         health and mining-environmental governance issues.

                         ➢❨¢ Subcomponent 2.2: Improving environmental compliance, enforcement and public
                         disclosure. (Estimated budget US$ 8 million). This component will strengthen the quality and
                         effectiveness of Environmental Monitoring and Disclosure. The activities will focus on ZEMA to
                         strengthen the quality and effectiveness of environmental monitoring including support to
                         enforcement/legal actions. This will include strengthening ZEMA➢❨ s capacity to review ESIAs,
                         negotiate (and, when necessary, update) ESMPs with investors, issue pollution permits, monitor
                         compliance, and collect fees and fines. The capacity building will include use of modern information
                         tools and GIS based techniques for effective inspection and compliance management. This will be
                         accomplished through a series of enabling interventions, focused on improving availability of
                         monitoring equipment and tools, training of both members of staff and identified honorary inspectors
                         from local authorities. In addition, reporting and public disclosure of area specific environmental
                         information will be designed to provide the general public, private sector and other stake-holders
                         access to environmental information to enable informed decision making. Specific activities will
                         include:

                         ➢❨¢ Designation and appointment of honorary inspectors;
                         ➢❨¢ Procurement and operationalization of environmental monitoring equipment;
                         ➢❨¢ Developing a comprehensive environmental monitoring program;
                         ➢❨¢ Improving enforcement of non-compliant facilities;
                         ➢❨¢ Developing standards and legislation to enhance environmental management;
                         ➢❨¢ Increasing access to and public disclosure of environmental information;
                         ➢❨¢ Operationalizing the Permanent Environment Fund; and
                         ➢❨¢ Environmental management mainstreaming into sectoral ministries and local government
Public Disclosure Copy




                         agencies.

                         Component III: Reducing environmental health risks through localized interventions (Estimated
                         budget US$ 13.5 million).

                         The Municipal councils of Kabwe, Kitwe, Mufilira and Chingola would be supported in identifying
                         areas where environmental health risks to residents relate to lack of environmental services, such as
                         disposal of hazardous and contaminated solid waste material; access to clean drinking water; lack of
                         medical interventions for children and women exposed to lead contamination; and loss of agricultural
                         soil productivity due to acidic exposure from Sulphur di-oxide emission from the past copper
                         smelting operation. The outreach and capacity of citizen monitoring at the local level as well as
                         management of public Information, Education and Communication (IEC) would be strengthened
                         through participating municipal councils in Kabwe and Copperbelt provinces. The component is also
                         aimed to introduce income generation opportunities, including dust suppression and nutritional
                         support micro-project initiatives, in contaminated areas that would enhance community involvement
                         in addressing environmental health risks. A pre-agreed set of selection criteria will be used to
                         identify and implement sub-projects, working closely with the private sector, particularly the mining
                         companies in the project area to identify locally relevant livelihood activities that would enhance
                         income generation opportunities. Specific attention will be given to women and vulnerable
                         community groups in the target areas. All activities will be relatively small, technically simple, and


                                                                     Page 4 of 12
                         cost effective. Collaboration with the private sector on outreach, consultations and community
                         stakeholder engagement will also be explored.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ➢❨¢ Subcomponent ➢❨ 3.1: Strengthening decentralized health and education interventions to
                         reduce environmental health risks. This component will target (more than 10,000) people that are
                         already affected by lead poisoning by conducting testing and assessments, screening, case
                         management and surveillance. This will include assisting local, district, provincial government
                         hospitals and clinics to collect existing data on health related to lead exposure in Kabwe; evaluate
                         project data to strengthen the intervention strategy on health and education of affected population;
                         evaluate the ongoing project to develop a sustainable health and communication strategy to prevent,
                         diagnose and treat lead related problems in Kabwe; evaluate the remediation projects by comparing
                         pre- and post-remediation lead levels; identify risk groups such as pregnant women, older children,
                         scavengers in the targeted areas; identify additional hotspots to be included in the health intervention
                         program. Treatment and nutritional supplements will be provided according to test results while
                         health promotion shall also be conducted regularly in the affected communities. The project will
                         support the development of a case based reporting system including a database. This will support the
                         testing of lead levels in food, using existing laboratory systems and processes.

                         ➢❨¢ Subcomponent 3.2: Support to local income generation and livelihood activities in targeted
                         areas. The component is aimed to introduce income generation opportunities in contaminated areas
                         that would enhance community involvement in addressing environmental health risks. It will provide
                         support to community groups in a form of small grants to organize themselves around productive
                         activities identified in partnership with the private sector in the area, the nature of which will be
                         determined by the beneficiaries based on their demand. The sub-grants will target up to 10 priority
                         communities per year identified in the targeted wards affected by pollution, including support to the
                         efforts of intermediaries and pollution affected people in Kabwe and Copperbelt Province. This will
                         include community-based project implementation and management such as financial and supervisory
                         support to enhance their managerial and technical capacities. Specific attention will be given to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         women and vulnerable community groups in the target areas and these activities will be relatively
                         small, technically simple, and cost effective, with support for establishing value chain linkages. This
                         sub-component will also support the development of a ➢❨ local content➢❨ policy and associated
                         regulations to encourage the development of local suppliers for the mining sector. Collaboration with
                         the private sector and community stakeholder groups will also be explored.

                         Component IV: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (Estimated US$ 4 million):

                         This Component will cover the cost for project management, implementation and supervision of
                         project activities, administration of procurement and financial management, monitoring and
                         evaluation, and safeguards compliance monitoring. The component will cover cost of a unified
                         Project Coordination Unit (PCU) established under the Ministry of Mines, and three Project
                         Implementation Units ( PIUs) set up respectively under MSD, Kabwe Municipal Council and the
                         ZEMA. A Project Management Consultant (PMC), particularly including external experts on
                         technical, financial, monitoring and procurement aspects will be hired by the MoM. The PMC
                         working closely with the PIUs would be responsible for preparing, implementing and monitoring
                         approved investments plans in Kabwe and Copperbelt provinces.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)



                                                                      Page 5 of 12
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Knut Opsal (GSU07)
                         Mwansa Lukwesa (GEN01)
                         Paula F. Lytle (GSU07)
                         Svetlana Khvostova (GEN01)

                         6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental            Yes        The majority of the proposed project activities are
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01               expected to have mostly moderate environmental impacts,
                                                             which can be readily mitigated through an environment
                                                             and social impacts assessment process. However, the
                                                             project was categorized as A, as the Project will support a
                                                             number of higher risk activities, such as the closure or
                                                             rehabilitation of tailing dams; remediation of
                                                             contaminated hotspots in Kabwe; development of solid
                                                             and hazardous waste disposal facility in Kabwe; and
                                                             improving the drainage and flow of Kabwe canal. Other
                                                             planned activities with low to moderate risks include
                                                             capacity building interventions, lab equipment upgrading,
                                                             lead poisoning treatment program for target population in
                                                             Kabwe, and small scale community driven projects in
                                                             support of environmental health outcomes (nutritional
                                                             support, income generation small grants). All site specific
                                                             details and design will be informed through a demand
                                                             driven and consultative approach. Since the exact
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             locations of the activities and scope of works are not yet
                                                             identified, the relevant instrument is an Environmental
                                                             and Social Management Framework (ESMF). An ESMF
                                                             has been prepared, consulted upon, disclosed prior to
                                                             Appraisal. The ESMF guides the screening of the sub-
                                                             projects and their categorization and also the development
                                                             of ESIA and/or ESMP once specific activities and
                                                             locations have been identified. The ESIA/ESMPs will be
                                                             prepared, consulted with local communities and disclosed
                                                             prior to commencement of detailed planning and physical
                                                             works. Management and supervision requirements for the
                                                             physical, chemical and biological environment (waste,
                                                             water and sanitation etc.), health and safety of
                                                             construction workers and safety and security of
                                                             neighboring communities are built into the ESMF.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No         This policy is not triggered in relation to anticipated
                         4.04                                project activities as there are no evidence of direct or
                                                             indirect significant impacts on natural habitats, fauna,
                                                             flora, or biodiversity either due to proximity or due to



                                                              Page 6 of 12
                                                        extended impact during construction and/or operations.
                                                        The ESMF includes guidelines to avoid as much as
                                                        possible projects affecting natural habitats (e.g. by choice
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        of location / alignment of physical investments), as well
                                                        as screening checklists and relevant mitigation measures
                                                        to avoid or, if unavoidable, minimize, mitigate,
                                                        compensate or offset (following the mitigation hierarchy)
                                                        impacts on fauna and flora and natural habitats. Any sub-
                                                        projects negatively affecting critical natural habitats will
                                                        not be considered for financing.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36      No     The policy is not triggered as the project activities are not
                                                        expected to overlap or cause adverse impacts on forestry
                                                        reserves. The ESMF provides measures to avoid potential
                                                        environmental and social impacts, in case of sub-project
                                                        that may be associated with forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     The project will not support the purchasing or use of
                                                        pesticides. The local level interventions for support to
                                                        environmental health will be designed to avoid the use of
                                                        agri-chemicals. The ESMF includes recommendations
                                                        and guidelines for use of non-chemical fertilizers and
                                                        pesticides, where possible.
                         Physical Cultural       Yes    The policy is triggered, and the project ESMF address
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           provisions of OP 4.11, however, there are no known
                                                        objects of cultural significance identified in the project
                                                        areas. In addition the ESMF includes the chance find
                                                        procedures to be used during civil works under
                                                        Component 1.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No    Screening has confirmed the absence in the project area of
                         BP 4.10                        people who meet the criteria of OP/BP4.10.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   OP/BP 4.12 has been triggered as a precautionary
                         OP/BP 4.12                     measure. The proposed project activities do not include
                                                        building any major infrastructure that may require
                                                        displacement or involuntary land taking. The nature,
                                                        scope and design of the project interventions provide an
                                                        opportunity to avoid involuntary resettlement and land
                                                        acquisition. The project however triggers OP/BP 4.12 for
                                                        a possibility in case there may be temporary impacts on
                                                        livelihoods due to restriction of access under Component
                                                        1 or Component 3, such as closing and rehabilitation of
                                                        tailing dams, community driven income generation
                                                        projects; or as part of voluntary in-situ remediation
                                                        program for backyards of households in contaminated
                                                        areas, based on voluntary participation by house owners.
                                                        A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been
                                                        prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed prior to project
                                                        Appraisal. The RPF will guide the development of site



                                                         Page 7 of 12
                                                                       specific Resettlement Action Plans, which will be
                                                                       developed as needed during project implementation. The
                                                                       RPF also provides detailed guidelines on processes for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       undertaking, documenting, and keeping records of
                                                                       voluntary land donations, if any.

                                                                       During the first year of implementation, the project will
                                                                       also develop and disclose a Livelihoods Assessment study
                                                                       to identify enhancement opportunities and support the
                                                                       community based jobs initiatives.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             The policy is not triggered as most tailing dams are not
                            4.37                                       design as water retaining structures. The project would
                                                                       focus on demonstration of environmentally sustainable
                                                                       rehabilitation and safety improvements of the selected
                                                                       TDs.
                            Projects on International   No             No project activities will affect international waterways.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No             There are no disputed areas in the locations targeted for
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                           project implementation.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              OP/BP 4.01 has been triggered and overall, the program has an environmental category A.
                              However, most interventions under the project are not likely to result in significant environmental,
Public Disclosure Copy




                              health or social impacts as they will be designed to reduce environmental health impacts, and
                              address the source of the impact. During the project preparation the following policies were
                              confirmed to be applicable to the project: OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment, OP 4.12
                              Involuntary Resettlement and OP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources.

                             The type of sub-project activities that might cause significant adverse impacts, proposed for
                             funding in the second year of the project include: (a) the closure or rehabilitation of tailing dams
                             and remediation of contaminated hotspots; (b) development of a solid and hazardous waste
                             disposal facility in Kabwe; and (c) improving the drainage and flow of Kabwe canal to reduce the
                             risks of flooding in the neighboring community. Based on the application of the procedures
                             outlined in the ESMF and RPF, site specific ESIA/ESMP, and, if required, RAP will be prepared
                             for all sub projects based on the screening, and publicly disclosed, prior to finalization of the
                             design and commencement of construction. During subproject preparation, the project
                             implementing teams will use an opportunity to use the ESIA/ESMP findings to further improve
                             project designs and minimize adverse impacts while maximizing positive impact on people and
                             environment.

                             Safeguards approach: Since the exact locations and site specific details of the activities and scope
                             of works are not yet identified, the relevant safeguards instrument at appraisal stage is an
                             Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The ESMF provides detailed step-


                                                                        Page 8 of 12
                          by-step processes for identification and screening of critical environment and social risks;
                          procedures for evaluation of significance of environmental risks and impacts; development of site
                          specific mitigation and monitoring plan when subproject details are identified; and institutional
Public Disclosure Copy




                          arrangement for safeguards implementation and capacity building measures. The ESMF provides
                          guidelines for the development of ESIAs and ESMPs that will present mitigation measures to
                          address the potential environmental and social impacts of the Project at the subproject level, once
                          the activities location and scope have been identified.

                          Inclusion of vulnerable groups: The selected municipalities have already implemented a number of
                          initiatives targeting groups such as women headed households, elderly, disabled and youth. The
                          project will provide special attention to these groups with dedicated grant opportunities under
                          Subcomponent 3.2 and targeted sensitization and education campaigns.

                           Avoiding land acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement through project design: The proposed
                           project activities do not include building any major infrastructure that may require displacement or
                           involuntary land taking. The nature, scope and design of the project interventions provide an
                           opportunity to avoid involuntary resettlement and land acquisition. The project however triggers
                           OP/BP 4.12 for a possibility that there may be temporary impacts on livelihoods due to restriction
                           of access under Component 1 or Component 3, such as closing and rehabilitation of tailing dams,
                           community driven income generation projects; or as part of voluntary in-situ remediation program
                           for backyards of households in contaminated areas, based on voluntary participation by house
                           owners. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared, consulted upon, and
                           disclosed prior to project Appraisal. The RPF will guide the development of site specific
                           Resettlement Action Plans, which will be developed as needed during project implementation. The
                           RPF also provides detailed guidelines on processes for undertaking, documenting, and keeping
                           records of voluntary land donations, if any.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The project design is envisioned to contribute to positive long term impacts, including improving
                           the levels of land and water pollution in the target areas, addressing environmental health risks of
                           exposure to lead and providing temporary and permanent job opportunities to project beneficiaries,
                           including the PAPs.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The alternatives will be reviewed at a sub-project level during preparation of the design and ESIA
                           studies. The overall project approach supports participatory and consultative planning process,
                           which provides flexibility in selecting design, technologies, and locations to allow avoiding or
                           minimizing potential negative impacts and maximize potential positive impacts of the proposed
                           activities.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The implementing agencies (MOM, Municipal Councils, MSD, ZEMA, and RPA) currently have
                           limited capacity for implementation of safeguards. Component 4 envisions to address the capacity
                           gaps and provide support to each of the agencies to improve environmental and social
                           management to support ZMERIP activities: (1) initially PIUs will be supported by Project
                           Management Consultant, that has significant experience in implementing the Bank safeguards, (2)
                           by project approval each of the PIUs will designate a focal point for safeguards, who will be


                                                                     Page 9 of 12
                           responsible for oversight of development and implementation of the subproject specific ESIAs/
                           ESMPs and RAPs, and for regular reporting on the quality of safeguards implementation to the
                           respective PIUs, PCU in the Ministry of Mines and the WB.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The project stakeholders include the communities in the target project areas, especially the poor
                           and vulnerable, living in contaminated areas affected by mining activities. The interventions will
                           target about 500 women and unemployed youth in these communities through direct support for
                           income generating activities and enhancements of livelihoods using a community based approach
                           in order to reduce their current exposure to hazardous employment activities. The project design is
                           built on a participatory approach which requires community development activities to be defined,
                           designed, planned and implemented by the local community groups. The project supports
                           Government➢❨ s decentralization agenda, whereby decision making has been devolved to the
                           Municipal councils. The Municipal Councils of Kabwe, Kitwe, Chingola and Mufulira are the
                           implementing agencies for their respective components and will be responsible for designing and
                           implementing activities within their jurisdiction and also be the interlocutors with the local
                           communities for the community development livelihood enhancement activities.

                           In addition to ongoing consultations on the design of subproject activities, the Project team has
                           conducted public consultations on the ESMF and RPF held on June 24, 2016, which were
                           summarized in the documents and publicly disclosed.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         14-Jul-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      21-Aug-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive         09-Aug-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Zambia                                                              14-Jul-2016
                           Comments: The ESMF and RPF (in substantially final form) were disclosed in Zambia for public
                                         consultations and then redisclosed (based on the final version of the documents).
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         14-Jul-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      21-Jul-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Zambia                                                              14-Jul-2016
                           Comments: The ESMF and RPF (in substantially final form) were disclosed in Zambia for public
                                         consultations and then redisclosed (based on the final version of the documents).
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




                                                                     Page 10 of 12
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?




                                                                     Page 11 of 12
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Sanjay Srivastava
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (SA)                    Date: 11-Aug-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Magda Lovei (PMGR)                          Date: 11-Aug-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
