                                  The World Bank
                                  IMPROVING HOUSEHOLD SURVEYS AND ADMINISTRATIVE DATA IN SUDAN: STATISTICAL CAPACITY BUILDING




                                                  Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                              Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Oct-2018 | Report No: ISDSC25098




                         Oct 02, 2018                                                                                           Page 1 of 10
                                  The World Bank
                                  IMPROVING HOUSEHOLD SURVEYS AND ADMINISTRATIVE DATA IN SUDAN: STATISTICAL CAPACITY BUILDING



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                            Project Name                 Environmental Category   Country
                                                                 IMPROVING HOUSEHOLD
                                                                 SURVEYS AND
                           P167988                               ADMINISTRATIVE DATA IN       C - Not Required (C)     Sudan
                                                                 SUDAN: STATISTICAL
                                                                 CAPACITY BUILDING
                           Team Leader(s)                        Estimated Date of Approval   Managing Unit            Financing Instrument
                                                                                                                       Investment Project
                           Alvin Etang Ndip                                                   GPV01
                                                                                                                       Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                           SUMMARY                    -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                         0.50
                           Total Financing                                                                                                            0.50
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                              0.00

                           DETAILS      -NewFinEnh1




                           Non-World Bank Group Financing
                              Trust Funds                                                                                                         0.50
                                  Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building                                                                    0.50


                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the project is to strengthen the capacity of the Central Bureau of Statistics to improve the quality of
                           household poverty survey data and availability of administrative data in education and health sectors by making
                           existing administrative data more available.

                           C. Project Description
                                 1. Description

                           Many developing countries are now benefiting from World Bank loans/grants to implement statistical
                           development projects for strengthening their national statistical systems, with a long-term vision.
                           Unfortunately, the economic sanctions and Sudan’s limited access to concessional development financing


                         Oct 02, 2018                                                                                                        Page 2 of 10
                                  The World Bank
                                  IMPROVING HOUSEHOLD SURVEYS AND ADMINISTRATIVE DATA IN SUDAN: STATISTICAL CAPACITY BUILDING




                           due to the external debt, makes it difficult to have such a project now. Hence, Sudan’s statistical work would
                           rely on donor trust funds. Until Sudan can become eligible again for World Bank loans and set up a more
                           comprehensive project to strengthen its statistical systems (as other countries), it is important to continue to
                           provide support to Sudan through trust funds. This would ensure that Sudan is not be left behind in terms of
                           producing good quality statistics that are fundamental for policy making and monitoring of progress towards
                           national and international development goals (including SDGs, and poverty reduction goals). This fits in very
                           well with the “leave no one behind” theme for this TFSCB Call for Proposals.



                           The proposed project has three core components and a project management component to facilitate project
                           implementation. The core components are designed to help strengthen the statistical capacity of Sudan
                           Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS), thereby strengthening the national statistical systems in general. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                           project components are: (i) Household survey design; (ii) Data analysis and dissemination; (iii) Improving the
                           availability of administrative data. A clear set of activities has been identified under each component which
                           will strengthen the capacity of CBS to improve the quality of poverty and other socio-economic data through
                           a series of trainings and technical assistance. The proposed project components will support these priority
                           areas through building CBS capacity for using ICT in data collection and processing as well as for compiling
                           the data into meaningful statistics to inform policy making.

                           Component 1: Improving the quality of household poverty survey data

                           The Household Budget Survey (HBS) is the official source of poverty and other social indicators in Sudan. CBS
                           implemented HBS 2009 and 2014/15 with funding support by African Development Bank (AfDB). However,
                           significant shortcomings have been identified in HBS 2014/15 that make it non-comparable with HBS 2009.
                           These include the following. Seasonality: The 2009 survey was conducted in a different month than all of the
                           rounds of the new survey. This can introduce a seasonal bias when comparing the 2009 estimates with new
                           estimates. Food Recall: The 2014/15 survey has a food recall period of 10 days instead of 7 days. This implies
                           that different weekdays are covered by the recall depending on the weekday of the interview. In Sudan,
                           consumption is usually higher on Fridays. Thus, households interviewed between Wednesday and Friday are
                           likely to have higher consumption than other households. Consumption Aggregate: The 2014/15 survey
                           includes 49 additional food items and 71 additional non-food items compared to the 2009 survey. Even
                           though the previous survey included ‘other’ items to capture consumption of any items not included, it can
                           be assumed that those additional items were under-reported.

                           While attempts can be made to address the quality and comparability issues between the last two surveys,
                           CBS has requested the World Bank to support Sudan with designing and implementing a new household
                           survey that is consistent with international best practices. Discussions are ongoing regarding implementing a
                           new household survey in Sudan, which will become the benchmark survey that follows international best
                           practices (as opposed to the 2014/15 survey). CBS is interested in working with the World Bank to prepare
                           and implement a new survey. The World Bank is working to help secure funding for the survey, which will



                         Oct 02, 2018                                                                                              Page 3 of 10
                                  The World Bank
                                  IMPROVING HOUSEHOLD SURVEYS AND ADMINISTRATIVE DATA IN SUDAN: STATISTICAL CAPACITY BUILDING




                           provide updated poverty and welfare statistics. This will inform a new Economic Development Plan in 2020
                           as well as World Bank engagements in Sudan.

                           In preparation for a new survey, a clear set of activities have been identified which will strengthen household
                           survey capacity of CBS. The support through the TFSCB funding will be focused on strengthening CBS capacity
                           to prepare and implement the survey in a more cost-effective manner through a series of technical
                           assistance engagement. The following areas of support have been identified:

                                 1. Poverty survey and measurement methodology. The first step will be to hold discussions with CBS
                                    and agree on the methodology for collecting poverty (consumption) data and measuring poverty in
                                    Sudan. The agreed methodology will be documented and will be used for the next household survey,
                                    serving as a benchmark going forward.
                                 2. Training on multi-topic household survey design. This will involve training on the entire process of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                    conducting a survey, from preparation through implementation to dissemination. The project will
                                    support CBS to design of a new survey that will be a benchmark survey going forward, following
                                    recommended international best practices. For example, for the next survey information on food
                                    consumption will be collected using a 7-day recall method rather than 10 days as was done in
                                    2014/15. The survey will be designed to collect data on new indicators relevant to multiple sectors,
                                    aimed at gaining a better understanding of the root causes of poverty as well as a better evaluation of
                                    the progress towards the SDGs.
                                 3. Training on sampling design: HBS 2014/15 included about twelve thousand households, but CBS
                                    believes that there were some issues of representativeness at the State levels. Technical assistance
                                    will be provided to improve the sampling design and representation at geographical levels.
                                 4. Survey modernization using CAPI. CBS plans to move from paper to modernized surveys. One of the
                                    envisaged aspects of modernization of the national systems of survey data collection is the
                                    introduction of Computer Assisted Personal Interview (CAPI) system in Sudan. CAPI technology can
                                    significantly reduce the time lag between data collection and data analysis, dramatically improve data
                                    quality, and reduce survey costs. The ability to integrate household survey data with GPS coordinates,
                                    sensor data, time stamps, audio/video recordings and more opens up new and greater possibilities of
                                    tackling innovative, policy-relevant questions. CBS recently used CAPI (Survey Solutions) for the pilot
                                    agricultural production survey, and they staff express satisfaction with Survey Solutions, requesting
                                    comprehensive training on this application. However, the process of moving CBS to this new
                                    technology, and ensuring sustainability at the level of CBS requires significant capacity building by
                                    CAPI experts in addition to peer-to-peer learning opportunities. The proposed support on CAPI
                                    consists of: (a) training and workshops; (b) working with the IT staff from CBS on setting up the survey
                                    system infrastructure (c) helping in the design and testing of the CAPI household survey instruments -
                                    including real-time consistency checks, supervisor and enumerator supervision, and new ways to deal
                                    with measures and standards; (d) supervision in conducting survey pilot; (e) purchase of tablets; (f)
                                    training on GIS.
                                 5. Pilot household survey: A pilot survey will be implemented based on the new (benchmark)
                                    methodology. This is to ensure that CBS staff put into practice the skills acquired from trainings
                                    received on the various aspects of survey design and implementation using CAPI. The sample size and

                         Oct 02, 2018                                                                                              Page 4 of 10
                                  The World Bank
                                  IMPROVING HOUSEHOLD SURVEYS AND ADMINISTRATIVE DATA IN SUDAN: STATISTICAL CAPACITY BUILDING




                                        areas of coverage for the pilot study will be discussed during project appraisal. The preliminary idea is
                                        to use a sample that includes both rural and urban areas to verify that the new techniques and
                                        methodologies that will be introduced work throughout the country, particularly in rural settings.



                           Component 2: Improving capacity for data analysis, report writing and dissemination

                           This component comprises three sets of hands-on training activities related to data analysis and
                           dissemination and an advanced training course in English.

                                 1. Basic data analysis and reporting. Currently, CBS has limited capacity to analyze the data they collect
                                    and prepare reports. This will include training in cleaning and compiling the survey data. The activities
                                    will include the preparation of a standard approach for data cleaning and quality assurance and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                    production of a fully documented and replicable procedure for data verification, error checking and
                                    correction etc. This activity will require acquisition of statistical software (such as Stata and SPSS) and
                                    relevant ICT equipment including computers. CBS staff will also be trained on using ADePT for
                                    socioeconomic data analysis.
                                 2. Poverty measurement. The project will train CBS in the poverty estimation methodology, including
                                    the estimation of the consumption aggregates, price indicators, and poverty line.
                                 3. Data Dissemination: Open access (open data) to anonymized data is key to enable evidence-based
                                    policy making and social accountability. It also helps statistics producers to justify budget allocations,
                                    which is essential for the sustainability of the project. The project will support the development of
                                    data access and information policies and dissemination practices, especially the dissemination of
                                    micro-data by financing: (i) the formulation and adoption of data dissemination and microdata access
                                    policies and calendar; (ii) the maintenance of CBS website to include a micro-data portal access in line
                                    with open-data principles; (iii) technical assistance and some trainings on micro-data anonymization;
                                    (iv) the improvement and maintenance of CBS website; and (v) training on SQL (Structured Query
                                    Language), one of the world's most popular databasing language, for mastering the basics of querying
                                    databases.
                                 4. Advanced English course for CBS staff. This would help to improve the writing skills of CBS staff,
                                    which is useful for report writing. It would also facilitate work on World Bank projects, particularly for
                                    staff using World Bank procurement and finance systems (STEP and Client Connection).



                           Component 3: Improving statistical coordination and availability of administrative data in education and
                           heath sectors



                           CBS leads in the production and dissemination of national official statistics while it guides the sectoral
                           statistical systems in producing high quality statistics in their domains through development of standards in

                         Oct 02, 2018                                                                                                    Page 5 of 10
                                  The World Bank
                                  IMPROVING HOUSEHOLD SURVEYS AND ADMINISTRATIVE DATA IN SUDAN: STATISTICAL CAPACITY BUILDING




                           concepts, definitions, classifications and methodologies. CBS focuses on surveys and censuses as sources to
                           generate indicators while it supports government ministries, departments and agencies (MDAs) in
                           developing and improving system of Administrative Statistics.



                           Administrative registers are essential elements in the statistical production process. Administrative registers
                           contain data records that have been created as a byproduct of an administrative process. While
                           administrative data has not been created to serve statistical purposes per se, it can be of tremendous value
                           in the statistical production process. Either to supplement the universe from which statistical samples can be
                           drawn, or by using administrative data as proxies for the phenomena that would otherwise be examined
                           through sample surveys. Some of the benefits of using administrative records include: reduced response
                           burden, cost reductions compared to expensive field surveys, potentially shorter lag times from reference
Public Disclosure Copy




                           period to dissemination, wide coverage, etc.



                           CBS needs assistance to help resolve the coordination problems between CBS and statistics-producing MDAs
                           to produce relevant economic and social statistics (administrative data) and disseminate statistical products
                           and services at the national and subnational levels, that could be used for tracking public programs’
                           performance. These coordination problems may result in the duplication of efforts and low-quality statistics
                           with contradictory estimates. This project aims to address these issues through the provision of trainings and
                           technical assistance for CBS and MDAs, as well as modern communication and information technologies and
                           support for CBS to ensure a better coordination among the different statistics producing entities.



                           The key objective of this component is to improve the availability of administrative data on selected key
                           indicators in education and health sectors, by making existing administrative data more available. The main
                           activities and expected outputs include the following.



                           Activities (and outputs)



                                 1. The aim is to focus on two sectors of priority to allow to achieve some benefits quickly in the short
                                    term. Discussions with CBS led to selection of education and health as focus sectors. Lessons learned
                                    from this project could later be used to scale up this activity to include administrative data in other
                                    sectors.




                         Oct 02, 2018                                                                                               Page 6 of 10
                                  The World Bank
                                  IMPROVING HOUSEHOLD SURVEYS AND ADMINISTRATIVE DATA IN SUDAN: STATISTICAL CAPACITY BUILDING




                                 2. Identify related public programs and associated indicators of interest. For example, indicators (based
                                    on administrative data) that would allow to monitor progress towards achieving targets of the
                                    poverty reduction strategy and Sustainable Development Goals.
                                 3. Asses the availability and quality of existing administrative data (for selected indicators), and develop
                                    a plan for improvement.
                                 4. Document and disseminate administrative data. Selected administrative records will be improved
                                    through the application of the DDI standard (already adopted by the CBS) for data documentation
                                    (metadata), geographic reference, and the merging with other administrative records when feasible.
                                    Basic monitoring tools will be developed to help the Ministries of Education and Health, and the
                                    Central Government to track performance of selected public interventions. Tools includes quality
                                    assessment of indicators and administrative records, as well as the development of basic score cards
                                    systems. A workshop will be organized to share lessons learned from this activity with stakeholders.
                                 5. Training for capacity building. Training sessions will be provided to CBS and MDAs staff to assess the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                    quality of administrative data and indicator and define improvements plans. Also, identified staff in
                                    selected Ministries (and local consultants) will be trained to support this work.
                                 6. A User satisfaction assessment will be undertaken, if possible, by conducting a user satisfaction
                                    survey at the beginning and at the end of the project. Individual interviews (e.g. paper questionnaires
                                    or online interviews with SurveyMonkey) and focus group discussions will be considered. This will
                                    allow to access the impact of the activity.
                                 7. Develop a strategy to scale up improvement in administrative data in the middle to long term.
                                    Although this activity will focus on selected programs and/or public services, an expansion to other
                                    public interventions may be done by the client through the development of specific guidelines and
                                    didactic material, and trained civil servants.



                           Upon completion of the activity, the project is expected to help improve the capacity of CBS to better
                           coordinate administrative data among MDAs.



                           Component 4: Project Management

                           Importance of project management in attaining full project implementation. Careful project management is
                           crucial to attain full project implementation. The success of the project depends on bringing together and
                           coordinating of stakeholders comprising users and producers of official statistics. This component will include
                           funds and activities related to project management. For example, the project will strengthen CBS fiduciary
                           functions (procurement and financial management) and project management capabilities. The project will
                           finance training of CBS project core team including the procurement officer, financial management officer.
                           These officers will ensure compliance with procurement, disbursement, and financial management policies
                           and procedures as well as agreed reporting requirements. This component will also finance operational costs
                           related to project implementation (including the use of local consultants as necessary).


                         Oct 02, 2018                                                                                                Page 7 of 10
                                  The World Bank
                                  IMPROVING HOUSEHOLD SURVEYS AND ADMINISTRATIVE DATA IN SUDAN: STATISTICAL CAPACITY BUILDING




                           Project Financing

                           The project will be financed with a grant of US$ 500,000 under the umbrella of Trust Fund for Statistical
                           Capacity Building, TFSCB. The Grant Funding Request (GFR) is being submitted together with the AIS/IN for
                           approval for a period of two years. The Government has strongly committed to support the activities that
                           will be financed by the grant.



                           The project costs by component are as follows:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Project Components                                                                  Total cost (USD)
                           Component 1: Improving the quality of household poverty survey data                 210,000
                           Component 2: Improving capacity for data analysis, report writing and
                                                                                                               130,000
                           dissemination
                           Component 3: Improving statistical coordination and availability of
                                                                                                               114,000
                           administrative data in education and heath sectors
                           Component 4: Project Management                                                     46,000
                           Total Project Costs                                                                 500,000


                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          Sudan. Safeguards responsibility transferred



                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          The Recipient has safeguard measures in place. But this is not relevant for this project since safeguards
                          policies are not triggered.



                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         Oct 02, 2018                                                                                             Page 8 of 10
                                  The World Bank
                                  IMPROVING HOUSEHOLD SURVEYS AND ADMINISTRATIVE DATA IN SUDAN: STATISTICAL CAPACITY BUILDING



                          Tracy Hart, Environmental Specialist
                          Samuel Lule Demsash, Social Specialist


                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project        Triggered?              Explanation (Optional)
                                                                                           There is no need for an environmental
                                                                                           assessment: the work entails desk work (to
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01           No                 design new survey; data collection
                                                                                           methodologies and analysis) and data
                                                                                           collection using field enumerators.
                                                                                           There is no need for an assessment of the
                                                                                           effect
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                           of this project on natural habitats: the work
                                                                                           entails desk work (to design new survey;
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                   No
                                                                                           data
                                                                                           collection methodologies and analysis) and
                                                                                           data
                                                                                           collection using field enumerators.
                                                                                           There is no need for an assessment of the
                                                                                           effect of this project on forests: the work
                                                                                           entails desk work (to design new survey;
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                            No
                                                                                           data collection methodologies and analysis)
                                                                                           and data collection
                                                                                           using field enumerators.
                                                                                           There is no need for an assessment of the
                                                                                           effect of this project on pest management:
                                                                                           the work entails desk work (to design new
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                       No
                                                                                           survey; data
                                                                                           collection methodologies and analysis) and
                                                                                           data collection using field enumerators.
                                                                                           There is no need for an assessment of the
                                                                                           effect of this project on physical cultural
                                                                                           resources: the work entails desk work (to
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11        No
                                                                                           design new survey; data collection
                                                                                           methodologies and analysis) and data
                                                                                           collection using field enumerators.
                                                                                           There is no need for an assessment of the
                                                                                           effect of this project on indigenous people:
                                                                                           the work entails desk work (to design new
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                 No
                                                                                           survey; data collection methodologies and
                                                                                           analysis) and data
                                                                                           collection using field enumerators.
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12           No                 There is no need for an assessment of
                                                                                           involuntary resettlement: the work entails

                         Oct 02, 2018                                                                                           Page 9 of 10
                                   The World Bank
                                   IMPROVING HOUSEHOLD SURVEYS AND ADMINISTRATIVE DATA IN SUDAN: STATISTICAL CAPACITY BUILDING



                                                                                                                      desk work (to design new survey; data
                                                                                                                      collection methodologies and analysis) and
                                                                                                                      data collection
                                                                                                                      using field enumerators.
                                                                                                                      There is no need for an assessment of the
                                                                                                                      effect of this project on the safety of dams:
                                                                                                                      the work entails desk work (to design new
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                     No
                                                                                                                      survey; data collection methodologies and
                                                                                                                      analysis) and data
                                                                                                                      collection using field enumerators.
                                                                                                                      There is no need for an assessment of
                                                                                                                      projects on international waterways: the
                                                                                                                      work entails desk work (to design new
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50                No
                                                                                                                      survey; data collection methodologies and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                      analysis) and data collection using field
                                                                                                                      enumerators.
                                                                                                                      There is no need for an assessment of
                                                                                                                      projects in
                                                                                                                      disputed areas: the work entails desk work
                                                                                                                      (to
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                         No
                                                                                                                      design new survey; data collection
                                                                                                                      methodologies and analysis) and data
                                                                                                                      collection
                                                                                                                      using field enumerators.


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? No


                              APPROVALS

                              Team Leader(s):                                  Alvin Etang Ndip

                              Approved By

                              Safeguards Advisor:                             Nathalie S. Munzberg                              01-Oct-2018

                              Practice Manager/Manager:                       Pierella Paci                                     01-Oct-2018


                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.




                         Oct 02, 2018                                                                                                                            Page 10 of 10
