                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                                         Report No.:ISDSA21385
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated:                 14-Feb-2017
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed               29-Nov-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                          Angola                       Project ID:              P151224
    Project Name:                     Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P151224)
    Task Team Leader(s):              Camilo Lombana Cordoba,Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares,Camilo Lombana
                                      Cordoba
    Estimated Appraisal               16-Nov-2016                  Estimated Board          10-Mar-2017
    Date:                                                          Date:
    Managing Unit:                    GWA08                        Financing                Investment Project
                                                                   Instrument:              Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency                   Recovery) or OP            No
    8.00(Rapid Response to Crises and         Emergencies)?
                                               Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           545.00                        Total Bank Financing: 200.00
    Financing Gap:                100.00
      Financing Source                                                                                      Amount
    Borrower                                                                                                     95.00
    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                     200.00
    FRANCE French Agency for Development                                                                      150.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                             100.00
    Total                                                                                                     445.00
    Environmental Category:           B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?       No

    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the institutional capacity of selected water sector agencies
    and increase water service coverage in target cities.
    3. Project Description
    The proposed project will finance strategic institutional development activities and priority water supply
    investments in the nine-targeted provincial cities of Kuito-Cunje, Huambo, Lubango, Namibe, N'dalatando,
    Malanje, Uige, Dundo, and Luena. Seven of these cities were included under WSIDP I; Namibe and Dundo,
    which have received institutional support from AfDB, are being added under the WSIDP framework. The

                                                    Page 1 of 10
project seeks to harness the momentum created under WSIDP I and will deepen and expand the development
impacts of that project. WSIDP II will include activities designed to strengthen water sector institutions,
including regulatory capacity, utility operations, and water resource management. The proposed institutional
interventions will be coupled with infrastructure investments to address key physical challenges and constraints.
Water supply infrastructure investments will focus on increasing the capacity of systems and expanding water
service coverage, predominately in under-served, low-income, peri-urban areas.

The proposed project has been designed in coordination with the Government's water sector infrastructure
investment program and is strategically aligned with other support to the Angolan water sector. The project is
expected to include four components, as follows:

COMPONENT 1: WATER SUPPLY INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING AND CAPACITY
DEVELOPMENT (US$74 million). This component aims to strengthen the institutional framework for the
water and sanitation sector and build capacity at the Borrower’s water and sanitation agencies at both national
and provincial levels, through:

(a) the provision of technical assistance and operational support for the strengthening of PWSUs’ management
capacities, including the provision of Performance Payments.

(b) the provision of technical assistance and capacity building to IRSEA to build its capacity to fulfil its
responsibilities as the Borrower’s water and sanitation regulator, including: (i) definition of IRSEA’s
organizational structure, staffing and skills requirements; (ii) a beneficiary assessment, (iii) development of
water and sanitation regulatory instruments (including reporting requirements, service standards, cost
accounting standards, and tariff application procedures); (iv) design and development of an information
system/database for the water and sanitation sector; and (v) training and capacity building.

(c) the carrying out of a study on private sector participation in the water sector to assess the potential for such
participation.

COMPONENT 2: WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT (US$35.2 million). This Component aims to
support the strengthening of the institutional framework for water resource management, through the provision
of support for:

(a) INRH central and regional directorates needed for the management of hydro-meteorological information.

(b) INRH at the central level, including: (i) direct advisory and training services to INRH and selected regional
directorates; (ii) the preparation of the INRH Strategic Plan; (iii) design and implementation of a public
awareness and communications campaign; and (iv) design and implementation of an economic instrument for
water resources management.

(c) the design and implementation of an information management system for INRH, including specifications of
hardware and software needed.

(d) the expansion of the Borrower’s hydro meteorological monitoring network consistent with the 2008
recommendations of the World Meteorological Organization (with coverage of 1,875 square kilometers per
station)., including: (i) the reconstruction of prioritized hydrometric stations, including provision of equipment,
services, goods and minor works; (ii) the upgrade of prioritized hydrometric stations to include meteorological
monitoring capabilities; and (iii) the support to manage the hydro meteorological monitoring network.

(e) INRH for: (i) the development and implementation of specific river basin plans, including the


                                                 Page 2 of 10
implementation of priority actions identified under the applicable plan; (ii)the piloting of the instrument for
water resources management developed under Component 2(b)(iv) of the Project, with respect to the Kwanza
River, including a comprehensive water user inventory, consolidation of procedures and instruments for water
use permits, training and workshops with relevant stakeholders, dissemination materials, publications and
evaluation of its impact; and (iii) the preparation of two additional integrated river basin management plans in
the Borrower’s southern coastal region.

(f) INRH for the preparation of a national Dam Safety Plan including : (i) the carrying out of a national
inventory of existing dams and reservoirs, including a description of main characteristics; (ii) an assessment by a
panel of experts of the safety status of prioritized dams, including the preparation of an investment plan and
other activities; (iii) preparation of the legal and regulatory dam safety framework, including institutional
responsibilities, standards and technical safety guidelines; and (iv) the development of a capacity-building
program to support the dam safety related activities described above.

COMPONENT 3: REHABILITATION AND EXPANSION OF WATER SUPPLY PRODUCTION AND
DISTRIBUTION (US$324 million, including supervision costs; US$49.5 million for contingencies). This
component is to support the PWSUs in the development of priority infrastructure to expand system capacity, to
increase service coverage and quality, and to improve the operating efficiency of the production and distribution
systems in target cities, through:
(a) the rehabilitation and expansion of production facilities, including: (i) the carrying out of civil and electro-
mechanical works to improve water production in target cities required to support expanding service coverage;
(ii) expansion and refurbishment of well fields and intake facilities, as well as expansion and refurbishment of
water treatment facilities; (iii) construction of clear-water storage tanks and the rehabilitation and expansion of
transmission infrastructure, including new pipelines, pump stations, telemetry/SCADA, and associated fittings.

(b) the rehabilitation and expansion of distribution systems, including: (i) the development of priority
infrastructure to increase service coverage and improve operational efficiency of the water distribution systems
in target cities; (ii) the rehabilitation of existing and construction of new distribution centers, including
increasing storage with ground tanks and pressure through elevated water towers; (iii) water supply network
expansion and rehabilitation; (iv) installation of district meters and pressure control valves within existing
pipelines; and (v) installation of approximately 186,500 new household connections with meters.

COMPONENT 4: MANAGEMENT AND ENGINEERING SUPPORT (US$62.3 million). This component
provides goods, operational costs, engineering support, training and technical assistance for Project
management, technical oversight, financial management, monitoring and evaluation, implementation of social
and environmental safeguards, as well as other investments in the water sector, including: (a) the carrying out of
engineering and other technical studies; (b) the design and supervision of works and performance contracts; and
(c) support for community consultation and communication activities.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics                  relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The project investments will take place in nine provincial capital cities, as follows: Kuito-Cunje, Huambo,
Lubango, Namibe, N'dalatando-Villa De Lucala, Malange, Uige, Dundo, and Luena (seven of these cities were
included under WSIDP I). In addition, the project will finance the rehabilitation and construction of 35
hydrometric stations nationwide. Given the nature, scale and scope of the infrastructure investments planned, the
potential adverse environmental and social impacts of the project are expected to be moderate, reversible and
temporary. The civil works will be carried out either on land already owed by the Government or along existing
roads right-of-way.

There are no protected areas for nature conservation, species or habitats of particular interest that will be directly


                                                  Page 3 of 10
or indirectly affected. It is expected that most of the potential adverse environmental and social impacts
associated with the project investments will be avoided and/or mitigated through provisions adopted during the
project preparation phase and/or the development of the technical designs.

Since the precise location of Project activities and their footprints will not be known prior to appraisal, the
borrower updated and disclosed an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to comply with
OP/BP 4.01 requirements. The ESMF includes both an environmental and social screening form (ESSF) and a
set of Environmental and Social Clauses (ESC) for project implementers. The ESMF, extensively reviewed by
both the Social and Environmental Safeguards Specialists and cleared by the Regional Safeguards Advisor
(RSA), was disclosed both in-country (September 27, 2016) and at the Bank's external website (October 6,
2016) prior to appraisal. Simultaneously, one site-specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)
and an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for N’dalatando were prepared, consulted upon and
disclosed both in-country and at the Bank's external website (April 29, 2016), as specific implementation details
were already known. The ESIA and ESMP provide detailed guidance to identify safeguards risks and define
mitigation measures of negative environmental and social impacts associated with the expected construction
works.

The proposed WSIDP II project is a repeater of the ongoing WSIDP I project, which is a Category B project.
WSIDP II will finance the same nature of investments as those financed by WSIDP I in largely the same
Provinces in Angola. WSIDP II is also a Category B project. In addition, the locations of infrastructure
investments under both projects are similar—urban areas and rights-of-way of existing roads.

The Borrower has proven experience in managing World Bank-funded operations, both in water and sanitation.
The Borrower had since recurrently prepared, consulted, and disclosed in-country and at the Bank's external
website 19 safeguards documents under WSIP I, including a number of ESMPs for different constructions sites
across the country.

Typical project-supported infrastructure investments include:

(a) Civil, electrical and mechanical works to improve water supply production, which include expansion and
refurbishment of well fields, a water intake, and water treatment plants;
(b) Priority infrastructure to increase service coverage and operational efficiency of the water distribution
system, which include goods and rehabilitation or construction of water distribution centers, increasing water
storage capacity and pressure;
(c) Rehabilitation or expansion of water transmission infrastructure, including new pipelines and pump stations,
as well as rehabilitation and expansion of water supply networks.
(d) Rehabilitation or replacement of hydrometric stations nationwide.
(e) Supply of chlorine, aluminum sulfate, caustic soda, and fuel.

Typical negative environmental and social impacts expected from the project-supported investments:

- Infrastructure investments under (a), (b), and (d) above will be constructed on Government-owned land, in
which similar infrastructure already exists but is in need of expansion or rehabilitation. When carrying out the
field visits, the project team observed that Government properties are partially fenced, free of encroachment
and, in general, well kept. The negative environmental and social impacts expected from the project investments
in these areas will be limited to the construction phase; these impacts will be mitigated through implementation
of the ESMF and the subproject-specific ESIAs/ESMPs. It is expected that there will be little or no land
acquisition in the project, but in case any construction requires land acquisition and/or affects community or
individual livelihoods, Government will follow the provisions of the RPF addressing compensation
requirements. The Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) of WSIDP I will be updated to be used in WSIDP II.


                                               Page 4 of 10
- Infrastructure investments under (c) will be constructed on the existing rights-of-way of roads. During field
visits, the project team observed that the road rights-of-way envisaged for the investments are free of
encroachment, but detailed information about any required land acquisition and/or impact on livelihoods (such
as of street vendors who may eventually use the area) will be available only during the preparation of the
detailed engineering designs. Given the technical a flexibility allowed for the installation of water pipelines, it
will be possible to avoid land acquisition and also impacts on livelihoods. In case these impacts cannot be
avoided, the Government will follow the provisions in the RPF addressing compensation requirements.

In Dundo and Luena, the project will expand the water distribution network and install new connections without
increasing the total production in the systems. The water treatment in Dundo uses the water from the Luachimo
River, which is an affluent of the Congo/Zaire River. The water treatment in Luena uses the water from the
Luena/Lumeje river, which is an affluent of the Zambezi River. Although the project will not increase the
abstraction from the Luachimo and Luena/Lumeje rivers, and the project will not affect the flows of the rivers,
this activity triggers the Policy on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the                     Team
 Kristine Schwebach( GSU07 )
 Paulo Jorge Temba Sithoe( GEN01 )
6. Safeguard Policies That Might Apply
Safeguard Policies                              Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01             Yes            This project is a repeater of WSIDP I, which was
                                                               classified Environmental Category B. The nature,
                                                               scale and scope of the infrastructure investments
                                                               proposed for the project are similar to those
                                                               financed under the original project. Nonetheless,
                                                               the precise location of Project activities, along with
                                                               their footprints will not be known prior to appraisal,
                                                               this policy is triggered to set forth the basic
                                                               principles and prerogatives to be followed to
                                                               comply with safeguards requirements related to due
                                                               to potential negative environmental impacts
                                                               expected during the construction phase.
                                                               The Environmental and Social Management
                                                               Framework (ESMF) has been updated to reflect
                                                               minor changes in the project nature and scope. The
                                                               environmental safeguard tools available at different
                                                               subproject stages, such as the Environmental and
                                                               Social Screening Checklist (ESSC) and the
                                                               Environmental Management Plan (EMP), have
                                                               been reviewed, as well as the environmental clauses
                                                               and penalties for non-conformity to the EMP. If
                                                               needed for certain sub-projects due to foreseen
                                                               negative environmental impacts, an Environmental
                                                               and Social Impact Assessment will be prepared to
                                                               identify, assess and adequately manage those
                                                               impacts. The ESMF updating process was subject
                                                               to broad public consultation in the nine beneficiary


                                                 Page 5 of 10
                                                     cities and has been disclosed in Angola (09/27/2016
                                                     and 10/05/2016) and at the World Bank’s external
                                                     website (10/06/2016).
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              No          There are no sensitive or critical natural habitat
                                                     areas affected by proposed investments.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No          The project does not involve or affect forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No          The proposed project activities do not require the
                                                     use of pesticides or other inputs that trigger this
                                                     policy.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No          The presence of physical cultural resources has not
                                                     been identified in the project area. In addition, the
                                                     project will avoid disturbing or affecting physical
                                                     cultural resources. Nonetheless, civil works
                                                     contracts will include "chance finds" procedures as
                                                     described in the project ESMF.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No          There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes         OP/BP 4.12 is triggered for this project due to the
                                                     nature of the proposed investments; a Resettlement
                                                     Policy Framework (RPF) has therefore been
                                                     prepared that establishes the standards and
                                                     procedures to follow in the event that individual
                                                     investments have been determined to result in
                                                     possible impacts on households and/or businesses.
                                                     The RPF updating process was subject to broad
                                                     public consultation in the nine beneficiary cities and
                                                     has been disclosed in Angola (09/27/2016 and
                                                     10/05/2016) and at the Bank’s external website
                                                     (10/05/2016).The project has been reviewed for
                                                     resettlement issues, and procedures for activities
                                                     that may require land acquisition have been agreed
                                                     with the GoA.

                                                     During the detailed planning and design of
                                                     individual sub-projects, a screening process will
                                                     determine whether or not the resettlement policy is
                                                     triggered due to land acquisition needs, impacts on
                                                     assets, or impacts on livelihoods. It is expected that
                                                     engineers will try to utilize unused government land
                                                     and rights-of-way when designing distribution
                                                     networks in order to reduce the number of affected
                                                     households and businesses. For cases where project
                                                     activities cannot find unused public land for project
                                                     investments, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will
                                                     be prepared based on the guidance and standards set
                                                     forth in the RPF. The RAP will be prepared by the
                                                     Borrower, reviewed and cleared by the World
                                                     Bank, and implemented such that affected persons


                                          Page 6 of 10
                                                                    will receive compensation prior to project activities.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                       No              This policy is not triggered.
    Projects on International Waterways OP/BP Yes                   OP 7.50 International Waterways is applicable to
    7.50                                                            the proposed project, as some of the water supply
                                                                    systems to be supported by the project rely on
                                                                    sources of water interconnected with the
                                                                    Congo/Zaire River and the Zambezi River, which
                                                                    are considered to be international waterways for
                                                                    purposes of the policy. However, the activities to be
                                                                    financed under the project in cities located in
                                                                    international basins (i.e., Dundo and Luena) do not
                                                                    entail the construction of additional treatment
                                                                    capacity, nor the expansion of production facilities.
                                                                    Existing water treatment capacity will be utilized to
                                                                    supply areas that will receive network extensions
                                                                    under the project. For the foregoing reasons, it was
                                                                    determined that the project meets the criteria
                                                                    defined in paragraph 7 (a) of OP 7.50 and is eligible
                                                                    for an exception to notification requirements. That
                                                                    is: the project (a) will not adversely change the
                                                                    quality or quantity of water flows to the other
                                                                    riparian; and (b) will not be adversely affected by
                                                                    other riparians’ possible water use. A Memorandum
                                                                    for Exception to Notification Requirements under
                                                                    OP7.50, Project on International Waterways, was
                                                                    prepared for the project (dated Aug 20, 2015) and
                                                                    approved by the Bank’s Africa Regional Vice
                                                                    President.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60           No              The project is not taking place in disputed areas.
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
    any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    WSIDP II is a repeater project from WSIDP I, and as the majority of project investments are expected to only
    have minor impacts on the environment. The project is classified as Category B in the World Bank’s
    Environmental Assessment classification. Simple environmental management measures are expected to be able
    to adequately manage likely impacts resulting from the project (primarily pollution from wastes/residues on soil,
    eventual oil spills from generator filling, and health and safety risks).

    Although the nature, scale and scope of the infrastructure investments proposed for the project are similar to
    those financed under the original project, the precise location of project activities and their footprints will not be
    known prior to appraisal. The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was therefore
    updated to reflect minor changes in the project nature and scope. The environmental safeguard tools available at
    different subproject stages, such as the Environmental and Social Screening Checklist (ESSC) and the
    Environmental Management Plan (EMP), have been reviewed, as well as the environmental clauses and
    penalties for non-conformity to the EMP. If needed for certain sub-projects due to foreseen negative


                                                      Page 7 of 10
environmental impacts, an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment will be prepared to identify, assess and
adequately manage those impacts (also in accordance with Angolan Environmental Impact Assessment law -
Decree 51/04 of 23 July 2004). The ESMF updating process was subject to broad public consultation in the nine
beneficiary cities and has been disclosed in Angola and at the Bank’s external website (October 6, 2016).

WSIDP II has triggered the following Safeguard Polices: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), due to
potential negative environmental impacts expected during the construction phase, mostly related to public
nuisance, disturbances, and pollution of soils, including waste management; Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP
4.12), because the project may result in temporary or permanent loss of assets, i.e., crops or other means of
income generation; and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50), because the project will finance
activities potentially affecting two international rivers, the Congo/Zaire River and Zambezi River. However, it
was determined that the project meets the criteria defined in paragraph 7 (a) of OP 7.50 and is eligible for an
exception to notification requirements. That is: the project (a) will not adversely change the quality or quantity
of water flows to the other riparian; and (b) will not be adversely affected by other riparians’ possible water use.
A Memorandum for Exception to Notification Requirements under OP7.50, Project on International Waterways,
was prepared for the project (dated August 20, 2015) and approved by the Bank’s Africa Regional Vice
President.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
The civil works and other construction and rehabilitation activities proposed under the project are relatively
small in scale, and the potential adverse environmental and social impacts are expected to be minor, localized,
and easily mitigated. Indirect and long-term impacts are not expected at this time, barring any major cumulative
impacts caused by the larger water sector investments in select target cities that are being implemented in
tandem with some of the activities of this project.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The FCMU—the project implementing agency—updated the ESMF and the RPF originally prepared for WSIDP
I for WSIDP II. The ESMF and RPF have been reviewed by the World Bank’s safeguards specialists and found
to be acceptable. Both the ESMF and RPF include clear guidelines and measures to mitigate any adverse
environmental and social impacts of the project, almost all of which are related to construction. The ESMF
provides a screening process for establishing the level of environmental management required for each type of
project activity.

The Borrower’s capacity to implement environmental safeguard policies during WSIDP I has proven to be
acceptable. The existing FCMU includes two experienced safeguards specialists, and safeguard procedures are
well established. The FCMU-WB will include the existing team and procedures, and the capacity to manage
environmental impacts of WSIDP II is considered to be satisfactory.

The project will finance training and capacity building activities associated with ensuring that the FCMU has
sufficient capacity to implement and supervise the ESMF and RPF, as well as any subsequent Environmental
and Social Management Plans for construction and Abbreviated RAPS throughout project implementation. The
overall budget for the implementation of the ESMF is estimated at U$380,100, of which $110,000 will be spent
on capacity building and training and U$ 273,100 on supervision and implementation activities.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                                                 Page 8 of 10
   Project stakeholders include DNA, the PWSUs, provincial and municipal authorities, community leaders and
   residents where the WSIDP II investments will be made.

   Both the ESMF and RPF were publicly disclosed in-country and in target cities on September 27, 2016
   following open and transparent public consultations with key project stakeholders prior to appraisal of the
   original project. The RPF was disclosed at the Bank’s external website on October 5, 2016. The ESMF was
   disclosed at the Bank’s external website on October 6, 2016. Project beneficiaries were included in the
   consultation process and were consulted directly with respect to the ESMF and RPF. The target audience for the
   public consultations included provincial and municipal governments, civil society, and local communities in the
   cities where the bulk of the project activities will be implemented. The recommendations and discussions were
   included in the final version of the ESMF and RPF. All project beneficiaries have access to the Portuguese
   version of the summaries of the ESMF and RPF in their city.
   .




B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                           18-Apr-2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                                        05-Oct-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




    Angola                                                                       27-Sep-2016
 Comments: Second disclosure on 10/05/2015 in Angola
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                      18-Apr-2016
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                   05-Oct-2016
 "In country" Disclosure
PHRESCTRY




 Angola                                                                     27-Oct-2016
 Comments: Second disclosure on 10/05/2015 in Angola
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [X]        No []         NA          []
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [X]        No []         NA          []
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP                Yes []         No []         NA          []
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                  Yes [X]        No []         NA          []
 framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
 prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards    Yes [X]        No []         NA          []
 or Practice Manager review the plan?

                                                  Page 9 of 10
          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                   Yes []      No []        TBD    []
          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access    Yes []      No []        TBD    []
          to assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means
          of livelihoods)
PHCompliance




          OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?          Yes []      No []        NA     [X]
          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the         Yes [X]     No []        NA     []
          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
          Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and
          sent?
          Has the RVP approved such an exception?
PHCompliance
                                                                          Yes [X]     No []        NA     []
          The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [X]     No []        NA     []
          World Bank's Infoshop?
          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a          Yes [X]     No []        NA     []
          public place in a form and language that are understandable
          and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




          All Safeguard Policies
          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [X]     No []        NA     []
          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
          measures related to safeguard policies?
          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been            Yes [X]     No []        NA     []
          included in the project cost?
          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes []      No []        NA     [X]
          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
          related to safeguard policies?
          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [X]     No []        NA     []
          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
          the project legal documents?


         III. Approval
         Task Team Leader(s):                  Name:Camilo Lombana Cordoba,Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares,Camilo
                                               Lombana Cordoba
         Approved By:
         Safeguards Advisor:                   Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)           Date: 15-Feb-2017
         Practice Manager/Manager:             Name: Jonathan S. Kamkwalala         Date: 28-Jun-2017
                                               (PMGR)




                                                        Page 10 of 10
