INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC14806
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Sep-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Sep-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Morocco                    Project ID:   P151169
Project Name:    Investing in Opportunities for Youth in Morocco (P151169)
Task Team        Gloria La Cava,Diego Angel-Urdinola
Leader(s):
Estimated        01-Dec-2015                Estimated     29-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSU05                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Other social services (60%), Public administration- Other social services (40%)
Theme(s):        Improving labor markets (40%), Participation and civic engagement (60%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     100.00            Total Bank Financing:    85.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
Borrower                                                        15.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development           85.00
Total                                                          100.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The project's proposed development objective (PDO) is to improve access to economic opportunities
and increase the active participation of disadvantaged youth in community life in Morocco.
C. Project Description
The proposed project provides integrated solutions for expanding youth access to opportunities by
combining learning and employability measures with young citizens' engagement. Given the specific
barriers encountered by Moroccan youth, including the high number of discouraged, inactive and


﻿disengaged young men and women, a traditional employment project would not provide the required
spectrum of learning and engagement opportunities tailored to their needs. Therefore, as indicated
below, youth-led community development, soft skills, sports, volunteering, and peer mentoring will
be used as entry points for youth engagement at the local level, although not exclusively, in
Q       preparation for employability interventions and job placement with private sector. While there is hard
evidence on the importance of the early years in shaping all skills, new evidence indicates that some
life skills, which are important for employability, are more malleable than cognitive skills at later
youth ages, such as when young people are in their twenties. Successful interventions at any age
emulate the mentoring and attachment that successful families give their children.
The IYFSs under the proposed project will complement existing formal educational and employment
programs by offering hands-on skills development and referrals to disadvantaged young people in
their respective communities through a "one-stop shop," with the goal of filling the gaps in the
current outreach capabilities of ANAPEC and other national providers. The proposed project is
consistent with GoM's vision to provide engagement and employability opportunities to less-
educated youth across the country. In this context, it will include school dropouts and illiterate youth
through outreach and referrals back into the education system, so that these young people can have
access to further learning and income opportunities available in the private sector.
Component I: Provision of IYFSs at the Local Level (US$75 million)
This component seeks to provide disadvantaged youth access to economic opportunities, encourage
their active participation in community life and ensure basic protection for those who are most at
risk. To meet this objective, the component will finance the provision of IYFS through the
establishment of one-stop shops throughout Morocco, and partnerships with local NGOs, the private
sector, and other relevant agencies. In addition, the component will finance specialized services for
the most vulnerable youth, in partnership with the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and
the National Council of Human Rights (CNDH).
1.1    Provision of IYFSs for Enhanced Economic Opportunities and Community Participation
This subcomponent will support the development and financing of two levels of services: (i) social
and community engagement as well as life-skills and job readiness services (Integration Services),
a       which will be available to all project beneficiaries upon registration and which seek to engage young
beneficiaries in their communities. Each center may provide different set of engagement activities,
depending on its capacity and the needs and interests of its youth; and (ii) a range of more advanced
services geared towards enhanced employability and self-employment opportunities (Employability
Services) for a relatively smaller number of beneficiaries, that is, only those who have completed a
specific number of integration services credit hours and required hours of volunteering. To better
tailor some of these services (and notably training services) to the needs of existing vacancies, the
project will establish very close links with employer federations and existing sectoral employment
observatories, such as the tourism and logistics employment observatories (currently supported by
IFC).
1.2 Support for IYFS Providers
This sub-component will ensure the delivery of IYFS by: (i) providing selected public-owned
facilities technical and in-kind support, to enable them to become one-stop shops; (ii) engaging in
results-based PPPs with Moroccan NGOs and the private sector; and (iii) establishing a referral


﻿system to services offered by other institutions/agencies at the local level, such as the National
Agencies for Vocational Training (OFPPT), ANAPEC, ADS, local employers, and others. This sub-
component will also finance an outreach campaign to encourage eligible project beneficiaries to
register in the one-stop shops and participate in IYFS.With regards to (i), this sub-component will
O
Q)      finance: (a) refurbishment/equipment of existing physical locations; (b) learning platforms and (c)
support for human resource development (for example, center managers, counselors, monitoring/IT
officers, and others). With regards to (ii), this sub-component will provide financial support to
eligible Moroccan private providers and NGOs/CSOs, so that they can in turn provide IYFS and
complement the services delivered through the one-stop-shops. This can include the development of
training tools and curricula, drawing from international best practices, to be used for integration and
employability services. Civil society and public providers implementing and conducting activities for
this project component will be selected through a competitive grant mechanism. The involvement of
civil society and private sector organizations in the delivery of employment and social services will
help address shortcomings in staff and the existing capacity constraints.
1.3 Integration Services for Most Vulnerable Youth
Integration Services for most vulnerable youth will be tailored to adolescents and youth
institutionalized in CPCs under the responsibility of the MYS, taking into consideration that the
profiles, ages, and situations of young people in this subgroup vary markedly. The project will
finance tailored services to this highly vulnerable youth population, including: counseling,
psychosocial support, life-skills development, access to legal services, and information services to
promote social and economic reintegration and follow-up through specialized NGOs. A needs
assessment of adolescents and youth institutionalized in CPCs will inform the specific modalities of
engagement, sequencing of service delivery and referral mechanisms to public services and IYFSs
available in their respective communities. The assessment will also clarify areas of collaboration and
partnership arrangements with UNICEF and CNDH.
Component II: Institutional Development and Project Management (US$10 million)
o
This component supports the MYS capacity to design, implement, monitor, and evaluate cost-
effective youth policies, programs and services across the country. It also emphasizes local level
capacity building and ownership of local institutions of the new IYFSs model and youth participation
o       in IYFS delivery so as to strengthen sustainability prospects. Specifically, this component will
finance several technical assistance (TA) contracts, as well as individual consultants and
expenditures supporting project implementation.
2.1 Institutional Strengthening to Deliver Youth Policies and Programs at the National and Local
Levels
National level: National-level institutional strengthening will be supported through TA to strengthen
(i) national policy implementation capacity; (ii) budget planning and execution; (iii) internal controls;
(iv) reporting; and (v) performance management systems, including communication and IT.
Local-level: Local-level institutional strengthening will be supported through TA to improve the
local planning, delivery and monitoring of youth services at three levels:
(i) Institutional strengthening for local governments aimed at developing the competencies of
public officials on territorial planning and monitoring of youth needs and services in collaboration


﻿with relevant private and public entities such as ANAPEC, ADS, MJs, FFs, CPCs, local NGOs,
religious institutions, and local youth councils and platforms.
(ii)   Capacity building of existing youth facilities aimed at reforming the current centralized
O
U       management to introduce a youth-led/NGO-led management system to ensure greater youth
participation and voice in decision making at the community level. The Fondation Mohamed VI
centers, whose management is contracted out to NGOs, offer relevant models for managing youth
venues.
(iii)  Certification and capacity building for all implementing NGOs, following their preselection
for program implementation is aimed at ensuring fiduciary accountability of interested NGOs while
reducing the risk of funds mismanagement, a hazard noted in recent studies on NGOs' lack of
capacity.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will have a national coverage. While the project will concentrate its efforts to reach out
to disadvantaged young men and women in popular neighborhoods, peri-urban areas, and rural areas,
all regions in Morocco will be covered. The project will include rehabilitation of the facilities but
they are limited to existing sites.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Ministry of Youth has a rather recent experience with the implementation of a 5 million dollar
grant (P144134), supporting Micro-Entrepreneurship for Disadvantaged Youth in the Informal
Sector. However, this is a Category C Project. Therefore training on the World Banks safeguards
policies and procedures will be conducted by the Bank team during preparation. The project will hire
a specialist as needed to review the EMP checklist filled out by sub projects and make sure that
identified mitigation measures are properly implemented.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
O
Fatou Fall (GSURR)
Suiko Yoshijima (GENDR)
o
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         OP/BP 4.01 is triggered because the project will
OP/BP 4.01                              include minor upgrade of the facilities. The potential
adverse environmental impacts are expected but will
be small-scale and site-specific and thus easily
remediable. Therefore the project is classified in EA
Category B.
An EMP checklist for Construction and
Rehabilitation Activities will be used as EA
instrument and the format will be disclosed in-
country and at the info shop prior to appraisal. EMP
checklist format covers typical core mitigation
approaches to civil works contracts with small,


﻿localized impacts. It is accepted that this format
provides the key elements of an Environmental
Management Plan (EMP) or Environmental
Management Framework (EMF) to meet World Bank
Environmental Assessment requirements under OP
4.01. Since EMP Checklist does not address potential
social risks, the team will consider social risks and
impacts related to provisions of services to particular
groups during preparation.
During implementation phase, each sub project will
fill out EMP checklist to identify mitigation
measures to be followed.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No
Forests OP/BP 4.36             No
Pest Management OP 4.09        No
Physical Cultural Resources    No
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/   No            OP 4.12 will not be triggered as the project will not
BP 4.12                                      finance any activities requiring involuntary land
acquisition resulting in either (i) involuntary
resettlement of people and/or loss of (or access to)
assets, means of livelihoods or resources and/or (ii)
involuntary restriction of access to legally designated
parks and protected areas resulting in adverse
impacts on the livelihoods of the displaced persons.
Some activities may involve rehabilitation of existing
facilities on existing lands, without any need for
further land acquisition or other forms of
displacement.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No
Projects on International      No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Nov-2015
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
An EMP Checklist format will be disclosed in-country and at the info shop prior to appraisal. Sub
projects will fill out EMP Checklist during project implementation phase.
5 IV. APPROVALS
O
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Gloria La Cava,Diego Angel-Urdinola
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Nina Chee (SA)                         Date: 15-Sep-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Ellen Hamilton (PMGR)                  Date: 16-Sep-2015
Manager:


