                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC19956

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Sep-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:              Lebanon                       Project ID:      P161766
                            Project Name:         Lebanon MoPH Statistical Capacity Building Project
                            Team Leader(s):       Nadwa Rafeh
                            Estimated Date        20-Sep-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:        GHN05                         Lending          IPF
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.38315                       Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building                                             0.38315
                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed development objective of this grant is to strengthen the capacity of the MoPH Statistics
                           Department to provide better data for informed policy on key health sector performance issues.

                           The program aims to achieve this objective by improving MoPH information database and building
                           the analytical skills of its staff.
                           C. Project Description
                           Proposed Activities:

                           The MoPH recognizes that data and information management is vital to the success of planned
                           reforms to improve the efficiency and access to health services, address equity, and improve
                           transparency and governance in key areas, including hospital and primary health care, morbidity and
                           mortality, and health financing. To achieve these objectives, the MoPH collaborated in several
                           projects in the past with several agencies mainly with World Health Organization (WHO) and the
                           United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). This included the work on births and deaths➢❨ data
                           collection from the Ministry of Interior and Municipalities (MOIM) through MOPH district health
                           offices; and the Maternal Neonatal Mortality Notification System, which collects data from hospitals
                           on maternal and neonatal deaths. Currently, the SD is collaborating with WHO in a major initiative
                         aimed at collecting certificates of death for the Beirut Governorate through the MOIM.

                         The proposed program will build on these achievements as well as on past and existing WB projects
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in Lebanon, namely:

                         i)      The Second Emergency Social Protection Implementation Support Project (P111849),
                         Component II: Rationalize Health Sector Expenditures. One of the objectives of this component was
                         to improve the efficiency of MOPH hospital expenditures through the Automation of the Billing
                         System (ABS) and the establishment of a system for performance-based contracting with hospitals.
                         ii)     The Lebanon Emergency Primary Health Care Restoration Project (P152646), which aims at
                         strengthening the capacity of the MOH to provide essential services to poor Lebanese most affected
                         by the Syrian crisis. An important component of this project is to strengthen the Health Information
                         System (HIS) that comprises of: (i) design of a program database; (ii) development of registers and
                         forms to gather data (enrollment registers, provider data collection forms); (iii) development of the
                         PHC contracting and claims processing system; (iv) collection and analysis of program indicators;
                         and (v) design of wider monitoring and verification activities.
                         iii)    The WB- CAS Household Survey (2010-2012).

                         The proposed program is divided into four main components:

                         Component 1: Upgrade the role of the MoPH Statistics Department ($139,500).

                         In the absence of a policy unit at the MOPH, and considering the difficulty of introducing a new unit
                         to the current MoPH organizational structure, this component aims to assist the MOPH re-define the
                         main role and functions of the SD and lay the ground for an effective and efficient organizational
                         arrangement whereby the SD will become the institutional home for health policy analysis. The
                         following activities will be conducted under this component:
                         ➢❨¢ Re-define the role and functions of the SD, including its role with CAS
                         ➢❨¢ Identify key stakeholders and coordination mechanisms,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ➢❨¢ Identify the technical skills needed for SD operation, and
                         ➢❨¢ Develop a staffing plan and retention policy with job descriptions for each position
                         Component 2: Capacity building ($79,000)

                         This component aims to build the technical capacity and develop the critical understanding of the SD
                         staff in the principles and applications of health statistics and health policy. This will entail
                         strengthening the SD staff skills in economics, statistics, health policy, and epidemiology as well as
                         in the use the use of data for health analysis. This capacity building program shall be based on the
                         new role of the SD and the skills➢❨ needs of the staff and shall consist of local workshops and
                         short-term training courses. Specific activities under this component shall include basic training in:

                         ➢❨¢     health policy
                         ➢❨¢     statistical methods and analysis
                         ➢❨¢     survey and research methods on health accounts (NHA)
                         ➢❨¢     public and household expenditure tracking (such as PER, HHS, budget tracking)
                         ➢❨¢     policy-relevant health and health system research and analyses

                         Component 3: System➢❨ s development ($107,700)
                         For the past decade, the MoPH has been working on several reform programs aimed at strengthening
                         different systems of the health sector. However, databases developed by the different programs are
Public Disclosure Copy




                         entered and maintained separately. Consequently, managing and maintaining these multiple
                         databases is constrained by fragmentation and absence of uniform data standards and classification.
                         Some of these key databases are; the maternal and neonatal registry, cancer registry, communicable
                         disease surveillance registry, primary health care information system, and hospital utilization and
                         billing system (visa billing system).

                         The aim of this component is to design a database that will allow for interoperability and serve as a
                         main repository of health sector data ready for analysis and dissemination. The database will not
                         only link the key MoPH databases, but will also pull relevant data from other sources such as CAS
                         household surveys (including Demographic and Health survey), NHA, and national hospital
                         morbidity and mortality reporting.

                         This component will work on the following activities:

                         ➢❨¢ Develop key performance indicators for assessing the performance of the health sector
                         including disease burden, efficiency and equity of the health sector, PHC and hospital key
                         performance indicators, health economics indicators, as well as setting a plan to extract and monitor
                         the progress in the health and health-related Sustainable Development Goals indicators
                         ➢❨¢ Design an ICT system for ensuring interoperability of the existing databases including
                         unification of patient identification numbers to facilitate statistical analyses for evidence based
                         decision making in the implementation of the national health sector plan
                         ➢❨¢ Conduct relevant training and dissemination workshops
                         ➢❨¢ Develop a manual for the indicators metadata and extraction of various indicators by dataset.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 4: Institutionalize National Health Accounts ($56,950)

                         The escalating financial pressure created by the Syrian crisis, and the resurgence of unprecedented
                         consumption of health goods and services accompanied with unorganized financial flows, has
                         brought to the picture the need for a solid, well established, institutionalized National Health
                         Accounts (NHA). The production of NHA surveys are largely linked to Household Surveys (HHS),
                         and in the absence of a HHS in the past, all NHA figures are based on projections rather than updated
                         data. A new NHA was conducted in 2012, based on the data from the latest household survey
                         (2011-2012) conducted by the CAS in collaboration with the World Bank.
                         The purpose of this component is to institutionalize NHA based on the new System of Health
                         Accounts (SHA) 2.0. The new systems allows the production of a NHA between two time periods;
                         the actual NHA (t1) data and the year of the study (t2). Specific activities under this component will
                         include:
                         ➢❨¢ Development of a platform that can extract NHA data from the various public funds based
                         on the structure of the Health Accounts Production Tool (NHAPT). This platform will be tailored to
                         the specific needs of the different public funds to facilitate the timely collection, tabulation, and
                         analysis of the data for NHA
                         ➢❨¢ Assign trained focal points at each public fund
                         ➢❨¢ Conduct training workshop(s) for the designated focal points on the new system
                         ➢❨¢ Provide on-the-job training and support to the focal points at the public funds for
                           implementation
                           ➢❨¢ Conduct the NHA survey based on the new SHA2.0 and using the NHAPT
                           ➢❨¢ Analyze results
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ➢❨¢ Produce an NHA report and disseminate its findings in a national seminar to key
                           stakeholders in the country.

                           B. Grant Execution and Implementing Agency

                           The financing instrument for this activity is a grant-Based Bank Executed on Behalf of the Recipient
                           (BEBR) for a proposed amount of US$383,150.

                           The need for BEBR is based on the Bank team assessment of the situation and on the request of the
                           MoPH to mitigate potential risks and delays in implementation. More specifically, to mitigate the
                           risk associated with the stalemate in government as a result of the current political situation, and the
                           constrains this may have in approvals and project implementation. Also to avoid the following: slow
                           disbursement due to the flow of funds➢❨ mechanism between MOF and MoPH; lack of experienced
                           and dedicated FM specialists; lack of accounting system to record and produce financial reports,
                           weak internal control system, and insufficient procurement capacity.

                           The MoPH through the Statistics Department will be responsible for the overall implementation of
                           the program. The SD will build on its strong collaboration with CAS) as CAS is expected to be
                           engaged in the intended development of national set of indicators, as well as in the NHA surveys,
                           based on its mandate to be the body responsible for conducting national surveys in the country. The
                           SD is also involved with CAS in other activities like tracking Millennium Development Goals
                           (MDGs), and poverty targeting. In addition, this project will engage with other stakeholders such as
                           public financing agents.

                           Supervision funds to monitor project implementation has been granted by the CMU. The CMU is
Public Disclosure Copy




                           allocating a total of USD 25, 000 for the next fiscal year, based on the economies of scale that we
                           will be achieved with the missions for the Lebanon Emergency Primary Health Care Restoration
                           project.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                           No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09                      No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/              No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
                           Projects on International                    No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP             No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Nadwa Rafeh
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Nina Chee (SA)                                               Date: 15-Sep-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Ernest E. Massiah (PMGR)                                     Date: 15-Sep-2016
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
