                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                    Report No.: ISDSA14652

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Aug-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Aug-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          West Bank and Gaza               Project ID:    P152914
                                                      Parent         P111394
                                                      Project ID:
   Project Name:     Additional Financing for Teacher Education Improvement Project (P152914)
   Parent Project    Teacher Education Improvement Project (P111394)
   Name:
   Task Team         Juan Manuel Moreno Olmedilla
   Leader(s):
   Estimated         10-Aug-2015                      Estimated   02-Nov-2015
   Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    GED05                            Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                      Instrument:
   Sector(s):        General education sector (100%)
   Theme(s):         Education for the knowledge economy (60%), Education for all (40%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:          3.00               Total Bank Financing:        0.00
   Financing Gap:               0.00
     Financing Source                                                                     Amount
     Borrower                                                                               0.00
     Special Financing                                                                      3.00
     Total                                                                                  3.00
   Environmental C - Not Required
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)



                                            Page 1 of 4
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The main objective of this project is to improve the competencies and skills of class teachers (i.e.,
   those teaching grades one to four) in West Bank and Gaza schools, and in doing so to contribute
   to enhancing student learning in primary schools. This objective will be achieved through two
   type of interventions targeted at teacher educators, student teachers and under-qualified practicing
   teachers. First, the proposed project will support investments aimed at improving the quality and
   pertinence of the school-based practice component of teacher education (the teaching practicum)
   programs. Second, TEIP will support the supply of quality programs by higher education
   institutions to facilitate the upgrading of academic and professional knowledge and skills of the
   large proportion of practicing class teachers (i.e., teachers teaching in grades one to four) who are
   currently under-qualified in their academic and/or professional teaching qualifications and who do
   not satisfy the new standards for teacher certification that are being developed by the Commission
   for Developing the Teaching Profession (CDTP) with support from EU-UNESCO. The target
   population of the proposed project is future teachers that are being prepared to become class
   teachers and under-qualified teachers currently teaching in grades one to four.
   B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


 3. Project Description
The Additional Financing to TEIP will continue to support the Government in improving the
competencies and skills of class teachers teaching grades one to four, by scaling-up of activities that
will enhance the project’s impact and development effectiveness . As under TEIP, the project will
maintain its three components as follows: (i) Component 1. Strengthening school-based practice of
pre-service teacher education programs (INSET); (ii) Component 2. Continuous Professional
Development of Primary School Teachers (PRESET); and (iii) Project Management and
Implementation Support. The first two components are aimed at improving the quality of teaching in
grades one to four in primary education while the third component will provide support to line units
of the MOEHE on general project management and implementation, including procurement and
financial management.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
This second phase of TEIP will be implemented in six universities in West Bank (An-Najah, Al
Quds , Birzeit, Hebron, Quds Open University, Arab American University) - covering the north and
south of West Bank - as well as in three universities in Gaza (Al Azhar University in partnership with
Al Aqsa University and Islamic University). The project does not contemplate financing of any form
of civil works thus there are no new environmental or social risks.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Arbi Ben Achour (GSU11)

 6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental               No
 Assessment OP/BP 4.01
 Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
 4.04




                                             Page 2 of 4
   Forests OP/BP 4.36          No

   Pest Management OP 4.09 No

   Physical Cultural           No
   Resources OP/BP 4.11
   Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
   BP 4.10
   Involuntary Resettlement    No
   OP/BP 4.12
   Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
   4.37
   Projects on International   No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed        No
   Areas OP/BP 7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The proposed Additional Financing does not introduce new environmental and/or social risks. The
     parent project (P111394) was classified as Category C and the proposed AF will sustain the same
     safeguards classification of Category C.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
     n.a.
   3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
     impacts.
     n.a.
   4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
     assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
     n.a.
   5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
     on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
     n.a.
  B. Disclosure Requirements
   If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
   respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
   Audit/or EMP.
   If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                                             Page 3 of 4
  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader(s): Name: Juan Manuel Moreno Olmedilla
   Approved By
   Safeguards Advisor: Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)                        Date: 17-Aug-2015
   Practice Manager/    Name: Lianqin Wang (PMGR)                           Date: 17-Aug-2015
   Manager:




                                             Page 4 of 4
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
