                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA17708
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Mar-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Jan-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          China                             Project ID:   P154694
                            Project Name:     Building a Modern Fiscal System Technical Assistance (P154694)
                            Task Team         Karlis Smits
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         18-Dec-2015                       Estimated   29-Apr-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GMF02                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General public administration sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Debt management and fiscal sustainability (20%), Public expenditure, financial
                                              management and procurement (40%), Analysis of economi c growth (20%), Tax
                                              policy and administration (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      28.15           Total Bank Financing:               22.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 6.15
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   22.00
                              Total                                                                                   28.15
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objectives of the proposed project are to inform the design and implementation of
                           the Central Government's fiscal reform program and to improve the Government's capacity in public
                           financial management


                                                                      Page 1 of 4
                          3. Project Description
                         Project activities are structured in two interrelated thematic components
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Key elements of China's public finance system: financing consultancies, supporting
                         policy research, designing analytical tools, implementation support and capacity building activities in
                         the following areas (i) establishing the basic framework of a modern public finance system, (ii)
                         developing a modern budget management system, (iii) developing a road map for tax policy reforms,
                         (iv) conforming inter-governmental fiscal relationships, (v) implementing accrual-based financial
                         reporting, including developing central government and state balance sheets, (vii) formulating
                         appropriate legal framework for China's fiscal and tax laws.

                         Component 2: Fiscal Policy and Sustainable Development: financing consultancies, undertaking
                         policy research, designing analytical tools in the following areas (i) a transition towards a
                         sustainable growth strategy, (ii) technological innovation as a driver for growth, (iii) medium and
                         long-term economic growth prospects, (iv) business climate for small and medium-sized enterprises
                         (SMEs), (v) China's rights, obligations and development strategies in the system of global economic
                         governance, (vi) collecting information on bilateral and multilateral rules on investment, trade,
                         finance, taxation, environmental protection and human development.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed project is a Fiscal Technical Assistance project to be implemented by MOF.

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Aimin Hao (GSU02)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               No
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                          4.04
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36          No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09 No

                          Physical Cultural           No
                          Resources OP/BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                          BP 4.10
                          Involuntary Resettlement    No
                          OP/BP 4.12
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                          4.37
                          Projects on International   No
                          Waterways OP/BP 7.50



                                                                      Page 2 of 4
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The proposed project is a fiscal TA project and the main project activities are policy research and
                              institutional Capacity building.

                             Environmental Safeguards: The project will not finance any civil works, nor any TA such as
                             feasibility studies which may lead to future investments. The project likely has minimal or no
                             adverse environmental impacts.

                             Social safeguards: The project will focus on national level research and capacity building
                             activities, and will contribute to holistic fiscal policy making serving the general public.
                             Involuntary resettlement is not expected.

                              The supported activities will not be in areas that indigenous people communities as defined by the
                              Bank's OP4.10 are collective attached to, or present in or not.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              See Section II A(1)
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              n/a
Public Disclosure Copy




                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The implementation agency for this project is MOF. General speaking, MOF is familiar with
                              Bank's safeguard policies and requirements. Before this project, there have been series of similar
                              TA projects conducted successfully and there were no outstanding safeguards issues found during
                              project implementation.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information


                                                                         Page 3 of 4
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Karlis Smits
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Mathew A. Verghis (PMGR)                      Date: 30-Mar-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 4 of 4
