                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC12130

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Jun-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Jun-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Haiti                            Project ID:      P154351
                            Project Name:      Haiti Modern Energy Services For All (P154351)
                            Task Team          Frederic Verdol,Dana Rysankova
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          20-Mar-2015                      Estimated        30-Oct-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEEDR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Other Renewable Energy (70%), Transmission and Distribution of Electricity
                                               (10%), Hydropower (10%), Energy efficiency in Heat and Po wer (5%), General
                                               energy sector (5%)
                            Theme(s):          Rural services and infrastructure (90%), Climate change (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     12.00                     Total Bank Financing:          0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              Clean Technology Fund                                                        12.00
                              Total                                                                        12.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to jump-start renewable off-grid electricity market in order to
                           facilitate the scale-up of access to modern energy services for rural households, enterprises and
                           institutions.

                           Renewable energy-based off-grid electricity services will comprise a variety of technologies and
                         business models, including individual systems, such as solar lanterns and solar home systems, and
                         community-based systems, such as mini- and micro-grids, powered by renewable energy or hybrid
                         sources (renewables with a diesel back-up and/or battery storage).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This objective will be achieved primarily through assisting the Government with the creation of an
                         enabling regulatory framework and the provision of funding to the private sector (including NGOs
                         and cooperatives) for commercially viable off-grid electrification investments with a potential for
                         replicability and scale-up.

                         -
                         C. Project Description
                         The project will have the 4 following components which are summarized hereafter:

                         (i)     Enabling environment and program oversight
                         (ii)    Access to finance facility
                         (iii)   Quality premium grants
                         (iv)    Technical support and capacity building

                         Component 1: Enabling environment and program oversight
                         (CTF $0.5 million)

                         The lack of a clear regulatory environment is considered the main bottleneck to scaling up rural
                         energy activities. The legal framework is currently unclear, with several legislations contradicting
                         each other. The component will contribute to GOH’s effort to clarify the legislation, facilitate
                         permitting process and work towards creating a level playing field between fossil fuels and
                         renewable energy options in rural areas. In addition, this component will provide support to
                         MTPTC to strengthen not only the existing structure but also to create a well-functioning supervisory
                         structure – in order to oversee the investments channeled through the financial intermediary. MTPTC
Public Disclosure Copy




                         is currently expanding its capacity to manage the sector, and the project will provide further support
                         to do this effectively.

                         Component 2: Credit line
                         (CTF: $10 million)

                         The component will be managed by a competitively selected financial intermediary (FI), and will
                         consist of a credit line or another access to finance facility channeling funds to private sector
                         providers of renewable energy services and products (including NGOs, cooperatives, rural retailers
                         and MFIs) for investment in off-grid renewable energy projects. The d etails of the credit line are
                         under development with the assistance of a highly qualified consultancy team of financial experts.

                         To be eligible, the projects will need to demonstrate that

                         - the project uses renewable energy (including hybrid systems),
                         - the project will expand access to power to rural households, businesses and/or public institutions in
                         rural areas (which will be subject to verification)
                         - the project has a viable business plan, demonstrating sustainability of investments, clear and
                         workable O&M arrang ements, and showing replicability and/or scale-up potential,
                         - the renewable energy equipment and the system meets minimum technical standards, and
                         - the project sponsor is a legal entity and passes a credit risk assessment carried out by the financial
                         intermediary (to be developed with the financial intermediary).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In addition, the credit line clients will be obliged to provide users with readily understandable
                         information on the service levels provided by the solutions they offer, and make costs transparent
                         upfront. Detailed eligibility criteria and procedures will be developed in Operating Guidelines.


                         Component 3: Quality premium grants
                         (CTF: $1 million)

                         High quality lanterns and other pico/micro PV products are currently facing significant regulatory
                         and market constraints, which are threatening to reverse the recent Haiti market progress. Not only
                         are these products facing unfair competition from the subsidized fossil fuels (kerosene and diesel) -
                         increasingly, they have also been threatened by an influx of very low quality off-grid lighting
                         products, which are often channeled through the informal economy (thus mostly un-taxed), while the
                         formal pico PV enterprises are subject to import duties and taxes that can be as high as 36%. There
                         is a consensus that the current situation is contributing to market spoilage: uneducated users choose
                         lower cost products, which turn out not to work as expected, creating a negative impression for other
                         solar and off-grid renewable products. This worrying trend (which confirms the rationale behind
                         early Lighting Global and GIZ quality assurance measures) seems to already affect 2014 Haiti sales
                         of high quality solar lanterns, as per stakeholder reports during the 2014 Forum. To level the playing
                         field for the products of appropriate quality, the project would consider offering quality premium
                         grants for high quality off-grid products (Lighting Global certified or equivalent).

                         Component 4: Technical support and capacity building
                         (CTF: $1 million)

                         This component will provide technical support, capacity building and market development services
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to the various nascent off-grid renewable energy markets described in the Technical Annex. This
                         component will finance a dedicated technical team to set up at the financial intermediary level; and
                         will include:
                         i) setting up and enforcing quality standards required for accessing credit line funding for different
                         system types and business models;
                         ii) TA to the FI credit officers for the evaluation of proposals;
                         iii) TA to service providers and users inc luding TA for energy efficient use of off-grid electricity
                         (including the use of smart technology, dissemination of energy efficient appliances, intelligent user
                         communication and simple demand-oriented tariff solutions in village grids) and support for
                         productive applications;
                         iv) verification of service provides
                         v) development and implementation of consumer awareness campaigns;
                         vi) promoting gender-sensitive approaches in off-grid electrification sub-projects;
                         vii) further pipeline development for credit line financing, including awareness building about the
                         credit line opportunities among the potential local SMEs.
                         viii) implementation of South-South knowhow exchange for fast diffusion of emerging lessons on
                         PAYG and similar disruptive business innovations.

                         -
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project location is not known as the sub-project would be fully demand-driven, financed through
Public Disclosure Copy




                           a financial intermediary. The project will not have any geographic targeting. All sub-projects
                           developed on Haitian territory fulfilling eligibility criteria will be eligible for financing.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           MTPTEC is currently implementing the IDA-financed Rebuilding Energy Infrastructure and Access
                           Project (P127203). The IDA Project is already financing off-grid electrification activities similar to
                           those eligible under the Modern Energy for All Project. To manage environmental and social risks
                           of these operations, MTPTEC is using Environmental and Social Management Framework and
                           Resettlement Management Framework, which were developed during the preparation of the IDA
                           P127203 project and disclosed on July 1, 2012. It es expected that the Modern Energy for All
                           Project will use the same framework, which, however, will be reviewed and adapted to reflect (i)
                           experience with its use under the IDA project; and (ii) specificities of the Modern Energy for All
                           project.

                           MTPTC’s performance regarding safeguards has been satisfactory under the ongoing IDA project
                           PRELEN. However, due to PRELEN’s current low disbursement rate, MTPTC’s capacity for
                           safeguards policies has not been fully tested yet. The World Bank is strongly supporting the
                           Government in its current endeavor to accelerate progress under PRELEN. Under PRELEN,
                           compliance with Project Safeguards is the responsibility of MTPTC and EDH, as described in the
                           Mirebalais Environmental Management Plan, the Mirebalais Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan,
                           and in the Environmental and Social Management Framework and in the Resettlement Policy
                           Framework.

                           During project preparation in 2012, the implementation institutional capacity for safeguards was
                           considered low. Therefore, PRELEN provides capacity building support to address this issue,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           through the organization of workshops, the hiring of a consultant to support the MTPTEC and EDH
                           in the implementation of safeguards policies (during Project preparation), and technical assistance. In
                           addition, the consultants hired to help the Government prepare the safeguards documents work in
                           close collaboration with the MTPTC and EDH, providing training as needed, including improved
                           PCB management.

                           To ensure that there is adequate monitoring, reporting and implementation supervision of safeguards
                           policies, the proposed CTF project will build on these experiences within the existing safeguards
                           framework.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Nicolas Kotschoubey (GENDR)
                           Peter F. B. A. Lafere (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         Yes            Overall, the project is expected to have a positive
                           OP/BP 4.01                                      environmental impact, as renewable energy solutions
                                                                           supported by the project will displace polluting fossil
                                                             fuel alternatives such as kerosene and diesel.

                                                             Negative environmental impacts are expected to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             very minor and are likely to be transitory only (e.g.
                                                             related to construction activities). Even those,
                                                             however, are likely to be limited as the project will
                                                             support only very small (village or household-level)
                                                             electrification solutions, most of them powered by
                                                             solar energy.

                                                             The typical sub-projects will be
                                                             - individual solar home systems or solar lanterns for
                                                             households (3 - 40Wp) capacity
                                                             - individual systems for rural enterprises - 100Wp -
                                                             10kWp capacity
                                                             - village mini-grids - about 200-2000 customers -
                                                             kWp range (all well below 1MW)

                                                             These impacts may be related to waste/debris
                                                             removal and disposal, worker and fire safety, soil
                                                             removal and erosion, increased levels of dust and
                                                             noise, oil spill or leakage from machinery (during the
                                                             mini-grid construction) and and isolid waste impacts
                                                             related to the disposal of batteries and solar panels
                                                             (post installation).

                                                             Social impacts are also expected to be largely
                                                             positive as affected population will benefit from
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             access to electricity, allowing them to improve their
                                                             lifestyle, increase disposable income (savings from
                                                             expenditures on kerosene, cell phone charging and
                                                             batteries) and engage in productive activities. There
                                                             is also increasing evidence showing that access to
                                                             electricity/light increase children study time. There
                                                             will be no resettlement, but there could be some
                                                             property acquisition.

                                                             The updated ESMF will include the types of
                                                             measures that need to be adopted to address the
                                                             environmental impacts foreseen under this Project,
                                                             and/or (ii) environmental management performance
                                                             of the existing measures and the institution(s) in
                                                             charge of their implementation.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD   The Project is not expected to impact critical natural
                                                             habitats. However, because the sites are still
                                                             unknown at the concept stage, it will be determined
                                                             by appraisal whether or not natural habitats will be
                                                              impacted. The ESMF will also include screening
                                                              procedures to ensure that project activities will not
                                                              involve unprecedented degradation or conversion of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              critical natural habitats. An effort will also be made
                                                              to ensure that non-critical habitats are not impacted
                                                              by the project.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             No    Given the massive scale of deforestation in Haiti,
                                                              there are very few pockets of any forestry remaining
                                                              and the project will not intervene in these areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09        No    The distribution grids are very small and village-size.
                                                              No herbicide or other chemical control measures will
                                                              be needed.
                         Physical Cultural Resources    No    It is expected that the proposed project will not
                         OP/BP 4.11                           involve any sites with archeological, paleontological,
                                                              historical, religious or other area of unique natural
                                                              value as defined under the policy. However, the
                                                              ESMF will include chance finds procedures.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No    There are no indigenous people as defined under OP
                         4.10                                 4.10 present in the project area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   There will be no resettlement of people (projects
                         BP 4.12                              involving resettlement of people will be included in a
                                                              negative list not eligible for the project financing),
                                                              but it is possible that the project activities will
                                                              include property acquisition. A Resettlement Policy
                                                              Framework (RPF), laying out the applicable policies
                                                              and guidelines, will be prepared to assess potential
                                                              impacts and disclosed prior to appraisal. The RPF
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              will include: (i) principles, review of policy
                                                              regulations; (ii) institutional arrangements, roles and
                                                              competences; (iii) consultations disclosure and
                                                              grievance redress mechanisms; (iv) monitoring and
                                                              reporting process. The RPF will be prepared in
                                                              accordance with World Bank OP 4.12. The client
                                                              and any financial intermediary implementing the
                                                              project will be required to screen activities and
                                                              subprojects for land acquisition, and if it does occur,
                                                              that a RAP satisfactory to the Bank will be prepared
                                                              and implemented. Special attention will be given to
                                                              the eligibility of potentially affected persons to
                                                              ensure that the rights of those without formal legal
                                                              rights to land are recognized in the RPF and
                                                              subsequent RAPs, per OP 4.12.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No    The project will not support any construction or
                                                              rehabilitation of dams, nor support any activities that
                                                              rely on the operations of existing dams.
                                 Projects on International      No                                                      No projects on international waterways will be
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   funded.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The project will not support any activities in disputed
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                areas as defined under the policy

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Sep-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Studies will be completed by September 2015
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Frederic Verdol,Dana Rysankova
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Glenn S. Morgan (SA)                                                                                                    Date: 01-Jun-2015
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Malcolm Cosgrove-Davies (PMGR)                                                                                         Date: 02-Jun-2015
                                 Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
