INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA13978
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Jul-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Jul-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Niger                      Project ID:  P148839
Project Name: Niger Investment Climate Support (P148839)
Task Team       Magueye Dia
Leader(s):
Estimated                                  Estimated    28-Aug-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTC07                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      SME Finance (50%), Other industry (50%)
Theme(s):       Other Private Sector Development (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      18.28            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
O
Borrower                                                                    0.00
Free-standing TFs Finance and Private Sector                               18.28
Total                                                                      18.28
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The objective of the Niger Investment Climate and Competiveness Support Project (NICCP) is to
improve critical elements of investment climate for the private sector and enhance competitiveness of
SMEs in selected agriculture value chain.
3. Project Description
Component 1: Modernization of the Business Environment (US$2.43 million):
Page 1 of 8


﻿This component will contribute to the attainment of PECEA2 (Programme de Promotion de l'Emploi
et de la Croissance Economique dans l'Agriculture) development objectives #1 and # 2: i) contribute
to the improvement of the Business environment through a stronger involvement of the private sector
O
in the reform process, ii) support the implementation of institutional reforms aiming to promote
export of agricultural products.
This component will support the Government's efforts to implement key regulatory and Institutional
reforms needed to create an enabling environment for private sector development.
Subcomponent 1.1. Implementing Investment climate reforms
The objective of this component is to improve targeted Doing Business indicators: i) starting a
business; ii) trading across borders; and iii) Dealing with construction permits, iv) enforcing
contracts. Under the latter, this activity seeks to help the Government alleviate the key investment
constraints of slow and poor quality decision making with regard to commercial disputes, as
recommended by the WAEMU council of Ministers in 2013. More specifically, this sub-component
will support the creation and operationalization of a Commercial Court; and the development of
alternative dispute resolution mechanisms.
In addition, it will support the implementation of the new OHADA "Entreprenant regime" for micro
and small informal firms to enhance formalization of the private sector in Niger. In particular,
through provision of TA and equipment, this activity will: i) support the elaboration and
implementation of tax incentives attractive enough to bring informal firms under the new regime; and
(iii) provide business development services to firms willing to adopt the new Entreprenant Regime.
Subcomponent 1.2. Enabling institutions for private sector development
The objective of this component is to help government put in place institutions and instruments that
will enhance private sector development and foster investment in Niger.
i)     Public-Private Dialogue
Support will be provided to improve Public-Private dialogue for Investment Climate reforms. This
will entail financing the efforts of CNIP in implementing the Government's action plan to improve
Niger business environment in the three key priority areas. This subcomponent will help facilitate the
framework for both public-private sector and state-development partner dialogue to ensure adequate
a        reforms are put in place. It will also support lobbying efforts by private sector organizations to enable
them to anticipate, prepare for and participate in discussions of reforms with public authorities.
ii)    Support to the operationalization of the export promotion agency (ANIPEX)
This subcomponent will focus on support to the development and implementation of the ANIPEX
business plan. It will finance activities that will complement what is already being undertaken under
PRACC. Created in 2004 for the promotion of exports in Niger including livestock and agriculture
products, ANIPEX remains a key partner in implementation of a successful reform on "Trading
across borders".
Component 2. Increase the competitiveness of selected agricultural value chains (US$13.75 million):
This component will contribute development objective #1 of the Danish program: Improve the
competitiveness of the SMEs along the agricultural value chains in Zinder and Diffa.
Sub-component 2.1 Support to the Maison de l'Entreprise (ME): Support will be provided to build
the capacity of the Maison de l'Entreprise (ME) as well as private sector organizations to offer a
Page 2 of 8


﻿suite of services tailored to different types of businesses involved in agricultural value chains.
Sub-component 2.2 Provision of Financial and non-financial business development services
O
Q)        This sub-component will facilitate access to business development services to actors along the value
chains with a view to improve their performance and competitiveness. To do so, the sub component
will support the operationalization of two "matching grant" schemes: i) a fund to finance the
provision of consultancy services to MSMEs operating in the identified value chains and ii) an
investment fund to provide financial support for MSMEs investment projects. These facilities will be
designed to be appropriate tools for the ME. An execution manual will elaborated in close
coordination with DANIDA and other stakeholders to outline the operating principles and procedures
of the fund, as well as the governance and internal control mechanisms.
Sub-component 2.3: Infrastructure Development
This sub-component will support the identification, financing and management of infrastructure to
support the development of specified agricultural value chains in Zinder and Diffa areas. As
indicated in the appraisal document of the Danish program, the project will work closely with the
regional chambers of agriculture, professional associations and local authorities to identify the
infrastructures to be constructed and select a model of management
Sub-component 2.4: Improving the Business environment for selected agricultural value chains
This sub-component will provide support to address key business environment constraints specific to
the targeted agricultural value-chains. The assistance could include the review of the applicable
business regulation, investment policy, or the review of the certification process etc.
Component 3: Project Implementation Support (US$2.1 million)
Implementation of the TF activities will be undertaken mainly through the Project Implementation
Unit (PIU) of the IDA-financed Competitiveness and Growth Support Project through the on-going
arrangements. Additional staff members, including an investment climate expert, a procurement
specialist and a financial management specialist, a matching grant expert and an agriculture value
a        chain specialist will be added to the PIU team to ensure that proper attention is given to the
additional activities. The TF will also finance additional operating costs of the PIU including:
equipment; consultant compensation; organizational and systems development; training, capacity
building; and technical assistance.
In addition, Word Bank Group (World Bank and IFC) teams will be mobilized to support the
implementation of project activities. For instance IFC advisory teams will directly support the
implementation of investment climate reforms, using its own experts or hiring external expertise.
As a consequence the TF will be implemented through two windows: i) Recipient executed window
for which the Recipient (Government of Niger) has implementation Responsibility) and, ii) Bank-
Executed window for which the World Banks has implementation responsibility including among
other things management and financing of project activities and supervision of project activities by
the Bank team.
Page 3 of 8


﻿4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Diffa and Zinder areas
0
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Abdoul Wahabi Seini (GSURR)
Medou Lo (GEN07)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The potential environmental impacts of the proposed
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               operation are related to the Sub-component 2.3 which will
support financing of infrastructure to support the
development of specified agricultural value chains. The
ESMF for the ongoing Competitiveness and Growth
Support Project (P127204) has been updated, consulted
upon and re-disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop
prior to appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          The proposed operation does not affect or involve natural
4.04                                habitats
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          The proposed operation does not involve forests
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          The proposed operation does not involve pest
management
Physical Cultural       Yes         Due to potential impacts on Physical Cultural Resources
Resources OP/BP 4.11                associated with civil works, the updated ESMF formulates
standard measures to be included in the companies'
contracts, in case any chance finds occurs.
0
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
BP 4.10
O
Involuntary Resettlement Yes        Sub-component 2.3 may require some land acquisition
OP/BP 4.12                          related to the construction of infrastructures to support the
development of specified agricultural value chains. The
RPF for the ongoing Competitiveness and Growth
Support Project (P127204) has been updated, consulted
upon and re-disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop
prior to appraisal. During the project implementation
specific RAPs will be prepared if needed and will also be
disclose prior to the commencement of civil works.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No          The project does not involve any construction or
4.37                                rehabilitation of dams.
Projects on International  No       This project will not support activities that will impact
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                international waterways.
Projects in Disputed    No          This project will not take place in any disputed areas as
Areas OP/BP 7.60                    defined under OP 7.60, and will not support activities that
will impact disputed areas.
Page 4 of 8


﻿II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
)           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Project is classified as environmental category B because activities funded under the Project
O
are not expected to have a significant negative environmental or social impact. However, the
Project triggers three safeguards policies: OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment, OP 4.11
Physical Cultural Resources, and OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement.
The environmental and social adverse effects/impacts of the project are mainly related to the
implementation of the sub-component 2.3 which will support financing of infrastructure to support
the development of specified agricultural value chains. During the preparation process, the
established tentative list of activities which could be financed by the project comprises storage
facilities, renewable energy infrastructures, access roads rehabilitation, sewage networks, etc.,
which in nature could raise a concern of some safeguards policies.
The main potential negative environmental and social impacts of the project are expected to come
from the construction work and could include: soil erosion, soil pollution, loss of vegetative (land
clearing), inadequate disposal of construction site waste, noise and dust nuisances, and risks of
accidents. It is expected that land acquisition cases will be limited and will result primarily from
construction of infrastructures to support the development of specified agricultural value chains.
In conformity with the World Bank' requirements and the Government's Environmental Impact
Assessment legislation, the borrower has prepared and published an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) which identify the
potential impacts of the project along with associated mitigation measures for each type of
potential investment.
O
)           No large-scale or irreversible adverse impact has been identified during the participatory ESMF
and RPF analysis conducted and approved by stakeholders.
O
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
No direct or long term adverse impacts are anticipated. Emphasis will be put on screening
P.          procedures and the adequate implementation of the mitigation measures outlined in the safeguard
instruments.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
To avoid or minimize land acquisition, the Municipalities will aim at providing projects sites, free
of claims, from the public land patrimony. Or the private investors will acquire their own land
prior to the investments.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The ESMF and the RPF prepared by the borrower are in line with the national environment and
social policies and they provide a transparent and standardized process for the identification and
screening of potential environmental and social impacts associated with any infrastructure
investments at the local level.
Page 5 of 8


﻿The ESMF indicates the corresponding mitigation and enhancement measures for each type of
environmental and social impact identified. This includes procedures and provisions for any
physical cultural resources that might be discovered during investments activities (chance finds
procedures for contractors will be included in bidding documents). Furthermore, the ESMF
provides a screening mechanism of project activities to determine the need for an Environmental
and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and/or Environmental Management Plan (EMP). In
addition, all bidding documents for works contracts will have environmental and social clauses
incorporated, in order to enable contractors to follow up on environmental and social due diligence
and to mitigate the anticipated negative impacts.
The RPF specifies the basic principles and procedures to be followed in the event that investments
would lead to involuntary land acquisition, loss of assets or access to assets.
The Borrower has experience with the World Bank Safeguards policies' requirements through
several Bank funded projects (Kandadji Dam Program, CDD projects, water and sanitation
projects, roads projects, health projects, etc.). In addition, this project will be implemented by the
Project Implementation Unit the ongoing Competitiveness and Growth Support Project (P127204)
which has an in-house environmental and social specialist who is been working for several years
on Bank financed projects. As such, there is reasonable capacity and experience within the various
sectors and among the various stakeholders involved in environmental and social issues. The
ESMF and the RPF includes provision to further reinforce the capacity of the stakeholders
involved in the implementation of the mitigation measures outlined in the safeguards instruments.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders identified are the Government of Niger and private sector agencies playing a
key role in the interaction between government and private sector (ANIPEX, APEN, CNIP, and
CCIAN/ME), the Chamber of Commerce, local authorities, the private sector (primarily private
enterprises and investors mainly in the supported value chains in the Zinder and Diffa areas), civil
society, and communities (beneficiaries and potential project affected people). Throughout the
entire process of project preparation, consultations with stakeholders were held, and they were
involved in the definition of the scope of activities and they will remain engaged during
implementation, supervision and evaluation stages of the project.
As part of the preparation of the ESMF and the RPF, public consultation meetings were held to
share the results of the studies, mainstream ownership and seek input in order to improve quality
and soundness of these safeguards instruments. The key concerns raised by the local stakeholders
includes (i) the involvement of beneficiaries and affected people at all stages of the sub-projects,
(ii) the establishment of municipal monitoring committees, and (iii) the involvement of the
deconcentrated services in the clearance process of the technical studies. These have been taken
into account in the project implementation arrangement.
The final safeguards documents (ESMF and RPF) were disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop
prior to appraisal. The ESMF describes a comprehensive consultation mechanism and disclosure
during sub-projects preparation. Furthermore, comprehensive and inclusive Communication
strategy and an Action Plan will be designed and implemented in order to help beneficiaries
understand project objectives and intervention mechanisms, and to favor appropriate dissemination
of all the information concerning approaches, processes, results and lessons learned to key
Page 6 of 8


﻿stakeholders.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              24-Jul-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           28-Jul-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              24-Jul-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           28-Jul-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Niger                                                    23-Jul-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[X]  No[     NA
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes[X]  No[    NA
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [ ]  NA [  ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Page 7 of 8


﻿Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Magueye Dia
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)            Date: 30-Jul-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: John F. Speakman (PMGR)             Date: 30-Jul-2015
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


