INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA15277
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Nov-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Nov-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Ethiopia                   Project ID:  P151712
Project Name: Urban Productive Safety Net Project (UPSNP) (P151712)
Task Team       Muderis Abdulahi Mohammed,Ruth Hill
Leader(s):
Estimated       14-Oct-2015                Estimated    15-Dec-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSP01                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Public administration- Other social services (90%), Solid waste management
(10%)
Theme(s):       Social Safety Nets/Social Assistance & Social Care Services (60%), Improving
labor markets (3 0%), Other urban development (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:    450.00             Total Bank Financing:  300.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                        150.00
International Development Association (IDA)                               300.00
Total                                                                     450.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The PDO of the proposed project is to support the government of Ethiopia to improve income of
targeted poor households and establish urban safety net mechanisms
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 13


﻿Component I: Safety Net Support (Total USD 411.00, Million, of which: IDA USD 221.00 Million,
GoE USD 190.00 Million)
1. This component will support the delivery of a predictable, timely and productive safety net
through conditional and unconditional safety net transfers. The project will ensure that various safety
nets principles such as primacy of transfer; adequacy, and predictability of transfer are respected.
o
2. Sub- component 1.1: Conditional Transfers: The conditional transfers will target able bodied
persons in households eligible for project support. This group constitutes 84% of total project
beneficiaries. Conditional transfers will require participation in public works which could range from
small-scale infrastructure to provision of beneficial services to communities that are absent in urban
areas including child care, home care for the elderly and people affected by HIV/AIDS and other
chronic illnesses, preparation of food for workers etc. Public works that increase the productivity of
urban work - such as building market sheds for self-employment retailers, provision of childcare or
prepared food - will be encouraged. As the program develops, transfers may also be conditioned on
enrolment in tailored training programs aiming at connecting project clients with job or self-
employment opportunities (component 2).
3. The project will support the financing and development of sustainable community assets and
public services implemented using labor intensive methods. A menu of public works appropriate for
the urban areas and customized to the special environments in each of the participating cities will be
provided as guidance to the communities in participating areas. These may include urban greenery
development, solid waste management, construction of cobblestone roads, building drainages and
community infrastructure and development of shelters and workshops for income generation SME
activities etc.). In cities where there is an overlap with ULGDP the public works will be limited to
urban greenery, environmental cleaning, solid waste management and social facilities/services
projects. Specific guidelines and manuals will be developed to guide the design and implementation
of various public works sub-projects. In this process, reference will be made to various
implementation manuals developed by the MUDHCo through ULGDP to ensure that overlaps will be
O
Q)        overcome and that necessary synergies between the projects will be ensured.
4. Implementation of the public works will also build basic technical skills, such as specific skills for
construction, catering or home care activities, as well as soft skills, like timeliness and discipline,
amongst the project beneficiaries.
5.      Wage rate and transfer size: In the case of Conditional Transfer beneficiaries, the daily
transfer size (wage rate) is determined taking into account the market wage rate for unskilled labor,
the availability of individuals to undertake their co-responsibilities, and market prices of basic food
commodities. Accordingly, a daily transfer size of Birr 60 (USD equivalent 2.91 equivalent based on
the current exchange rates) per person per day will be used at the start of the program. This will be
reviewed on an annual basis and adjustments will be made as necessary depending on the specific
food price situation of each city. The 2015 market wage rate for those with primary and some
secondary education (education level of target beneficiary group) converges at around 50 Birr (2015
prices) per day (excluding the construction sector in which wages are 70 percent higher), but a
higher rate of 60 Birr is chosen to take into account expected inflation between 2015 and the program
start in 2016. Each eligible urban household will be able to work for up to 4 members of the
household and will be entitled to a transfer over 12 months by providing labor to access public
works.
Page 2 of 13


﻿6. Consistent with budgetary estimates for the labor vs. capital components of the public works, the
labor intensity is expected to be not less than 70% on average so as to maximize the element of
transfer to the target households.
o
7. Participation in the public works is designed to ensure it does not result in unnecessarily high
levels of foregone income opportunities. Specifically: (i) individuals will self-select the number of
days they spend on public works up to a cap that is 60 days per household member in the first year
and tapering off in the second and third year to 40 and 20 days respectively, for up to 4 person per
household (ii) the daily conditional transfer will be set lower than the average wage rate received for
unskilled work encouraging beneficiaries to pursue other work first, (iii) in the first year a matching
grant will be provided for amounts saved from conditional transfers encouraging individuals to use
this transfer to increase, not replace, income.
8. Sub- component 1.2: Unconditional Transfers:    Unconditional transfers will target persons
that for various reasons are unable to perform work (e.g. the chronically ill, the elderly and people
with disabilities, urban destitute). The urban destitute include the target group who do not have
access to a sustainable livelihood, and often resort to begging or illicit activities to make a living.
Physical and mental health problems affect many in this group. Some in this group are very young-
children who have run away from homes in rural areas. The unconditional transfer beneficiaries will
reach up to 16% of the total project beneficiaries.
9. Unconditional Transfer beneficiaries will receive 170 Birr per person a month (USD 8.25
equivalent) or Birr 2040 per year (about USD 100/year equivalent) will lift about 48% of those in
this group out of poverty. (Annex 2). It is recognized however that this transfer level is insufficient
for people that fall in the category of urban destitute (about 2% of total project beneficiaries). The
needs of this group are vast and complex. In addition to financial support that can be provided
through transfers, they need housing, health care and psycho-emotional counselling services.
Therefore, the cost of support will need to be significantly higher than for the other categories of
urban poor. The project will have a dedicated budget line to finance pilot projects of specialized
service providers to inform an engagement strategy tailored to the specific needs of this group. In
this regard, it is estimated that a support of Birr 600/person/month (about USD 29 equivalent) for 12
Months and an additional 30% overhead cost for the provision of this services will be required.
10. Sub-component 1.3: Safety net mechanisms and systems: The project will also support the
development of common safety net mechanism and systems. This will include payment systems,
targeting, wage rate setting and market price monitoring.
11. Payment mechanism. The mode of transfer of the project will be cash. The project will develop
effective payment mechanism that will use formal financial institutions such as banks and MFIs to
deliver payments to all beneficiaries. The project will also explore options to use electronic payment
mechanisms such as mobile money transfer. An assessment of how to increase financial inclusion for
beneficiaries in a cost-effective way will be undertaken prior to implementation. The project will
finance the sensitization and training activities that the financial inclusion assessment recommends in
order to ensure all beneficiaries can be paid through financial institutions. This increase in financial
inclusion will have many benefits for beneficiaries in addition to improving the effectiveness,
transparency and recording of transfers.
12. Duration and timeliness of transfers. Seasonality in the availability of work is modest, and poor
Page 3 of 13


﻿urban households face shortfalls in meeting their basic needs throughout the year. In order to
distribute additional income throughout the year and to ensure that beneficiaries are not replacing
existing economic activities with engagement in their co-responsibilities, conditional and
unconditional transfers to beneficiaries will be provided evenly throughout the year. Conditional
O
Transfer payments will be made on monthly basis after completing public works and will be
transferred within a maximum period of 15 days after the end of each month. Unconditional
Transfers will be based on a fixed monthly payment schedule at the end of each month. The
beneficiaries of conditional transfer will be in the program for three years. The unconditional
beneficiaries will remain in the program throughout the life of the project depending on when they
start receiving transfer.
13. Market price monitoring: The Project will closely monitor food prices in urban areas using
existing data from CSA. This will inform not only adjustments to transfer sizes, but also provide
surveillance on possible food price-induced crises as those that hit the country in 2008 and 2011. In
other words, the monitoring of food prices will both inform design adjustments but also act as an
early warning system for the project as a whole. In case of large covariate shocks affecting urban
areas, the Project will closely coordinate a required response with the Disaster Risk Management and
Food Security Sector of the Ministry of Agriculture (DRMFSS), PSNP and other programs.
14. Targeting: Project beneficiaries will be identified through a combination of geographic targeting,
community targeting, proxy means tests and self-selection. Although in each city the program will
scale to cover all areas of the city in the first year it will target beneficiaries in the poorer parts of the
city and expand to other parts of the city in the second and third year. Those who have been in their
place of residence for 6 months at the start of the targeting process will be considered for the
program. Within each administrative unit, targeting committees will be established in each
community and will rank households from poorest to richest, thereby identifying those that will be
project beneficiaries. This list will be published publicly and verified by implementing a proxy
means test. A final list of project beneficiaries will be decided by the community targeting committee
after any inconsistencies have been discussed. Categorical targeting will be used to determine who is
eligible for conditional and unconditional transfers. Self-selection will also be used in that
individuals will determine whether they want to participate given the compensation received in
return for public works, and will decide how many days will be worked by each beneficiary. The full
targeting process is described in Annex 5.
Component II: Livelihood Services (Total USD 107.00 Million, of which IDA USD 57.00 Million,
GoE USD 50.00 Million)
15. his component will support interventions that will facilitate graduation from the program and
promote moving out of poverty. The target group for these interventions are individuals in
households receiving conditional transfers that desire more and higher-paid work. One individual per
household can receive this support which will result in a total of 188,000 individuals eligible for this
component. The individual will be selected by the household. The support will be implemented by
the One Stop Centers Directorate in FEMSEDA which established One Stop Centers in woredas/
kebeles. Some of the functions will be performed in collaboration with MOLSA.
16. Sub-component 2.1: Counselling and life-skills development: The first phase of livelihoods
support will focus on enhancing financial literacy and soft skills that will be useful across a range of
livelihood choices; assessing the technical skills of beneficiaries; and providing individuals with
information on entrepreneurship and wage opportunities in their location.
Page 4 of 13


﻿17. Financial literacy and soft skills development Beneficiaries will receive short trainings on
financial literacy and soft skills to improve employability. The training will encompass how to open
a bank account, planning, budgeting and saving, attitude and expectations of work, and business and
O
workplace readiness. Financial literacy training will be provided to all conditional support
beneficiaries early on, as part of their co-responsibility for safety net transfers. This is to ensure that
they are able to save appropriately from the income they receive from public works during the first
year (some of the livelihood grant made available in the second year of the program will be in the
form of a matching grant to match savings undertaken in the first year).. The project will finance the
development of new materials or adaptation of existing ones, to be used where existing materials
cannot be used, an assessment of training providers, the training of trainers and the provision of these
trainings to beneficiaries. A financial inclusion assessment prepared prior to implementation, will
inform the design and delivery of the financial literacy training.
18. Guidance and counselling. The technical skills and interest of each individual will be assessed in
the first phase through individual interviews and focus groups discussions. Individuals will be
provided with information on viable entrepreneurship opportunities and the availability of jobs. City
level Micro and Small-Scale Enterprise Development Agency staff and Labor and Social Affairs
employment officers will ensure the provision of these services in order to guide each individual on
what opportunities are available to him/her to pursue based on his/her skill level and the type of
training support that would be required.
19. Building capacity. Capacity will be built within MOLSA and OSCD at the regional and city
levels to provide these services. The use of private providers and thus private employment officers,
particularly in the provision of information, will be considered based on the needs on the ground and
the actual capacity available to satisfy the needs. MOLSA Employment officers are currently
expected to provide the type of skills assessment, guidance and counselling services envisaged in this
phase, but capacity to deliver these services is limited. Although the reach of the OSCD is larger,
their clients are currently more educated than the average safety net beneficiary. A capacity
assessment will be undertaken in the first year of implementation and used to develop a capacity
building plan. Given the need to build capacity, 10,000 beneficiaries will receive this service in the
first year of the project with more receiving this support at the beginning of year 2. The project will
also finance the development of new skills assessment tools and manuals for staff. Additional
a         engagement with the private sector to access more information on job openings and to spread it
quickly to a city-wide network of employment offices will be invested in in the early months of
implementation. This will improve upon the existing system in which information is available only in
selected locations. The project will also experiment with dissemination of job alerts to mobile ph
ones.
20. Sub-component 2.2: Financial support and training for livelihood development: In the second
phase of livelihoods support, individuals who received guidance in the first phase will choose
whether they would like to receive support to increase their income from self-employment (either by
starting a business or increasing the profitability of an existing business) or wage employment (either
by gaining access to wage-employment or moving from low to higher wage employment). They will
receive financial support to pursue this livelihood pathway upon completion of plan accepted by the
relevant OSCD and MOLSA staff. The plan will be accepted if it is realistic in terms of viability of
activities envisaged and reflects the skills the individual has. In addition to financial support
individuals will receive the information, mentoring and training necessary to develop and implement
a plan.
Page 5 of 13


﻿21. Value of support. Individuals will receive up to 10,000 Birr of support (approximately 500
USD). The exact value of the support that they will receive will depend on: (i) how much they saved
during their first year in the program, and (ii) the amount needed to fund the plan developed. 4,000 to
O
6,000 Birr (exact amount to be determined during implementation) of the financial support will be
provided unconditional of the amount that has been saved in order to ensure that those that were not
able to save much from first-year transfers still receive a grant on meaningful size. Additional funds
(up to 10,000 Birr total) will be provided to match savings from the first year of transfers. Existing
data suggests that on average, beneficiaries will be able to save 2,000 Birr from the first year of
transfers. Beneficiaries will only be rewarded for continuous savings. The matching grant requires
breaking a lot of new ground and successful implementation will require a lot of attention and
capacity. The value of support available does not depend on whether or not an individual is pursuing
self or wage employment.
22. Self-employment. The beneficiaries under this track will receive training on entrepreneurship
and business development in order to develop an accepted business plan for the livelihood grant. The
provision of these trainings will be facilitated by OSCD. It is anticipated that the majority of these
training programs will be provided by public TVET but an assessment of training providers will be
undertaken to determine whether private TVET and NGOs should also be considered. In addition
OSCD will facilitate access to workspace, market linkage services and other licensing or financial
services that may be needed for the business plan to succeed, through its network of one-stop service
centers. It is expected that self-employment pathway beneficiaries will largely start-up with
household enterprises of very small scale nature, and will need handholding to ensure they can cope
with start-up challenges and continue. OSCD will thus work with small business regulators to ensure
that any advantages accruing to such small businesses will be accessed.
23. Wage-employment. Under the wage employment track, livelihood grants can cover a stipend to
attend training to build skills for a wage job (40 Birr a day stipend, training fees will not be covered
by the livelihood grant but will be paid separately by the project); an allowance to travel to job
interviews until a job is secured; and/or an allowance to travel to work or cover the ancillary costs of
employment such as child care expenses. The rationale for the allowance to be provided during early
work days is that individuals gain useful experience in early days of a new job even though net take-
home pay may be late or low, and persistence can be encouraged. Improving the functioning of the
o        TVET system is beyond the scope of this project, however the program will undertake an assessment
of training providers in year 1 to determine what can be provided, and will assess that training is
indeed met with improved skills for beneficiaries. Private training centers within the industrial zones
are due to be established as part of the Competitiveness and Job Creation (CJC) project. These may
offer a better opportunity to program beneficiaries and linkages will be explored in program
implementation.
24. Technical support and monitoring: Given the complexity of this component and the fact that it is
the first large scale program to increase the employability of poor households in urban areas, the
project will support monitoring, evaluation and technical support. The success of this component will
depend on strong technical support packages and building capacity to ensure staff with the necessary
skills are available to implement it. Evaluation of pilots in early years of implementation is necessary
to ensure the package of support offered incorporates lessons from implementation in the early years
before scaling up to a larger numbers of beneficiaries in later years of the project (see component 3).
Component III: Institutional strengthening and program management (Total USD 41.00 Million, of
Page 6 of 13


﻿which IDA USD 22.00 Million, GoE USD 19.00 million)
25.    This component will support the development and strengthening of project systems for
targeting, M&E and MIS, payments, and citizens' engagement. It will also finance capacity building
Q)       (human resource, training, administrative, physical capacity) and strengthening program management
(coordination, financial management, procurement, safeguards).
26. Sub-component 3.1. Operational System development: A number of systems development
activities will be supported by the project. The main ones will include systems for (i) monitoring and
evaluation, (ii) financial management, (iii) human resources management (iv) targeting, and (v)
management information system (MIS).
27.    Ethiopia is moving towards the development of key building blocks, tools and instruments
for a social protection system, in line with the recently approved social protection policy and
strategy. Many of these tools will be financed by PSNP 4, including the development of a single
registry and significant investments in information management. UPSNP will be a user of many of
these tools, but will also be an important financier of some of these key tools.
28.    The project will finance a program-specific MIS, which will provide credible information for
decision making to program managers and implementers. Over time, this management information
system will be harmonized with the MIS of PSNP to contribute to the development of a
comprehensive social protection MIS. The MIS will include comprehensive public works and
livelihoods databases and, given the decentralized nature of Ethiopia and the program, will be
developed to be functional at both federal and city levels. Establishing the MIS will require training
and investments in information and communication technology at all levels.
29.    Sub-component 3.2. Capacity building: The UPSNP is being led by an institution which has
not been involved in safety nets design and implementation in the past. The project will thus require
targeted continuous and fast-tracked capacity development and institutional strengthening as part of
implementation. A comprehensive capacity assessment at federal, regional and cities levels will be
conducted during the start of the project to inform the project's capacity building strategy and action
plan. Capacity building and skills enhancement activities for the parent and other ministries that will
be closely involved, as well as other institutions at federal, regional and city levels will be a priority
o        The capacity development activities are expected to ensure that the primary managers, implementers
and stakeholders of the UPSNP have the required awareness levels for safety nets in general and
urban safety nets in particular, and impart them with skills to successfully deliver their roles.
30.    Program management support: This component will also allocate resources for the regular
program management and coordination activities. This includes regular monitoring and evaluation,
technical assessments and studies, missions and project coordination meetings etc.
31.    Sub-component 3.3: Citizens' engagement: The UPSNP design has made efforts to
maximize opportunities for adopting citizens' engagement during the design and this will be pursued
further during the implementation stage. The objective will be to ensure that the project clients are
receiving their entitlement on a timely basis, in full and with dignity; and that citizen's participation
in planning and providing feedback on project activities shall be facilitated to allow informed
feedback and development of appropriate solutions. Consistent with the current Government and
Bank vision for strengthening Citizens' Engagement as a platform for localized service-delivery-
based governance, implementation of this initiative under the UPSNP will be closely coordinated
Page 7 of 13


﻿with other World Bank-financed operations with Citizens' Engagement interventions to avoid
duplication and fragmentation of approaches, tools and mechanisms for monitoring progress. The CE
initiative will include three interrelated interventions namely: (i) Social Accountability, (ii) Financial
Transparency and Accountability, and (iii) Grievances Redress Mechanism (Annex 11).
o
31.    Social Accountability. To facilitate a structured mechanism for the citizens' participation in
planning, evaluation and feedback provision, Citizen's Report Cards or a Community Score Cards
will be implemented in participating cities at the start of the program on a randomly sampled group
of beneficiaries, at mid-term and at the end of the program. The application of these report/score
cards will help to create awareness among the citizenry on their rights, roles and responsibilities
about the project activities. It will also promoted monitoring of beneficiary and the broader citizenry
perceptions about the project and management of emerging issues as part of implementation
improvements. Implementation of the report/score cards will go hand in hand with empowering
citizens to monitor project implementation. The creation of awareness about the project will ensure
appropriate and informed citizen participation. The project will facilitate creation of project
monitoring committees as an upgraded mandate for existing committees, or a new mandate for newly
formed project committees where such committees do not exist.
32.    Grievances Redress mechanism (GRM). As part of awareness creation on the project, the
existence of GRM, procedures for citizens will be effectively communicated. Project complaints and
appeals committees will be established at the ketene, kebele and woreda levels - with a mandate to
receive and register complaints, convene meetings to resolve the complaints and respond to the
appeals resulting from committees' decisions. The effectiveness of resolution of complaints and
appeals will be monitored during implementation. Information on the complaints and appeals will be
collected at the ketene, kebele and woreda levels, and if there will be referrals to the regional or
Project Implementation Unit level, which is less expected, the PIUs will be required to report
information on the cases management as well. Information requirements will include registered
cases, cases resolve in a timely manner and cases referred to the next level of the complaints and
appeals structure.
0
33.    Financial transparency and accountability. These activities will focus on promoting
transparency and accountability on the project budgetary planning and implementation. The main
activities will include budget literacy training among implementers at all levels and citizens'
o        representatives. Basic tools for communicating project budgets will be developed and disseminated
at all levels. Feedback mechanisms will involve communication of the budget execution performance
and variances as well as explanations as part of reporting by the implementers at local government
levels. Feedback will be targeted to the citizenry in general and beneficiaries in particular as well as
the implementers and service providers.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
34. The Project will cover a total of 11 cities (Addis Ababa, Dessie, Mekelle, Adama, Awassa,
Gambella, Asossa, Semera, Jigiga, Harer and Dire Dawa) and reach approximately 752,000
beneficiaries in 5 years. Labour Intensive Public Works (LIPWs) subprojects will be community-
based with technical assistance provided by city, woreda, and ketene administrations. LIPW
subprojects will be small-scale and their impacts will be site-specific and limited. The range of works
include: urban greenery development, solid waste management, construction of cobblestone roads,
building drainages and community infrastructure and development of shelters and workshops for
income generation, SME activities, etc.
Page 8 of 13


﻿5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Asferachew Abate Abebe (GENDR)
Chukwudi H. Okafor (GSURR)
Ian Leslie Campbell (GSP01)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         Most of LIPW sub-projects, though intended to impact the
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               environment positively, will have 1 minor environmental
and social impacts. Thus, OP 4.01 is triggered and an
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) has been prepared to guide preparation of
Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs)
and/or Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) as
needed, to address potential adverse impacts of LIPWs.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          As the LIPW sub-projects will all be implemented within
4.04                                the designated urban areas, no disturbance of natural
habitats is expected.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          As the LIPW sub-projects will all be implemented within
the designated urban areas, no disturbance of, or impacts
on, forests are expected.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          No irrigation or agricultural projects utilizing
agrochemicals are planned within the UPSNP LIPW
program.
Physical Cultural       Yes         An adverse impact on physical cultural resources are
Resources OP/BP 4.11                unlikely in view of the small scale nature of the
subprojects to be financed under this project. However,
this policy is triggered to protect any likely impacts on
cultural heritages in the urban settings through 'chance-
finds'. The policy is addressed in the ESMF screening
process. Sub-projects will be assessed for their potential
disturbance to cultural or religious sites and possible
mitigation measures will be prepared.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          As the affected communities all lie within urban areas,
BP 4.10                             and there are no Indigenous Peoples expected to be
present in the project area.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes        Although sub-projects involving change of land use or
OP/BP 4.12                          involuntary loss of assets are not expected to be common,
due to the possibility of a sub-project activity such as
road-widening or drainage taking a small amount of land,
or altering access to resources, this policy is triggered. A
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared
and will guide the development of Resettlement Action
Plans (RAPs) as needed to avoid, mitigate and
compensate impacts.
Page 9 of 13


﻿Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           No sub-projects involving dams that would trigger this
4.37                                 policy will be eligible for the UPSNP.
Projects on International  No        No sub-projects involving water abstraction from rivers
U         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 tributary to international waterways will be eligible for
the UPSNP.
O
Projects in Disputed    No           None of the ULGs concerned will be located in disputed
Areas OP/BP 7.60                     areas.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
From an environmental and social safeguard standpoint, the proposed operation is a Category B
Project, since impacts of the project, for the most part, will be minimal, site-specific and
manageable to an acceptable level.
Sub-Component 2: Labor Intensive Public Works (LIPWs) and other co-responsibilities will
support the financing and development of sustainable community assets and public services
implemented using labor intensive methods. The range of works include: urban greenery
development, solid waste collection, construction of cobblestone roads, building drainages and
community infrastructure and development of shelters and workshops for income generation, SME
activities, etc. LIPWs will also include the provision of home-based care activities for elderly, sick
and disabled community members.
Where possible, communities will select LIPWs that improve the productivity of work in the urban
environment, through building assets that improve work infrastructure (i.e. market sheds) or health
(i.e. drainages), or through providing services that make it easier for households to manage formal
work commitments (i.e. child care, meal preparation or home based care for elderly members of
O
U           the family). The potential direct environmental impacts associated with these investments include:
damage/destruction to cultural heritage, soil erosion, and pollution of surface and ground water
o           resources as a result of urban agriculture activities such as chicken farm, animal fattening, and
dairy production. Additionally, poorly designed drainage systems can expose residents to public
o          health risks such as water bome diseases. Potential social impacts may arise from traffic accidents,
exposure to toxic waste and communicable diseases and involuntary resettlement. The potential
negative impacts of the investments will be minimized through careful planning for subprojects
and vigilant supervision of their implementation. Although may not individually have significant
adverse environmental and social impacts, several projects in combination could have larger more
significant cumulative impacts. To avoid and mitigate the likely cumulative impacts, the ESMF
and RPF documents provide that individual projects should be planned carefully based on sound
technical knowledge of the location, size and material requirements of infrastructure subprojects.
Component 2: Livelihood Services will support interventions that will facilitate graduation from
the program and promote moving out of poverty. It a Self-Employment Pathway that will enable
beneficiaries to start up household enterprises of very small nature. Since each household-level
activity will be at micro-scale, and as the procedures under this Component will include the
assessment of the agro-ecological suitability of the activity, including screening for potential
negative impacts, no significant site-specific negative impacts are expected from individual
Page 10 of 13


﻿household-level activities.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Activities under the UPSNP are expected to include LIPW subprojects based on a community
planning approach. These are expected to make contributions to improving the productivity of
work in the urban environment.
As stated above, any potential long-term or cumulative impacts that might have been caused by
UPSNP LIPW activities such as infrastructure will be detected through the screening and
mitigating procedures, and addressed. At the same time, potential long-term cumulative impacts
that might have been caused by the implementation of large numbers of similar household
enterprise activities will be managed by annual monitoring of impacts, and corrective action taken.
In view of this, no indirect or long-term negative impacts are anticipated from the project.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not applicable.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower has prepared an ESMF and RPF to minimize and mitigate potentially negative
environmental and social impacts. By agreement with the GoE, a Social Impact Assessment (SIA)
has been conducted to assess, in advance, the social consequences that are likely to result from the
UPSNP Preliminary findings have already been incorporated into the design and final resultant
recommendations will be reviewed during Appraisal, with adjustments (if necessary) being made
to the design and informing the overall risk management of the project.
The Government and World Bank will monitor the implementation of the ESMF and RPF
throughout implementation. MUDHCo has good capacity and experience to implement the ESMF
and RPF, with well-developed systems and procedures. The Ministry has Environmental and
Social Safeguard Specialists for following up on the proper day-to-day implementation of the
ESMF and RPF. Further, as described in the ESMF and RPF, the UPSNP will provide training and
capacity building to support implementation of all safeguards instruments prepared for the project.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the beneficiary households, and those involved in the implementation of
the Project. The UPSNP ESMF and RPF have been the subject of extensive consultation among
stakeholders including at community level, and the reports and requirements of these consultations
are incorporated in the final documents as disclosed in the World Bank Info Shop and Country
Office public-access library and through the MUDHCo at federal level and regional level. In
addition, the final documents will also be published on the MUDHCo website.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              30-Sep-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           07-Oct-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Page 11 of 13


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
O
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                30-Sep-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             07-Oct-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
report?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?            Yes [  ]  No [X]    TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [ ] No [ ] TBD [ X]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Page 12 of 13


﻿All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes[X]  No[     NA
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes[X]  No[   NA
o          in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]  No[       NA[
o          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[      NA[
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Muderis Abdulahi Mohammed,Ruth Hill
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)             Date: 02-Nov-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Dena Ringold (PMGR)                  Date: 02-Nov-2015
Manager:
Page 13 of 13


