                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC13959

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Aug-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Senegal                        Project ID:       P156259
                            Project Name:        Digital Entrepreneurship Senegal
                            Team Leader(s):      Sofya Muradyan,Matina Deen
                            Estimated Date       02-Oct-2015
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GTCID                          Lending           Lending Instrument
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           General information and communications sector (70%), General industry and
                                                 trade sector (30%)
                            Theme(s):            Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (90%), Technology diffusion
                                                 (10%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.45                           Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              InfoDev                                                                                     0.45
                            Environment       C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective: Fostering growth of digital entrepreneurs by scaling up
                           Senegal's leading ICT focused business enabler (CTIC Dakar)
                           C. Project Description
                           The project is to extend CTIC Dakar (mLab West Africa) capacity and service portfolio to launch
                           globally competitive, growth-oriented, mobile and digital technology businesses and further position
                           it as a regional hub for the advancement of digital entrepreneurship.

                           The project activities build upon earlier projects of the Digital Entrepreneurship Program (formerly
                           Mobile Innovation Program), which has designed, tested and derived lessons from 13 mobile
                           business enablers (mLabs and mHubs) in Asia, Africa, ECA and the Caribbean.
                           The impact evaluation of these earlier projects has demonstrated that there are still several gaps
                           remained in relation to targeted business advisory expertise for digital enterprises, while the
                           proliferation of activities aimed to assist tech entrepreneurs in Africa signals an enormous demand
                         for entrepreneurship support.

                         The key gap relates to the ability of business enablers to identify and to meet the needs of digital
Public Disclosure Copy




                         entrepreneurs with the growth potential, which struggle to scale, build links to wider value chains, or
                         to enter new markets.
                         To address this gap, the program will strengthen the institutional capacity of CTIC Dakar to provide
                         quality services to growth-oriented digital entrepreneurs. Based on best practices around the world,
                         the program aims also to test an innovative business advisory approach known as “acceleration” that
                         takes growth oriented enterprises and start-ups through a rapid-cycle competitive curriculum, and
                         matches them quickly to appropriate capital and business mentors.
                         Similar projects will be implemented in Kenya and South Africa targeting the East African and
                         Southern African markets.

                         The following key activities will be implemented within the project scope:

                         1. Strengthening of CTIC Dakar institutional capacity to support growth-oriented digital
                         entrepreneurs

                         Expected Deliverables: (1) improved business and sustainability models (including strategy on
                         engagement with early-stage investors and enhanced services portfolio); (2) improved M&E
                         framework and tools critical for tracking the progress of entrepreneurs and other business analytics.

                         2. Improving CTIC Dakar capacity to increase investability of digital entrepreneurs

                         Expected Deliverables: (1) staff trained via participation in "Master training" on increasing
                         entrepreneurs investability; (2) up to 10 Access to Finance workshops for select group of investment-
                         ready entrepreneurs organized; (3) links with early-stage financiers strengthened.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Implementation of Regional acceleration program

                         The core grant funding will be allocated to the piloting of Regional acceleration program aimed to
                         identify prominent digital entrepreneurs in West Africa and provide them with intensive face-to-face
                         and virtual support in order to link them with expertise, capital and markets they need to grow.
                         CTIC Dakar will run Regional acceleration program for West Africa, where it will be responsible for
                         reaching out to the large network of technology innovation hubs and incubators and act as regional
                         hub, facilitating a sub-regional program and addressing the issue with limited local deal flow
                         individual business enablers typically face.
                         During each round of Regional acceleration program, 20 of the most talented entrepreneurs would be
                         nominated by the participating business enablers (based on rigorous selection criteria) and cultivated
                         by CTIC Dakar over a limited period of time c ombining both virtual and residential acceleration
                         methods.
                         The program will introduce an advanced acceleration curriculum for the participating entrepreneurs.
                         The curriculum will include topics such as investment readiness and investor engagement, diaspora
                         networks, and internationalization of digital enterprises, and will seek to create the capacity and
                         networks necessary to take most potential entrepreneurs “up the ladder.”

                         Two rounds of acceleration programs should be implemented within the grant scope. It is expected
                         that the outcomes of the first round will inform on potential adjustments to the program design to
                           ensure the most efficient approach. The overall objective is that the business enablers may adapt and
                           replicate the program in future years.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           It is also expected that CTIC Dakar will work closely with the task team and nominate entrepreneurs
                           from regional acceleration program for a Pan-African Acceleration Program that will be
                           implemented through bank-executed activities and aimed to bring around 20 star performers across
                           Africa to scale through a rapid process of exposure to global capital and industry connections.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Nationwide

                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Not applicable

                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Maman-Sani Issa (GEN01)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        No               The project will support neither physical
                           BP 4.01                                              investment nor technical assistance activity
                                                                                which could indirectly trigger environmental
                                                                                and social risks/impacts.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No
                           Projects on International           No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP    No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                              Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):           Name: Sofya Muradyan,Matina Deen
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:       Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                        Date: 13-Oct-2015
                         Practice Manager/                Name: Ganesh Rasagam (PMGR)                                        Date: 14-Oct-2015
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                         InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                         affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
