                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA18569
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Jun-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Jul-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Ghana                               Project ID:    P145316
                            Project Name:      Dedicated Grant Mechanism for Local Communities (P145316)
                            Task Team          Nyaneba E. Nkrumah
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          13-Jun-2016              Estimated     26-Aug-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEN01                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         5.50           Total Bank Financing:       0.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                                      0.00
                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                                  5.50
                              Total                                                                                         5.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The PDO is to strengthen knowledge and practices of targeted local communities in REDD+ process
                           and sustainable forest management
                            3. Project Description
                           The Ghana Dedicated Grant Mechanism (G-DGM) is expected to contribute to the promotion of
                           social resilience among local and traditional communities in the Brong Ahafo and Western FIP
                           project areas by (a) enhancing the capacities they need to strengthen their participation in the FIP and
                           other REDD+ processes at the local, national, and global levels; (b) promoting the sustainable


                                                                        Page 1 of 12
                         management of forest and natural resources; (c) promoting coping and adaptive strategies/livelihoods
                         that will make them more resilient to manmade pressures and climate change; and (d) promoting
                         synergies with the FIP project and the Global Dedicated Grant Mechanism for Indigenous Peoples
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and Local Communities .

                                  The proposed project is part of a global program, the G-DGM that was created and
                         developed as a special window under the FIP. The FIP is one of the three programs under the
                         Strategic Climate Fund (SCF), a Multi-donor Trust Fund established in 2009, under the Climate
                         Investment Funds (CIF) partnership to provide fast-track climate financing to reduce deforestation
                         and forest degradation in tropical countries. The G-DGM was designed to promote the inclusion of
                         communities reliant on forests in policy formulation and initiatives that seek to reduce deforestation
                         and degradation. The G-DGM is being established to provide grants to LCs to support their
                         participation in the development of FIP strategies, programs, and projects, as well as in other REDD+
                         processes at the local, national, and global levels.
                                  The G-DGM follows the framework guidelines and set of activities covered under the
                         components designed for the Global DGM. The project will support capacity building and finance
                         the demand-driven provision of grants to community organizations of LCs in Ghana to strengthen
                         their participation in FIP and other REDD+ processes at the local, national, and global levels as well
                         as to increase their capacity to adapt to climate change. The G-DGM will prioritize its actions in the
                         Western and Brong Ahafo Regions to promote synergies with the FIP and FCPF projects. Capacity-
                         building and training activities will have a regional scope but in the last year of the project will
                         include some national-level capacity building

                         Component 1: Capacity Building and Institutional Strengthening (Estimated Total Cost: US$1.0
                         million)
                         This ➢❨ basic training➢❨ is the first step that must be undertaken by community members, eligible
                         CBOs, others to engage in the project and better understand the link between the concepts of climate
                         change, REDD+, their activities on the ground and the grants for investments. The project will
                         finance goods, services, and operational costs for this basic training to perform the following
Public Disclosure Copy




                         activities:
                         (a)      Promote training workshops and capacity-building activities aimed at improving LCs➢❨
                         capacity to understand climate change, REDD+, the impact of local and global activities on
                         greenhouse gases (GHGs), climate change, livelihoods, and so on.
                         (b)      Improve extension service providers➢❨ ability to incorporate this knowledge (a) into their
                         activities by targeting them for basic training (COCOBOD- cocoa growers extension service),
                         assemblymen, district officers and others) so that they can be more effective trainers to the
                         communities over the long-term.
                         (c)      Improve the chiefs/traditional authorities ability to effectively combat threats from within
                         and without by providing basic training for them which will allow them to understand the
                         consequences of threats to the LCs such as illegal surface mining (widespread Gallamsey), illegal
                         chain saw operations, etc.
                         (d)       To improve the depth of perception about local actions in climate change/REDD+ which
                         have a global impact, trips (national and international) should be arranged for selected community
                         members to learn how local action related to REDD+/Climate Change can make the difference to
                         lives and livelihoods in a community setting.
                                  For these very interested participants who have fully grasped the basic training and who have
                         personalized its messages, the NEA will seek out eac h year local, national, or global venues related
                         to REDD+ and climate change that key proponents can attend and participate in, which, in turn will


                                                                     Page 2 of 12
                         further build capacity and allow community members to practice what they have learned and
                         understood. To understand links with the FIP project, the FIP organizers will organize training to
                         highlight the relationship of the DGM to the FIP and the broader priorities of the FIP that go well
Public Disclosure Copy




                         beyond the DGM intervention. This will enable communities to see themselves as belonging to a
                         wider national initiative and not just a smaller DGM project and enable them to participate more
                         fully in the FIP
                                  This component will, in addition, support training to enable the preparation of the individual
                         and community proposals for community initiatives (Component 2), which includes writing the
                         proposals, examining the costs and benefits, examining the sustainability of the initiative, and so on.
                         The proposal can be written by a potential grantee after they have received basic training.

                         Component 2: Sustainable and Adaptive Community Initiatives (Estimated Total Cost: US$3.5
                         million)
                                  The aim of this component is to assist LCs and organizations to develop and implement
                         innovative community initiatives to address issues related to (a) the sustainable management of forest
                         and natural resources in their territories; (b) the vulnerabilities and threats faced by LCs➢❨
                         livelihoods due to climate change; and (c) their adaptation to existing climate and inclusive growth
                         challenges. All potential grantees should have completed basic training (with a certificate of
                         completion) under Component 1 before submitting their proposals.
                                  Component 2 includes two subcomponents.
                         Subcomponent 2A: Community Initiatives (Estimated Total Cost: US$2.8 million)
                                  This subcomponent will primarily finance goods as well as operational costs for (a) eligible
                         communities as a whole (community-level initiatives)); (b) individuals living in these communities
                         (individual initiatives); and (c) community-based organizations (CBOs) (who have been working in
                         Brong Ahafo and Western Regions in climate change/REDD+ thematic areas for more than five
                         years), to undertake small-scale activities for sustainable initiatives that fall under predetermined
                         themes. Those who have benefited from initiatives under the FIP project will not be allowed to
                         benefit under the DGM, given that they should not get double benefits.
                         Examples of initiatives that will be supported include, but are not limited to, reafforestation,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         agroforestry, shade-grown cocoa, drought-resistant crops, water and soil conservation measures,
                         efficient wood-burning stoves, alternative energy to wood, rehabilitation of degraded areas, rainwater
                         collection and storage systems for crops, firefighting services for the community, alternative climate-
                         smart livelihoods, and others, subject to the approval of the National Steering Committee (NSC), the
                         National Executing Agency (NEA) and the Bank. These initiatves are broken down into six thematic
                         areas. Therefore, community initiatives will potentially aim at achieving the following (additional
                         detail found in Annex 2-Detailed Project Design):
                         (a)      Increase biomass coverage and diversity (for example, community woodlots that are
                         maintained as woodlots; individual trees planted on community, degraded, or individual lands where
                         land is not a limiting factor; tree nursery establishment; plantations for woodlots that will go through
                         a cycle of plant/replanting; planting shade-grown cocoa on individual plots as well as trees that go
                         well with cocoa; and so on).
                         (b)      Improve sustainable livelihoods to bolster against the effects of climate change (for example,
                         vegetable farming, shade grown cocoa, handicraft, processing and marketing of tree based crops,
                         processing equipment for business ventures and so on, skills for processing and marketing,
                         improvement of livelihoods not NRM related for resiliency, skills in financial planning, etc for
                         cocoa/plantation owners/farmers).
                         (c)      Climate-proof community investments (for example, improve their agricultural productivity
                         by developing improved soil and/or water conservation measures for farm and household use,
                         planting of climate-resistant crops, installing weather forecasting-related apps on phones, and

                                                                      Page 3 of 12
                         providing other weather-related equipment and so on).
                         (d)      Soil and Water conservation related investments (for example, small scale local
                         infrastructure such as boreholes, rain water collection systems, composting and so on).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (e)      Reduce carbon emission and reduction of deforestation ( for example, improved stoves,
                         alternative energy to wood; firefighting services which may include provision of water [borehole or
                         other], firefighting training, and equipment to be used in forest fires; controlled burning, fire safety
                         during planting, and so on).
                         (f)      Scale up of existing ventures that increase and maintain biomass: this pertains to those
                         individuals or communities who are already engaged in climate/REDD+ ventures such as people
                         already engaged in plantations or woodlots or existing schemes that need scaling up. However, such
                         an investment requires a firm establishment of the baseline from which the additional activities will
                         be supported by the project.

                         Subcomponent 2B: Technical Training of the Grantee in Activity Implementation (Estimated Total
                         Cost: US$0.7 million)
                                  This subcomponent will finance the field-based technical training (in Twi) of the selected
                         grantee (individual or community) in the specific activity for which the proposal was selected. This is
                         tailored training to ensure the success of the investments over a period of five years and beyond.
                         Fifty percent of the grantee activities should have been initiated on the ground by the end of the year
                         2, with no additional activity commencing after year 4. However, technical re-training should
                         continue for all participants over a five-year duration of the project to ensure that the initiatives will
                         be sustained even after the project ends.
                                   Once a proposal has been selected, the funds will support the technical training activities for
                         the grantees along lines of interest. For example, those interested in agroforestry and tree planting
                         will receive specific training before and during implementation of the activity. For technical lines for
                         which there is no in-house expert, the funds will be used to recruit a specialist in that technical area
                         to do the relevant training and follow-up.
                                  Field-based technical training should only be initiated with a grantee in response to an
                         accepted proposal. Types of technical training must be directly linked to the needs outlined in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         proposal. All training must be hands-on, practical, on-the-ground/farm-level training instead of
                         classroom training.
                                  Trees funded under the DGM should go through a process of voluntary registration (after
                         planting) to ensure that the trees can be registered to the planters. This is a cumbersome process, so it
                         should not be allowed to stall the rollout of the activities but should be done afterwards. For
                         situations where the landowner and planter are different, written and notarized permission from the
                         owner must be granted before any registration. If there is no agreement, those trees will remain
                         unregistered. For community lots, registration will occur in the name of the community, rather than
                         the individual chief.
                                  Each proposal submitted by LCs for community initiatives will be assessed for the needs of
                         on-site training/technical assistance. The technical team, which trains the community, must also be
                         field based (living and operating in Brong Ahafo or Western Region) and their on-site technical
                         assistance should extend to the end of the project.

                         Component 3: Project Governance, Monitoring, and Evaluation (Estimated Total Cost: US$1.0
                         million)
                                  The aim of this component is to support the project➢❨ s effective governance and efficient
                         management, dissemination, monitoring and evaluation (M&E). This component will finance the
                         incremental operational costs incurred by the NEA for effectively and efficiently carrying out its



                                                                       Page 4 of 12
                         responsibilities (a) by serving as secretariat to the NSC; (b) through the project➢❨ s technical
                         coordination, M&E; and reporting to the Bank and the Global Steering Committee (GSC); (c)
                         through the project➢❨ s adequate financial management, procurement, and auditing; (d) through the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project➢❨ s Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) operation; and (e) by supervising the
                         implementation of community initiatives and results assessments. Further information on the
                         NEA➢❨ s role and responsibilities is presented in annex 3. This component will also finance travel,
                         staff placement in the field, recruitment of any required NEA staff not already on the staff roll, and
                         limited procurement of software and hardware.
                                  The G-DGM will also benefit from the global component on knowledge sharing and
                         networking on REDD+.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will focus on the High Forest Zone in the Western and Brong Ahafo Regions although
                         there may be scope for some national level activities. Land use in the HFZ includes cocoa farms,
                         subsistence crops and fallow lands. Biodiversity in the HFZ is high and the HFZ falls within the
                         West African Biodiversity Hotspot. The focus on these two regions mirrors the focus of the Ghana
                         Forest Investment Plan which the DGM directly complements.

                         The Brong Ahafo region covers an area of approximately 39,558 km2 and an estimated population of
                         2.2 million (GSS, 2010) with a population density of 58 persons/km2.

                         The predominant vegetation zones are the moist semi-deciduous forest, transitional and the Guinea
                         Savanna woodland roughly representing the southern, middle and northern parts of the region
                         respectively. The forest belt is mainly found to the south and south-western parts of the Region
                         while the savanna wood land predominates in the eastern half of the northern third of the region. The
                         region has access to economic trees estimated at 29 million m3 ? (17% of national stock).
                         The Western Region covers an area of approximately 239,221 km2 and an estimated population of
                         1,924,577 .
Public Disclosure Copy




                         About 75 percent of its vegetation is within the High Forest Zone and lies in the equatorial climate
                         zone. The rich tropical forest makes it one of the largest producers of raw and sawn timbers as well
                         as processed wood products. The region is home to the Ankasa Conservation Area (approximately
                         500km2, which is comprised of Nini-Snhie National Park and the Ankasa Resource Reserve.

                         Western region is the largest producer of cocoa and timber and the second highest producer of gold
                         (both large scale, small scale, and artisanal mining). In addition, the region has commercial
                         plantations of rubber and palm oil and is now producing oil.
                         Within the HFZ cocoa farms, subsistence crops and fallow lands are dominant land use times. Both
                         regions have diverse populations including various ethnic, sub-ethnic and linguistic groups.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Dora Nsuwa Cudjoe (GEN06)
                         Michael Gboyega Ilesanmi (GSU01)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            The proposed conservation project is expected to have a
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     positive environmental impact because it seeks to promote


                                                                      Page 5 of 12
                                                        sustainable ethno-development, forest and natural
                                                        resources management and adaptation, and climate-
                                                        change adaptation for LCs whose livelihoods depend on
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        the biome➢❨ s natural resources. Project activities may
                                                        also contribute toward reducing deforestation pressures on
                                                        the remaining forests➢❨ on which the livelihoods of these
                                                        traditional populations mostly depend➢❨ and protecting
                                                        headwaters and riparian zones, thus reducing water and
                                                        soil pollution. The nature and scale of the proposed
                                                        investments will not have significant adverse impacts, and
                                                        the Project is rated as Category B. Despite these positive
                                                        impacts, the proposed Project will be working in various
                                                        sensitive biodiversity and forest (off reserve) areas. Ghana
                                                        DGM will build upon the Ghana FIP ESMF, that has been
                                                        has been prepared, consulted upon, cleared by the Bank
                                                        and disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   Some of the forest and woodlands to be targeted will
                         4.04                           contain critical ecosystems; the project will enhance the
                                                        quality of the management of these critical ecosystems,
                                                        designed to reduce ongoing patterns of loss and
                                                        degradation of natural habitats, notably forests. The
                                                        ESMF provides guidance on avoiding or mitigating
                                                        impacts on natural habitats
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes   Assisting LCs and organizations to develop and
                                                        implement innovative community initiatives to address
                                                        issues related to the sustainable management of forest and
                                                        natural resources in their territories is one of the priorities
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        of this project in addition to trees in the agroforestry
                                                        landscape. The project will explore integrated and
                                                        participatory forest management as part of a strategy of
                                                        increasing carbon sequestration through sustainable forest
                                                        management. The ESMF includes guidance on managing
                                                        forestry issues. Community forestry activities will adhere
                                                        to the principles of sustainable forest management
                                                        specified in OP 4.36.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes    The project will not directly finance the use of pesticides
                                                        but will promote IPM and application of pesticide to
                                                        minimize risks to human health and the environment,
                                                        particularly in situations when pesticide use may increase
                                                        in association with the project, such as promotion of shift
                                                        of the existing cocoa farming practices towards climate
                                                        smart and resilient ➢❨ shade➢❨ cocoa. The FIP Project
                                                        specific Pest Management Plan has been prepared with
                                                        this in mind, to ensure that the project does not increase
                                                        the environmental impacts of pesticide use, and where
                                                        possible these are managed responsibly, in line with



                                                         Page 6 of 12
                                                              sound environmental and human health protection
                                                              objectives. It is also noted that the key environmental and
                                                              social issues and risks associated with chemical
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              applications in cocoa are part of the analysis undertaken
                                                              as part of the ESMF prepared for FIP. The FIP ESMF also
                                                              provides identification of IPM activities linked to the
                                                              cocoa enhancement activities that are considered
                                                              important to be supported. A Pest Management Plan has
                                                              been prepared for FIP, consulted upon, cleared by the
                                                              Bank and disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop, and
                                                              will be used under Ghana DGM.
                            Physical Cultural           No    No PCR should be affected through the implementation of
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11              this project. However, screening of sites for pilot
                                                              activities will include specific screening under the ESMF
                                                              to avoid adversely affecting physical cultural heritage,
                                                              such as sacred groves.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No    There are no indigenous peoples as per OP 4.10. Reviews
                            BP 4.10                           of the applicability of 4.10 in Ghana have determined that
                                                              characteristics outlined under paragraph 4 are not present,
                                                              and the policy is not applicable. The Global Mechanism
                                                              refers to Local Communities and Indigenous Peoples, the
                                                              project in Ghana refers to local communities as
                                                              beneficiaries, reflecting the specific identification in that
                                                              country context.
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes      From a safeguards point of view, no involuntary
                            OP/BP 4.12                        resettlement of population will result from any activities
                                                              financed by the Project, However, there may be cases
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              where use and access to resources may be restricted due
                                                              to changes in forest management and resource
                                                              management plans, hence, the safeguards policy of the
                                                              World Bank (O.P. 4.12), Involuntary Resettlement, is
                                                              triggered. In this case, the appropriate safeguards
                                                              instrument is a Process Framework. To this end, the
                                                              Process framework for the FIP project would be updated
                                                              according to the DGM context, consulted upon and
                                                              disclosed in country and at the InfoShop by Appraisal.
                                                              This Process Framework describes the steps to identify
                                                              and possibly resolve any situation of restriction of access
                                                              that may appear.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No    Not applicable.
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No    Not applicable.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No    Not applicable.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

                                                               Page 7 of 12
                         A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           The proposed conservation project is expected to have a positive environmental impact because it
                           seeks to promote sustainable ethno-development, forest and natural resources management and
                           adaptation, and climate-change adaptation for LCs whose livelihoods depend on the biome➢❨ s
                           natural resources. Project activities may also contribute toward reducing deforestation pressures on
                           the remaining forests➢❨ on which the livelihoods of these traditional populations mostly
                           depend➢❨ and protecting headwaters and riparian zones, thus reducing water and soil pollution.
                           The nature and scale of the proposed investments will not have significant adverse impacts, and
                           the Project is rated as Category B. Despite these positive impacts, the proposed Project will be
                           working in various sensitive biodiversity and forest (off reserve) areas. Ghana DGM will build
                           upon the Ghana FIP ESMF.
                           Specific country-level features and operational procedures to screen, assess, mitigate and monitor
                           environmental impacts will be dealt with in the POM. To address the likely steep learning curve of
                           the NEA and the NSC on World Bank safeguards policies, their application monitoring and overall
                           supervision, training will be provided upfront once the authority is chosen and the committee is
                           formed. User friendly training manuals will be developed which could serve as ready reference on
                           Bank safeguards. It is envisaged that similar tailored training will be offered to prospective
                           applicants for the grant support under Component 2. Here again, training modules will be
                           packaged in the form of handout/leaflets for easy reference when developing proposals and during
                           implementation
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Due to the community-based approach, the project is not expected to bring adverse effects for
                           beneficiary communities; on the contrary, it will support activities that will contribute to (a)
                           improve the livelihood of LCs; (b) increase their social resilience and their adaptive and mitigating
Public Disclosure Copy




                           capacity to deal with the social, environmental, and climate pressures that they face and that harm
                           their social, cultural, and economic survival; (c) recover and preserve their traditional knowledge;
                           and (d) strengthen the capacity of their representative organizations to plan their future life and
                           promote the effective, efficient, and sustainable management of their lands and natural resources.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The proposed project was prepared through an intensive consultation process with key
                           stakeholders. A stakeholder engagement process followed by two regional workshops and a final
                           national workshop were carried out with the broad participation of both men and women. The
                           main features of the proposed project design the eligible activities and proponent organizations,
                           the size of community grants, the composition of the NSC, the criteria for the selection of the
                           NEA, and so on will be debated and approved by the NSC, which comprises community-selected
                           representatives.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           A screening process and mitigation guidelines are included in the ESMF to address risks and
                           impacts of concern. The ESMP will be included in the Project Implementation Manual. The ESMP
                           outlines mechanisms for:
                           ➢❨¢ Screening of proposed project interventions, identifying potential environmental and social


                                                                     Page 8 of 12
                           impacts and management of safeguard policies implications;
                           ➢❨¢ Arrangements by the relevant institutions for implementation and their capacity building;
                           ➢❨¢ Monitoring ESMP measures implementation;
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ➢❨¢ Community consultations.
                           The formal environmental approval and permitting processes will be the Ghana EIA Regulations
                           (EPA, 1999), that also established a process to screen and evaluate all developments, undertakings,
                           projects and programs which have the potential to give rise to significant environmental impacts,
                           and the World Bank safeguard policies. The Ghanaian environmental permit procedures are
                           followed by all projects. Those projects requiring Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
                           clearance will only commence when an environmental permit has been obtained from the EPA.
                           The Agency has provided the list of projects for which an Environmental and Social Impacts
                           Assessment (ESIA) is mandatory and these are detailed in the ESMF and are consistent with the
                           World Bank categorization of projects.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The proposed project was prepared through an intensive consultation process with key
                           stakeholders: LCs from the Western and Brong Ahafo Regions. Community consultations began in
                           October, 2015 during which stakeholders raised a number of issues related to the project (annex 7)
                           and incorporated into the design. The consultations culminated in each community selecting an
                           individual that was their representative to attend a Regional Workshop in January, 2016, one in
                           Western Region and the other in Brong-Ahafo region. The culmination of the regional workshop
                           was the selection of the national steering committee members. The final workshop (March, 2016),
                           this time at the national level, invited all climate change/NRM related NGOs/CBOs to discuss the
                           project with the Bank and Global DGM, culminating in the presentation of the NSC members.
                           The first meeting of the NSC was held also in March, 2016 on day two of the National Workshop
                           and the second meeting was held in April, 2016. The third NSC meeting is slated for May, 2016.
                           The main features of the proposed project design➢❨ the appropriateness of the proposed
                           community demand-driven approach, the eligible activities and proponent organizations, the size
Public Disclosure Copy




                           of community sub-grants, the composition of the NSC, the criteria for the selection of the NEA,
                           the arrangements for social control, and so on➢❨ will be fully debated and approved by self-
                           appointed representatives from the LCs in the project area.

                          Due to the community demand-driven approach, the project is not expected to bring any adverse
                          effects for beneficiary communities. Instead, it will support only activities that will contribute to
                          (a) improve the livelihood of LCs; (b) increase their social resilience, adaptive, and mitigating
                          capacity to deal with the social and environmental pressures that they face and that harm their
                          social, cultural, and economic survival; (c) recover and preserve their traditional knowledge; (d)
                          strengthen the capacity of their chiefs to better manage their resources; and (e) connect these LCs
                          to a national and global stage of actors working on climate change issues.
                          The project will allow community members who benefit from a subgrant to donate land and other
                          private assets to the subproject on a voluntary basis without compensation and without any
                          significant or long-term impact on livelihood. The POM will clearly indicate the criteria and
                          procedures to identify cases in which voluntary donations of land or usage rights for parcels of
                          land are necessary for a community initiative, to ensure that these donations are fully voluntary
                          and that adequate mechanisms are in place to confirm that affected parties in cases of loss of
                          access or usage rights are compensated through culturally appropriate means.
                          Strong monitoring and approval mechanisms will be put in place by the NEA to ensure that asset
                          donations are indeed voluntary and that no negative impact on livelihood will ensue. Annual social


                                                                    Page 9 of 12
                           audits carried out by the NEA will verify the informed agreements of affected people.
                           The POM will also indicate the criteria and procedures to ensure that financed community
                           initiatives are proposed by socially legitimate and representative individuals, CBOs, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           community leaders and have received free, prior, informed, and broad support from the proponent
                           communities.
                           The main responsibility for implementing the ESMF rests with the NEA.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-Nov-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   28-Nov-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ghana                                                            28-Nov-2014
                           Comments: Will re-disclose during project appraisal mission
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      28-Nov-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   28-Nov-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ghana                                                            28-Nov-2014
                           Comments: Will redisclose during appraisal mission
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      28-Nov-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   02-Dec-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ghana                                                            28-Nov-2014
                           Comments: Will redisclose during appraisal mission
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?


                                                                   Page 10 of 12
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?



                                                                     Page 11 of 12
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Nyaneba E. Nkrumah
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)                         Date: 06-Jul-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Magda Lovei (PMGR)                          Date: 12-Jul-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    Page 12 of 12
