                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC14093

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Jul-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Iraq                             Project ID:      P151357
                            Project Name:      PFM Institutional Development and Capacity Building (P151357)
                            Task Team          Emmanuel F. Cuvillier
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          09-May-2016                      Estimated        18-Jul-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GGO23                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General public administration sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):          Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (50%), Other public
                                               sector governance (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     41.40                     Total Bank Financing:         41.40
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        41.40
                              Total                                                                        41.40
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to improve the GoI budget management
                           practices at the federal level and in the KRG. It will pursue this objective by supporting capacity
                           development and foundational systems (IFMIS, PIMS, Public Procurement, andFinancial Controls).
                           The project outputs are expected to contribute to better information for fiscal management and
                           strategic allocation of resources, more efficient service delivery, and public finance transparency.
                           C. Project Description
                         The Iraqi PFM development framework covers the legal and institutional framework for budgeting
                         and public finance, the various stages of the budget cycle, the development and operational
                         implementation of the IFMIS, which includes improving the transparency and accountability of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         budget process, and the available skills and capacity of budget regulatory institutions (MoF and
                         MoP) and line ministries implementing the budget.

                         Some preparatory PFM work was advanced in 2014 with support by the Iraqi Technical Assistance
                         and Capacity Building Fund (TACBF): i) A system requirement study (SRS) for IFMIS; ii) Open
                         budget training; iii) A framework for public sector internal control and audit; and iv) The PIMS
                         Assessment and its 2016–2018 Action Plan. FY16 Bank KAS activities that will strengthen project
                         readiness include an update of the PFM performance measurement assessment, a MoF capacity
                         assessment, increased alignment of web-based budget publication with open budget principles,
                         technical comments on the PFM legal framework, and improvements to the supreme audit institution
                         (Federal Bureau of Supreme Audit) reporting.

                         The Federal Government of Iraq and the KRG asked for continuing World Bank support in specific
                         PFM areas in order to lay down strong foundations for a viable PFM modernization project, overseen
                         by their respective ministries of Finance and Planning. During project identification, the government
                         counterparts expressed their desire for a focused project with limited activities and implementing
                         entities, as shown below:

                         1.1 IFMIS design and initial implementation (MoF): US$19.00 million
                         1.2 PFM/IFMIS capacity development (MoF): US$ 3.75 million
                         1.3 Internal Control and Audit (MoF): US$1.00 million
                         1.4 Project management and reform coordination (MoF): US$1.25 million

                         2.1 PIMS modernization (MoP): US$2.75 million
                         2.2 Public Procurement modernization (MoP): US$2.00 million
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2.3 Project management and reform coordination (MoP): US$0.25 million

                         Description of Components

                         IFMIS Design and Implementation: IFMIS design and implementation is the backbone of this new
                         PFM project and is considered as a top priority initiative by the new federal government. The
                         continuation of PFM reform in Iraq cannot not anymore be envisaged without an IFMIS in place.
                         This system will be the conduit for modernizing budget management business processes that will
                         allow to streamline budget preparation, track financial events and record all transactions, summarize
                         information, support reporting and policy decisions, and incorporate the element of information and
                         communication technology (ICT), skilled personnel, procedures, controls and data.

                         It is envisaged that Phase 1 of IFMIS introduction would have a duration of 4 years supported by this
                         operation, for procurement, designing, configuring, testing, commissioning, training and
                         implementing in MoF, MoP, three line ministries, and two governorates. In KRG, the IFMIS would
                         be piloted in the MoF and MoP.

                         PFM/IFMIS Capacity Development: Critical success factors in carrying out such a major change
                         management effort include training, capacity building, and the ensuring of sustainability. It must be
                         understood that the federal government and the KRG will also have to invest political capital to
                         embark on PFM reform to overcome resistance from vested interests.

                         Internal Control and Audit: Internal control and audit have to be strengthened for PFM reform to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         successful. The fragmentation of the budget preparation and execution process, the absence of a
                         coherent accounting framework, the time needed in issuing annual financial statements, poor
                         investment budget execution rates, lack of a Treasury Single Account (TSA), and weak commitment
                         controls increase the risk that cash and appropriations are not well managed. This leads to pressures
                         including unnecessary formal and informal sequestrations, virements over funding of investment
                         projects, and disbursement delays. Technical interventions in these areas will require complementary
                         efforts to build a reliable internal control and audit system applicable to both public procurement and
                         recurrent expenditure management.

                         PIMS modernization: Both the federal government and the KRG face the problem of allocating
                         scarce resources towards the satisfaction of infinite needs and with the goal of obtaining the
                         maximum social and economic benefits. Effective project appraisal can support appropriate choices
                         of outputs and designs and reduce the risk of excessive costs of construction and operation . Rigorous
                         project identification and selection systems act as screening mechanisms to prevent inappropriate and
                         inefficient projects from getting into the project cycle and gaining political support and momentum
                         that can make them difficult to be stopped at later stages. PIMS modernization will be linked to both
                         modernization of budget management practices embedded in IFMIS development, and to
                         strengthening of public procurement needed for efficient implementation of investment projects.

                         Public Procurement modernization: There is a broad consensus among stakeholders that federal and
                         regional governments continue to struggle to spend their procurement budgets. Nationally, an
                         average of less than 64 percent of capital expenditures was executed for the years 2010-2013.
                         Problems with procurement and contracting capacity appear to be preventing a large proportion of
                         spending from taking place in an efficient and transparent manner.

                         Project management and reform coordination: The project will provide both MoF and MoP entities
Public Disclosure Copy




                         with resources for technical leadership and management of the overall reform program, and to ensure
                         the specific project objectives are met on time, on quality, and on budget.

                         Areas not covered: In accordance with the focused scope of the project, it will not include support to
                         accountability institutions such as the Bureau of Supreme Audit (BSA) or the legislature’s fiscal
                         oversight bodies. The Bank is working with other development partners, such as the EU and UK
                         DFID, to identify opportunities for parallel capacity development support to these institutions.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project Location
                         Federal level: Baghdad
                         Regional level: Erbil (Kurdistan Region of Iraq)
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Environmental Assessment                                    No
                                 OP/BP 4.01
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                 No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                          No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                     No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources                                 No
                                 OP/BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.10
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                No
                                 BP 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No

                                 Projects on International      No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Aug-2015
Public Disclosure Copy




                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      No safeguard-related study needed.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Emmanuel F. Cuvillier
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nina Chee (SA)                                                                                                          Date: 12-Apr-2016
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Hisham Ahmed Waly (PMGR)                                                                                               Date: 13-Apr-2016
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
