                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSR18985
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Aug-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Aug-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Central African Republic                     Project ID:           P149884
                            Project Name:      CF-EMERGENCY PUBLIC SERVICES RESPONSE PROJECT (P149884)
                            Task Team          Kolie Ousmane Maurice Megnan,Ragnvald Michel Maellberg
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          17-Mar-2014              Estimated     24-Apr-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GGO26                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                     Yes
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        30.00           Total Bank Financing:      23.90
                            Financing Gap:              6.10
Public Disclosure Copy




                                Financing Source                                                 Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                    0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                            13.11
                              IDA recommitted as a Grant                                                                           10.79
                              Financing Gap                                                                                         6.10
                              Total                                                                                                23.90
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives


                            3. Project Description
                           The changes proposed in the Restructuring Paper (RP) for the Emergency Public Services Response
                           Project (EPSRP) do not affect the project development objective, safeguard categories, financial

                                                                                 Page 1 of 4
                         management and procurement arrangements, disbursement category, or the institutional
                         arrangements. The proposed restructuring only involves reallocation of resources between the
                         components to allow for the financing of new activities added to Component 2 - Technical
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Assistance to core structures in the Ministries of Finance and Civil Service. New intermediate result
                         indicators (see Annex 1) were added to the results framework to capture the impact of the new
                         activities. The new activities aim to address the key challenges and policies recommendations that
                         were identified in the Public Financial Management (PFM) Policy Note (P157806), elaborated in
                         consultation with the new government, focusing mainly on: (i) public investment management; (ii)
                         domestic revenues mobilization; (iii) upgrade of the computerized budgeting and accounting system;
                         and (iv) external oversight.

                         The project is in full compliance with the Bank➢❨ s financial management requirements, and there
                         are no overdue audit reports and interim financial reports.

                         This Level 2 restructuring reflects the Government of the Central African Republic (GoCAR)
                         justifiable request sent to the World Bank Group (WBG) on June 23 2016, to amend the Financing
                         Agreement and add these new activities using project savings amounting to US$ 5 million.


                         The Bank team has evaluated the request and considered the justification, time and amount requested
                         appropriate.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         A phased approach will be adopted starting in Bangui and moving progressively, as security
                         improves, into provinces.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (GEN07)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              No
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP     No
                          4.04
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36         No
                          Pest Management OP 4.09    No
                          Physical Cultural          No
                          Resources OP/BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/     Yes            In face of the risk that some civil servants might not
                          BP 4.10                                   deliver basic services (e.g. health and education) in areas
                                                                    where indigenous peoples (Baaka) are present, an IPPF
                                                                    was prepared (in line with OP 4.10, Indigenous Peoples)
                                                                    under the original project and incorporated in the Project
                                                                    Implementation Manual. Its related dissemination
                                                                    campaign, started under the original project and covered
                                                                    by the media, was organized with support from the PIU,



                                                                      Page 2 of 4
                                                                     the Ministry of Social Affairs, and an NGO. It focused on
                                                                     (a) explaining the existence of the Litigation Committee
                                                                     to civil servants from the indigenous community, and (ii)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     discussing the factors (including the presence of civil
                                                                     servants) affecting service delivery in the Baaka
                                                                     communities This dissemination campaign was pursued
                                                                     during the Additional Financing in conjunction with other
                                                                     Bank-funded projects in these areas.
                            Involuntary Resettlement    No
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                N/A
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                N/A
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                              impacts.
                                No reasonable alternatives are identifiable from an environmental management perspective.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                In face of the risk that some civil servants might not deliver basic services (e.g. health and
                              education) in areas where Indigenous Peoples (Baaka) are present, an IPPF was prepared (in line
                              with OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples) under the original project and incorporated in the Project
                              Implementation Manual. The restructured project will pursue dissemination and sensitization
                              activities on this IPPF in conjunction with other Bank-funded projects in these areas.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                                An IPPF was prepared (in line with OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples) under the original project
                              and incorporated in the Project Implementation Manual. The restructured project will pursue
                              dissemination and sensitization activities on this IPPF in conjunction with other Bank-funded
                              projects in these areas.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                             Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework


                                                                       Page 3 of 4
                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                      01-Jun-2014
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                   01-Jun-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                            "In country" Disclosure

                              Comments:
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Kolie Ousmane Maurice Megnan,Ragnvald Michel Maellberg
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)               Date: 23-Aug-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Guenter Heidenhof (PMGR)          Date: 23-Aug-2016
                            Manager:



                                                                       Page 4 of 4
