                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC13099

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Aug-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Aug-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Bosnia and Herzegovina          Project ID:     P152406
                            Project Name:     Federation Road Sector Modernization Project (P152406)
                            Task Team         Moustafa Baher El-Hefnawy,Liljana Sekerinska
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         30-Nov-2015                     Estimated       31-Mar-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GTI03                           Lending         Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (80%), Public administration-
                                              Transportation (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Regional integration (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     92.43                   Total Bank Financing:        54.93
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                   0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     54.93
                              EC European Investment Bank                                               37.50
                              Total                                                                     92.43
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Overall Development Objective of the Transport Sector Modernization Program (TSMP) is to
                           improve transport connectivity of the country along priority transport links and to support
                           improvements in transport operations and asset management practices. The Program is multi-phased
                           with a First Phase including road sections in FBH.
                         The Project Development Objectives of the First Phase of the TSMP are to: (i) improve road
                         connectivity, road use efficiency and road safety along project roads and (ii) progress towards more
                         efficient management of the road network including road asset management in the Federation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Bosnia and Herzegovina.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed Project (the First Phase of TSMP) will support the Government of FBH in the
                         implementation of a part of its new Road Modernization Program. It is envisioned that the
                         Government’s Program will be supported by EBRD, EIB and the Bank (EIB has already approved its
                         loan). The proposed Project would be co-financed by EIB and the Bank totaling about €84.0 million.
                         Co-financing shares could vary by subproject/contract. EIB will also finance additional sections,
                         which are out of the scope of the proposed Bank Project, estimated to cost €15.9 million. These
                         additional EIB sections are separated geographically from the Project financed road sections. EBRD
                         would use parallel financing in the amount of €80.0 million to implement a certain proportion of the
                         Government’s Program in two phases. The first phase will be flood-related damage repair that is
                         expected to start at the end of this year and the second phase planned for 2017 will finance by
                         bypasses, a few of which might be physically adjacent or located in close geographical proximity to
                         the Project financed road sections. However these are not functionally linked to the EBRD financed
                         bypasses.

                         In accordance with design documentation, the design and economic viability of the proposed Bank
                         Project are not dependent on the EBRD project or on the additional sections financed by EIB.
                         Moreover, the second phase of the EBRD project is not contemporaneous with the proposed Bank
                         Project. The World Bank safeguards will be applicable to the proposed Project only, covering all the
                         activities co-financed by the Bank and EIB regardless the size of co-financing shares

                         The Project is designed as the first of a series of projects (SOP). This approach provides a common
                         project framework to address specific issues needed to enhance transport connectivity, increase the
                         efficiency of transport operations and improve asset management in BH. Under the SOP approach,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         interested entities may opt for participation in the program, but there is no interdependency in
                         implementation among specific projects in the series. In other words, each project can achieve its
                         own objectives independent of whether the other projects are carried out. The program is horizontal
                         in that the different projects could start when ready. The advantage of the SOP instrument is that it
                         allows the Bank to provide support in a flexible manner and is well-suited to support long-term
                         reforms, with logical sequencing of activities, when each entity meets the readiness criteria. Each
                         subsequent project in the SOP will be described in a separate PAD and corresponding ISDS.
                         However, under the SOP approach, there is also no commitment to the financing of ensuing phases.

                         The Project in FBH is the first phase in since the entity has demonstrated readiness and willingness
                         to participate through: (i) a formal request and expression of interest to join the program; (ii) a
                         program of activities designed to meet the PDO of the program; and (iii) the preparation (including
                         advanced preparation with EIB) of detailed designs and related safeguards documents.

                         It is proposed that the Project have four components:

                         Component 1: Road Reconstruction (estimated cost €60-70 million, including about 57% of IBRD
                         financing). This component will finance civil works to:
                         (i)      complete construction of the main road M17.3 Neum – Stolac from St.Neum to Drenovac in
                         three stages: (1) St.Neum- Broćanac, 6 km; (2) Broćanac - Cerovica approx. 12 km length, and (3)
                         Cerovica – Drenovac, approx. 13 km length;
                         (ii)   construct passing lanes for slow traffic on selected road sections;
                         (iii)  reconstruct/rehabilitate selected road sections with partial axis correction;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (iv)   rehabilitate selected tunnels; and
                         (v)    rehabilitate selected bridges.

                         The selected sections and structures under activities (ii)-(v) are located outside M17.3 Neum – Stolac
                         road.

                         Component 2: Road Safety Interventions (estimated cost €2-4 million, including 57% of IBRD
                         financing). This component will finance reconstruction of intersections classified as black spots on
                         the main roads.

                         Component 3: Institutional Reforms (estimated cost €5-6 million, including 100% of IBRD
                         financing). This component will strengthen road management in FBH with a particular focus on
                         sustainability of investments and road safety. It will include work with FBH-MoTC, FBH-MoF and
                         PC Roads of FBH in order to (i) revise road categorization (on a functional basis) that would allow
                         the proper allocation of resources to the different categories, (ii) develop a sustainable financing
                         mechanism for the road sector and (iii) strengthen the capacity of PC Roads of FBH in investment
                         planning and programming, and monitoring; and (iv) support ongoing efforts to establish a
                         sustainable road asset management system. Road safety activities will aim to improve the technical
                         capacity in PC Roads of FBH to institutionalize road safety considerations in operations, and help
                         introduce of a more comprehensive approach to road safety by working with other institutions with
                         responsibilities in safety.

                         Component 4: Project Implementation Support (estimated cost €1.5-2.0 million, including 57% of
                         IBRD financing). This component will finance the supervision of civil works and capacity-building
                         of PC Roads of FBH through the provision of technical assistance, carrying out the annual financial
                         audits of the Project, monitoring project activities, beneficiary satisfaction activities, as well as mid-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         term and impact evaluation surveys.
                         he Project, monitoring project activities, beneficiary satisfaction activities, as well as mid-term and
                         impact evaluation surveys.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The SOP is envisaged to be implemented at a number of locations throughout Bosnia and
                         Herzegovina while the first phase will be implemented solely within the entity of Federation of
                         Bosnia and Herzegovina as a part of overall Government’s Program.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The PC Roads of FBH has experience in implementing the previous World Bank financed project
                         (Road Infrastructure and Safety Project - closed in 2012). The PC Roads has a fairly well established
                         PIU including a full time environmental specialist with extensive experience in both BH
                         environmental legislation and working with other IFIs, in particular WB financed projects. The
                         environmental specialist will remain on board the PIU as a full time staff for the duration of the
                         project. The project will require a (part-time) social specialist to manage and supervise anticipated
                         resettlement and expropriation. The capacity of the subsequent SOP implementing agencies will be
                         assessed by the World Bank team during preparation of the additional project series and reflected in
                           the corresponding ISDS/PADs, and will also be supported in either hiring of an external
                           environmental and social specialist or assigning this task to the existing member of the PIU team.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Esma Kreso (GENDR)
                           Eva Rossi (CRKI3)
                           Ifeta Smajic (GSURR)
                           Sandra Kdolsky (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         Yes            The project is comprised of a number of
                           OP/BP 4.01                                      interventions on road reconstruction (re-pavement,
                                                                           safety interventions, widening of lanes) but also
                                                                           includes new construction of passing lanes, tunnels,
                                                                           overpasses and underpasses and select road sections
                                                                           aimed at improving traffic communication within
                                                                           FBH. A number of environmental impacts are related
                                                                           to reconstruction (dust, noise, waste management,
                                                                           worker safety, traffic management etc) while
                                                                           construction of new roads (component 1.1, M17.3
                                                                           Neum – Stolac road) will also have permanent
                                                                           impacts of land use changes, impacts on the
                                                                           surrounding biodiversity and environment and
                                                                           changes in landscape which need to be addressed
                                                                           through a full Environmental and Social Impact
                                                                           Assessment report. For the M17.3 works, an EIA has
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           been prepared by independent consultants and
                                                                           approved by the Government. The EIA requires
                                                                           some updating to address specific gaps (e.g. on social
                                                                           aspects) and also because it was prepared in 2009.
                                                                           The updated EIA or ESIA will be will be prepared
                                                                           and disclosed prior to Appraisal. For other
                                                                           investments under Component 1, and Component 2,
                                                                           an Environmental and Social Management
                                                                           Framework (ESMF) will be prepared, as at least
                                                                           some of the works are not expected to be identified
                                                                           or at a sufficiently advanced design stage by
                                                                           Appraisal to enable preparation of site-specific EA/
                                                                           EMP. Site-specific EA or EMP (as appropriate) will
                                                                           be prepared prior to Appraisal for any sub-projects
                                                                           that are sufficiently advanced by that time.
                                                                           Adequate due diligence documentation will also be
                                                                           prepared for other phases of the SOP as they are
                                                                           conceptualized. This will take place independent of
                                                                           this project’s preparation The due diligence will be
                                                              reflected in the preparation documents for each
                                                              separate project.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    TBD   Some of the road sections that are included in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              rehabilitation activities are located adjacent to, or in
                                                              the proximity of the potential natural habitats and
                                                              protected areas. This will be reviewed in greater
                                                              detail in the EMF.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             No    It is unlikely that any major impacts will occur on the
                                                              forested areas beyond the measures that would be
                                                              included under the Natural Habitats OP.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09        No    No activities on pest management are foreseen.

                         Physical Cultural Resources    No    There are no identified physical-cultural resources in
                         OP/BP 4.11                           any of the project locations, particularly those with
                                                              new road construction. However, a chance findings
                                                              procedure will be included in the EMPs.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No
                         4.10
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   Due to the variety of sections where the construction
                         BP 4.12                              of a new route, construction of new lanes, changes of
                                                              alignment and axis correction, and the reconstruction
                                                              of the location of road accident black spots is
                                                              planned, it is anticipated that there will be situations
                                                              that require land acquisition and resettlement. An
                                                              existing EIA (2009) for the main road M.17.3 will be
                                                              revised to reflect the status on the ground and to
                                                              strengthen the assessment of potential positive and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              negative social impacts, including those sections for
                                                              which land acquisition and resettlement will be
                                                              required. The ESIA will be conducted by an
                                                              independent consultant/agency. Since parts of the
                                                              M.17.3 road have already been expropriated, a land
                                                              acquisition audit will be prepared prior to Appraisal
                                                              to assess how land acquisition has been conducted
                                                              and to identify potential corrective actions. The
                                                              timeline for implementation of the actions will be
                                                              defined as the preparation progresses. With
                                                              assistance of the Bank team, the client will have to
                                                              prepare an RPF for the sections co-financed by EIB
                                                              and the World Bank consistent with the planned
                                                              ESIA, and the existing EIA for the main road M.17.3
                                                              and the RPF prepared in 2014 for the Flood
                                                              Emergency Recovery Project. Resettlement Action
                                                              Plans (RAPs) will be ready at Appraisal stage for
                                                              those road sections with final detailed designs.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         There are no impacts on dams or any impacts that
                                                                                                                        can be anticipated downstream from dams.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects on International                                   TBD                        Works may include reconstruction of bridges over
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   smaller rivers that are tributaries to international
                                                                                                                        waterways. However, with adequate mitigation
                                                                                                                        measures in place, there should be no direct or
                                                                                                                        indirect impacts from this activity on the
                                                                                                                        international waterways. However, some of the
                                                                                                                        proposed interventions do include mention of
                                                                                                                        riverbed interventions which need to be further
                                                                                                                        clarified by the client prior to Appraisal and to be
                                                                                                                        addressed in the due diligence.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 23-Nov-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The EIA prepared by an independent consultant consortium in 2009 will need to be revised in
                                      light of any changes since then and to strengthen the assessment of social impacts, and also to
                                      make sure that the report is fully compliant with the World Bank requirements for a Category A
                                      Environmental Assessment. The ESIA report needs to be disclosed following the Pelosi
                                      Amendment (120 days prior to the Project’s Board date).

                                      The ESMF and all other due diligence documentation shall be prepared and finalized with
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      disclosure and consultations in country and Infoshop prior to project Appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Moustafa Baher El-Hefnawy,Liljana Sekerinska
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                        Date: 24-Aug-2015
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Juan Gaviria (PMGR)                      Date: 27-Aug-2015
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
