INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA14774
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Oct-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Oct-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Mexico                     Project ID:  P149872
Project Name: Mexico Municipal Energy Efficiency Project (P 149872)
Task Team       Janina Andrea Franco Salazar,Karen Bazex
Leader(s):
Estimated       13-Oct-2015                Estimated    20-Jan-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEE04                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (100%)
Theme(s):       City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (50%), Climate change (50%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     163.00            Total Bank Financing:  100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
O
Borrower                                                                    9.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     100.00
Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country                  54.00
Total                                                                     163.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The development objective of the proposed project is to promote the efficient use of energy in
municipalities by financing energy efficiency investments in selected municipal sectors and
strengthening the enabling environment.
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 7


﻿SENER has requested Bank support to design and implement a pilot for a national municipal energy
efficiency program in 32 municipalities in the country. The proposed operation would seek to reduce
energy consumption in municipalities by increasing their capacity to prepare, finance, and implement
energy efficiency investments, and piloting energy efficiency investments in selected municipalities.
The operation would focus on sectors with cost-effective energy efficiency potential. The proposed
US$100 million IBRD investment operation would be implemented by SENER over a six-year
period and would comprise two components.
Component 1: Policy development and institutional strengthening
It would strengthen the enabling environment for energy efficiency at the municipal level, and
contribute to the identification of potential subprojects that could feed into a pipeline beyond the
Project's life. It would support raising awareness of the multiple benefits of energy efficiency and
enhancing capacities at both the national and subnational levels, as well as developing and adapting
tools and systems to encourage better integration of energy considerations into subnational planning
and management efforts. It would finance: i) capacity building on municipal energy efficiency; ii)
sector-wide policy support, including plans to scale-up activities piloted under this operation with a
view to transition to more commercial and (iii) project monitoring and management activities.
Component 2: Municipal energy efficiency investments
It would support cost-effective energy efficiency investments in municipal street lighting, water and
wastewater, and building sectors - drawing from the results of the diagnostics conducted by SENER.
These activities are expected to demonstrate the value of energy efficiency investments in municipal
sectors as a means of reducing energy consumption and carbon dioxide (C02) emissions while
maintaining or enhancing quality of service. Investments are anticipated to have a positive
demonstration impact from an operational, economic, financial and environmental standpoint. By
developing and testing revolving financing schemes and implementation models, those that are
successful could be replicative, thereby creating a sustainable framework beyond the Project's
O
)         lifespan.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
O
analysis (if known)
The Project will be implemented in cities across the 31 States of Mexico and the Federal District and
within existing municipal infrastructure. No land acquisition will be required for project activities.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Alonso Zarzar Casis (GSURR)
Jose Luis Calderon Bartheneuf (GEN04)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes   This
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               project has an environmental risk Category B as it is
unlikely to result in significant negative impacts; its
adverse impacts are identifiable, mostly temporary and
easily mitigated with known management techniques. As
the sites, types and scale of the subprojects to be financed
are not known, an ESMF was prepared by SENER/FIDE
Page 2 of 7


﻿that was discussed with key stakeholders on August 4,
2015 and was disclosed on September 4, 2015. Both
SENER and FIDE have designated personnel responsible
for ensuring compliance with the Banks safeguard
policies.
The ESMF determines, if any, the legal, environmental,
social and cultural resources protection requirements that
may apply to the activities in Component 1 and to the
subprojects in Component 2, and compliance actions, if
any, that would be mandatory for project funding. The
ESMF includes an exclusion list for subprojects and no
Category A subprojects would be supported. Potential
subprojects under Component 2 and activities under
Component 1 would fall into either B or C categories. The
typical types of subprojects to be financed under
Component 2 are: public lightning, energy efficiency in
water supply and wastewater processes and energy
efficiency measures in public buildings, like efficient
lightning and air conditioners.
All subprojects would be subject to screening by SENER
and the ESMF would support the screening process. The
ESMF will be applied by proponents when they submit
their subprojects to SENER for evaluation and possible
funding. The ESMF also provides guidance for preparing
subproject-specific and simplified Environmental and
Social Impact Assessments and Management Plans which
will include mechanisms to attend and resolve claims and
grievances. The team's environmental and social
specialists will supervise the proper application of the
Project's ESMF.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          The project activities to be financed would not affect
4.04                                natural habitants as defined in Annex A of OP 4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          The project has not foreseen activities that would affect
forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          No activities would include pest use or procurement of
pesticides.
Physical Cultural       Yes         This policy is triggered because some of the public
Resources OP/BP 4.11                buildings where actions would be implemented might be
in a "historic" or "artistic" protection status by federal or
local authorities and specific authorizations might be
necessary. The ESMF considers this issue in its screening
process.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          This policy is not triggered because subprojects would
BP 4.10                             only be implemented in urban municipalities where there
are no indigenous peoples that meet the requirements of
Page 3 of 7


﻿OP 4.10, in particular a collective attachment to a distinct
habitat or ancestral territory. Furthermore, the project
would focus in public infrastructure such as municipal
buildings, public lighting and water infrastructure.
Involuntary Resettlement No            The Project would not finance any activities that would
OP/BP 4.12                            require the involuntary taking of land that result in
physical displacement, loss of assets or access to assets or
economic displacement.
Subprojects to be supported under the Project would be in
already existing infrastructure such as public lighting,
existing water and wastewater infrastructure and existing
municipal buildings. If for any circumstance there is need
to use land this will only be done under a voluntary
donation to the project. The project's ESMF includes
criteria to ensure that any necessary transaction is carried
out voluntarily.
Safety of Dams OP/BP     No           The project would not support the construction or
4.37                                  rehabilitation of dams, nor would support other
investments which rely on the services of existing dams.
Projects on International  Yes         The Policy regarding Projects on International Waterways
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                  has been triggered. Several of the subprojects being
considered for funding may use water from international
waterways or their tributaries. In particular, eight
municipalities (Tijuana, Monclova, Tuxtla Guti6rrez,
Ciudad Judrez, Monterrey, Hermosillo, Centro, and
Reynosa) are located near the borders of Mexico, and/or
may extract water from international waterways whether
surface or ground water (shared with Guatemala and the
United States of America) to meet the water supply needs
of the Project. Given the Project's framework approach,
some of the Project investments could involve water
utilities in these municipalities.
However, the operation would not finance any works and/
or activities in municipalities or water and wastewater
utilities located in any trans-boundary basin which exceed
the original scheme, change its nature, or so alter or
expand its scope and extent as to make it appear a new or
different scheme. As such, the Project team has assessed
and concluded that, while OP 7.50 is triggered, the
exception included in Paragraph 7(a) of OP 7.50 to the
riparian notification requirements under the policy would
apply.
The exception to the notification requirement has been
cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo to the
RVP prepared, sent and approved on September 28, 2015.
Page 4 of 7


﻿Projects in Disputed    No           The project would not affect disputed areas as defined
Areas OP/BP 7.60                     under the policy.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
O
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is not expected to have significant negative environmental and social impacts or
issues. The ESMF focuses on prevention and contains a detailed mechanism for screening as well
as instruments to qualify and manage risks in subprojects, while recommended good practices will
help creating awareness among producers.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The project will not result in any indirect or long term environmental or social impacts in
communities, neither resettlement or land acquisition. This is due to the small scale nature of the
activities to be financed under this funding.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
In Mexico, the Environmental and Natural Resources Secretariat (SEMARNAT for its acronym in
Spanish), the National Water Commission (CONAGUA), the National Forest Commission
(CONAFOR), the Natural Protected Areas Commission (CONANP) and the Federal
Environmental Protection Attorney Office (PROFEPA), amongst others, are all federal level
institutions that have the responsibility for guaranteeing the adequate application of Mexican law
regarding environmental impact and pollution control.
Concerning environmental legislation, Mexico has accumulated a great number of laws,
regulations and statutes that span every single aspect of environmental management. Amongst
a          these, the General Ecological Balance and Environmental Protection Law is the one that will
regulate the expected subprojects to be supported by this project.
Since 1986 the General Ecological Equilibrium and Environmental Protection Law has established
a mandatory Environmental Impact Assessment for every project, whether privately or publicly
financed. The procedure is detailed and explained in the Rulebook for such Law concerning
Environmental Impact and its correlation with the wide existing regulations, and the guidelines for
the development of environmental impact assessment carried out in Mexico, are consistent with
World Bank operational directives for Environmental Assessment (Safeguard 4.01).
The monitoring of the prerequisites on environmental impacts resolutions are guaranteed by the
Federal Environmental Protection Agency (PROFEPA) which depends directly upon the
SEMARNAT and enforces the environmental legislation for which it has specialized offices in
every state. PROFEPA is a 20-year-old organization with a noble and effective entrustment, but
with very limited resources for operation. There is however, a risk of non-compliance with local
legislation and/or Bank 4.01 safeguard policy, due to lack of knowledge of applicable legislation
Page 5 of 7


﻿by the beneficiaries. This risk will be mitigated with the use of the instruments the project is
developing (an ESMF including a screening process of subprojects).
The implementing agency, SENER, has capacity to manage the Bank's social and environmental
O
safeguards issues, as it is currently implementing a large number of infrastructure- intensive
Projects in the energy sector, such as solar farms for remote communities, as well as wind farms.
In addition, FIDE (that will execute Component 2) also has extensive experience with
environmental safeguards policies, as it has been developing energy efficiency actions since its
creation, including the Bank-financed Efficient Lighting and Appliances Project, (P106424),
which included replacing and proper environmental management of more than 2 million
refrigerators and air conditioning equipment.
The Bank will provide training to key personnel at SENER and FIDE, in the proper application of
the safeguards instruments. Additional environmental and/or social consultants - whose
qualifications should be acceptable to the Bank - will be hired as needed for the Project.
Personnel would be required to fulfill the following tasks:
*      screen potential subprojects for environmental and social risks and impacts;
*      ensure that subprojects proponents (municipalities, utilities) carry out an environmental
and social assessment for their respective subproject; and
*      verify that subprojects comply with local laws and are consistent with Bank Safeguards
Policies.
The safeguards instrument is an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The
ESMF has been prepared by SENER, with support from World Bank environmental and social
specialists. In practical terms, the ESMF is a screening tool to help key personnel to identify which
projects to exclude, and for those to be approved with some perceived environmental and or social
risks, the know how to manage them according to national legislation and World Bank Safeguards.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
O
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders with responsibility for implementing environmental and social safeguards
include SENER, FIDE, the municipalities and water utilities receiving support from the project,
the National Water Commission, and the Federal Commission of Electricity (CFE). Consultations
related to the ESMF were held in August 2015.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                04-Sep-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             17-Sep-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  04-Aug-2015
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Mexico                                                     04-Sep-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
Page 6 of 7


﻿If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
It is included in the ESMF.
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
0
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ] No[X]   NA[    ]
report?
0         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?  Yes [  ] No [X]    NA [   ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                Yes [ X] No [   ]   NA [   ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes[X]  No[   NA
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
O
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes[X]  No[  NA
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]  No[     NA[
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Janina Andrea Franco Salazar,Karen Bazex
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Antonio Alexandre Rodrigues        Date: 07-Oct-2015
Manager:                     Barbalho (PMGR)
Page 7 of 7


