INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA15717
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Jan-2016
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Jan-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Africa                      Project ID:  P153702
Project Name: West Africa Survey Harmonization Project (P 153702)
Task Team       Johannes G. Hoogeveen
Leader(s):
Estimated       20-Jan-2016                 Estimated    10-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GPV01                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Public administration- Information and communications (55%), General
agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%), General educati on sector (10%),
Health (10%), General energy sector (5%)
Theme(s):       Economic statistics, modeling and forecasting (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      40.50             Total Bank Financing:    40.50
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
IDA Grant                                                                    40.50
Total                                                                        40.50
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The PDO is to support the WAEMU Commission at strengthening the capacity of its member
countries to conduct living conditions surveys that meet harmonized, regional standards and to make
the collected micro-data publicly accessible.
Page 1 of4


﻿3. Project Description
The project will strengthen regional integration in West Africa by harmonizing living conditions
information and by strengthening the capacity at the WAEMU Commission and the national
statistical agencies of all WAEMU member states to regularly produce and to publicly disseminate
high quality, living conditions information that are comparable over time and across countries. The
project provides assistance in ways that reflect differing country needs and capacities. A regional
approach has several advantages. By working through the WAEMU Commission the demand for
a        quality statistics is sustained. A regional approach also brings efficiency gains, as it allows setting
common methodological standards, and enhances data comparability and data dissemination. A
regional approach unlocks new opportunities for financial sustainability and, finally, facilitates
south-south learning and peer review.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
This is a regional statistical project coordinated by the WAEMU Commission in Burkina Faso. It
concerns the harmonization of living conditions surveys (instruments; methodology; manuals; core
statistics) and data collection methods (CAPI). Field work will be carried out by each of the eight
WAEMU member countries: Benin, Burkina Faso, Cte d'Ivoire, Guinea Bissau, Mali, Niger,
Senegal and Togo. The activities to be funded by the project are limited to capacity building and data
production and dissemination and use. It will not fund any civil works that could have adverse
environmental or social impacts. The social impact is expected to be positive because by making
quality data publicly available it will nurture public debate on matters of economic, financial, and
social concern, facilitate public accountability and a better targeting of public policies and use of
public resources.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
0
Environmental           No          No need for an environmental assessment: the work
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               entails desk work (to design new survey instruments; data
cleaning and analysis) and data collection using field
enumerators.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          No need for an environmental assessment: the work
4.04                                entails desk work (to design new survey instruments; data
cleaning and analysis) and data collection using field
enumerators.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          No need for an environmental assessment: the work
entails desk work (to design new survey instruments; data
cleaning and analysis) and data collection using field
enumerators.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          No need for an environmental assessment: the work
entails desk work (to design new survey instruments; data
cleaning and analysis) and data collection using field
enumerators.
Physical Cultural       No          No need for an environmental assessment: the work
Resources OP/BP 4.11                entails desk work (to design new survey instruments; data
Page 2 of 4


﻿cleaning and analysis) and data collection using field
enumerators.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           No need for an environmental assessment: the work
BP 4.10                              entails desk work (to design new survey instruments; data
cleaning and analysis) and data collection using field
enumerators.
Involuntary Resettlement No          No need for an environmental assessment: the work
OP/BP 4.12                           entails desk work (to design new survey instruments; data
cleaning and analysis) and data collection using field
enumerators.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           No need for an environmental assessment: the work
4.37                                 entails desk work (to design new survey instruments; data
cleaning and analysis) and data collection using field
enumerators.
Projects on International  No        No need for an environmental assessment: the work
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 entails desk work (to design new survey instruments; data
cleaning and analysis) and data collection using field
enumerators.
Projects in Disputed    No           No need for an environmental assessment: the work
Areas OP/BP 7.60                     entails desk work (to design new survey instruments; data
cleaning and analysis) and data collection using field
enumerators.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
0
N/A
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
0          N/A
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
N/A
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
N/A
B. Disclosure Requirements
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Page 3 of 4


﻿Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
N/A
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Johannes G. Hoogeveen
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Pablo Fajnzylber (PMGR)             Date: 12-Jan-2016
Manager:
Page 4 of 4


