                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                          RESTRUCTURING STAGE
            Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon       approval of the project restructuring
.




                                                                                          Report No.:ISDSR24150
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated: 30-Jan-2018
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                           Gambia, The                     Project ID:               P133079
    Project Name:                      GAMBIA - READ: Results for Education Achievement and Development
                                       Project (P133079)
    Task Team Leader(s):               Ryoko Tomita
    Estimated Appraisal                20-Aug-2013                     Estimated Board           06-Mar-2014
    Date:                                                              Date:
    Managing Unit:                     GED07                           Financing                 Investment Project
                                                                       Instrument:               Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency                      Recovery) or OP               No
    8.00(Rapid Response to Crises and         Emergencies)?
                                                Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           34.80                              Total Bank Financing: 11.90
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                           Amount
    BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                16.00
    IDA Grant                                                                                                         11.90
    Education for All - Fast Track Initiative                                                                          6.90
    Financing Gap                                                                                                      0.00
    Total                                                                                                             34.80
    Environmental Category:            B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?        No

2. Current Project Development Objectives


Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)


3. Project Description
The project supports the implementation of the Government's Education Sector Strategic Plan. It is a
US$34.6 million investment (IDA US$11.7M, GPE US$6.9M, and Government financing US$16.0M),

                                                      Page 1 of 9
followed by an additional financing (AF) in the amount of US$8.5 million (US$1 million in early learning
partnership funds, and US$7.5 million in IDA). The Project comprises four components: Components 1 to 3
have been executed through a traditional IPF approach and Component 4 has been carried out through a
results-based approach.

The traditional IPF component finances essential investment activities, advisory, technical, capacity-building,
and monitoring and evaluation support. The results based component is critical to strengthening the education
system because it is geared towards changing critical behaviors that are currently impeding the education
system, changes without which the strategic investments will have little effect. Under the results-based
component, the event and amount of project disbursements are contingent on the satisfactory achievement of
disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs).

The project disburses against selected key education budget line items referred to as Eligible Expenditure
Programs (EEPs), up to agreed limits. The event and amount of disbursements are based on the achievement
of all pre-specified results for a given year, referred to as disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs), determined
in partnership with the Government and related to the reforms and activities under the Education Sector
Strategic Plan. The financial management arrangements follow Government systems. Procurement
arrangements and safeguards policies follow World Bank's procedures.

Component 1:
Increase access to basic education

Although the enrollment has significantly improved over the last decade, the number of out of school
children has not been reduced due to the rapid population growth. Distance to school, high private education
costs, and school readiness remain critical challenges this component supports to increase access to basic
education.

Subcomponent 1.1: School construction: The data show that 17 percent (339 communities) of communities in
the country do not have a lower basic school within 3 kilometers. In this context, READ is financing the
construction of 40 multi-grade schools (80 classrooms) and water points in remote areas which do not have a
lower basic school within 3 kilometers reducing the number of un-served communities to about 239. Each
school will comprise 2 classrooms, accommodation for two teachers, a water point, and furniture (desks and
chairs).

Subcomponent 1.2: Donkey carts: One of the MOBSE policy pronouncements 2004-2015 is that no child in
lower basic education should walk more than three kilometers in order to access school. Under the previous
GPE project, 82 customized donkey carts were provided on a pilot basis to communities where lower grade
students had difficulty in walking to school due to long distances. However, it has been reported that donkey
carts themselves are too heavy without children onboard and they need to be redesigned. The project finances
approximately 100 redesigned donkey carts.

Subcomponent 1.3: The name of this subcomponent was changed to ‘Early Childhood Development’ under
the AF, which were supported by the US$1 million ELP Grant. Instead of building 40 community-based
ECD structures as had been planned under the READ Project, the project was modified to support the
construction of 2 multi-grade LBS with two classrooms for grades 1–6, an ECD classroom, as well as staff
quarters and a toilet block (the cost of constructing 40 community-based structures is similar to that of 2
multi-grade schools). Because an impact evaluation found more positive learning outcomes associated with
the annexed ECD approach (attached to LBS), the Government has decided to expand the ECD program
following this model. Therefore, this change is aligned with Government strategy.



                                                  Page 2 of 9
Eight multi-grade schools (16 classrooms), which cover grades 1 to 6, were built in remote areas under the
former IDA-funded project (Third Education Project, P077903) which closed in December 2013. In 2013,
during the pre paration of the READ Project, it was found that 17 percent of communities (339 communities)
in the country still did not have an LBS within 3 km. As such, it was decided that an additional 40 multi-
grade schools (80 classrooms) would be built in these remote communities and the construction has since
been completed. All of the newly built multi-grade schools comprise 2 classrooms, accommodation for
teachers, a water point, and furniture (desks and chairs).

These 48 multi-grade schools do not have an ECD classroom attached to them. Because it is a government
policy to have three years of formal ECD education before LBS, and their goal is to set up an annexed ECD
within every LBS, it is essential to construct ECD classrooms attached or next to these multi-grade schools
and to provide furniture and teaching and learning materials, while also providing training to ECD teachers
and monitoring the ECD classes through the MoBSE ECD unit.

In addition to the construction of two multi-grade schools (each with an annexed ECD classroom) to be
funded by the original project, of the 48 multi-grade schools already constructed, the AF is constructing 27
ECD classrooms either attached or next to 27 multi-grade schools (annexed ECD approach). As all of the 48
multi-grade schools are in remote areas, 27 was selected based on the size of the population ages 0 to 6,
current enrollment of students, and economic disadvantage. The next IDA/GPE project will construct ECD
classrooms in the remaining 21 multi-grade schools. In addition to the construction of 27 ECD classrooms,
the AF also supports: (a) provision of ECD furniture in the 27 classrooms; (b) training of ECD teachers,
including in-service training; (c) provision of GOALS material and other teaching and learning materials;
and (d) monitoring and supervision by the MoBSE ECD unit.

Sub-Component 1.4 Provision of School Sub-Grants to Support Sub-projects to all lower and upper basic
public schools and stationery to all students in lower basic education in hardship areas. This sub-component
provided schools with a grant based on student enrollment numbers to substitute for formal and informal
fees. It was officially taken over by the Government shortly thereafter. However, there was a temporary
provision under the AF to pay for school grants for 7 months. This has since been completed and school
grants have been resumed by the Government.

Component 2. Improve Quality of Teaching and Learning

This component aims to improve quality of teaching and learning through (i) supporting reforms of initial
teacher training to improve pedagogical and content skills of new teachers, (ii) providing regular stipends to
student teachers taking the HTC as an initial teaching qualification, with an increased stipend for student
teachers specializing in mathematics, and continued provision of stipends for those in the existing PTC, (iii)
providing hardship allowances for lower and upper basic teachers in remote areas, with enhanced payments
for those in very remote areas (above 9km from the main road)and female teachers, (iv) supporting teacher
continuing professional development, (v) supporting initiatives to enhance reading in the early grades, (vi)
supporting the CCT program for Majalis (Daaras), (vii) providing supplemental readers and library books,
and (viii) supporting a phased connection of schools to a high bandwidth ICT learning network. Under the
Additional Financing the following changes were made:

Subcomponent 2.3: Hardship allowances for public lower and upper basic teachers in remote areas
The project financed the hardship allowances for public LBS teachers whereas the government has been
financing the hardship allowances for public UBS teachers. During the time when the AF covers the
teachers’ salaries and allowances, hardship allowances for public UBS teachers were also covered by the AF.

Subcomponent 2.8: LEARNET (Learning, Education, Activities, and Resources Network) provides


                                                  Page 3 of 9
curriculum-linked dynamic e-content to public schools and provide teacher training on Progressive Science
Initiative and Progressive Math Initiative (PSI-PMI)'. The PSI-PMI pilot program, an innovative ICT
program using 21st century technology using an interactive board, has been implemented in 24 schools since
2013. The project finances the training of teachers in subjects which were not included as training subjects in
the PSI-PMI pilot program (The Gambia Teaching Math and Physics through e-learning Project, P129888).
The project also continues to support the development of curriculum-linked digital content of mathematics,
science, and English for grades 7–12. Solar panels were also provided to 24 PSI-PMI schools. Provision of
solar panels to the 24 PSI-PMI schools is essential because the program requires electricity to operate and the
power grid is very unstable. In addition to the solar panels, light rehabilitation for classrooms and equipment
such as interactive white boards, projectors, laptops and student responders is supported under this
component.

Subcomponent 2.9: Teacher salaries for public LBS, UBS and SSS teachers, and allowances for eligible
public LBS, UBS, and SSS teachers was added under the AF. Of the US$7.5 million AF, US$5.2 million is
used to financially support all public LBS, UBS and SSS teachers’ salaries and allowances for eligible public
LBS, UBS, and SSS teachers, temporarily to help allay the fiscal crisis. Allowances include Provincial
Allowance, Travel Home to Office Allowance, Civil Servants Special Allowance, Special Skills Allowance,
Retention Allowance, Teaching Allowance, Double Shift 50 Percent Allowance, Cost of Living Allowance,
and other allowances. Hardship allowances for LBS teachers are paid through the parent project under
Subcomponent 2.3. Hardship allowances for UBS teachers, which have previously been paid by the
Government, is temporarily supported by the project, after which the government resumes full payment.

Component 3: Technical and Institutional Support
The TA component aims to support institutional and capacity strengthening interventions to facilitate the
implementation of Components 1 and 2 and engaging in effective communication regarding the sector and
the READ project.

(i) Developing a strong communications strategy. Before the project, communication had been ad hoc,
however, a newly developed cohesive communication strategy allows for more effective communication with
all constituents. The strategy addresses both internal and external elements (TV, radio, newsletters,
documentary, website) as well as attempt to build and improve upon strategic partnerships with external
players who can support MOBSE's work. The communication strategy also encompasses dissemination
strategies involving community/opinion leaders to influence behavior changes.

(ii) Institutional support and capacity building including continuous implementation of assessments of
learning outcomes (standardized and classroom based), with a focus on utilization of the results for improved
teaching and learning and involvement of parents, strengthening data systems by linking the Education
Management Information System (EMIS) school level data, Human Resources (HR) data, learning outcomes
results, and other data from the regions for a more comprehensive system analysis, Project Coordination Unit
(PCU) salaries and operating costs to coordinate the program, building MOBSE and Regional staff statistical
capacity through training programs, and collecting regular data on student and teacher absenteeism using the
mobile phone system introduced on a pilot basis under the current program in regions 1-6.

Component 4: Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs):
Under this component, the governance and management reforms, for the most part, aim to address gaps in
and/or current poor practices in strengthening the system, all of which are critical to improving access and
addressing teacher and student performance. There were originally 9 Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs)
and each DLI weighs US$400,000. The event and amount of project disbursements is contingent on the
satisfactory achievement of DLIs. Five DLIs were removed during the restructuring but they were kept as
indicators in the Results Framework. The targets of remaining 4 DLIs have already been met. For all 4 DLIs


                                                  Page 4 of 9
whose targets have been met, the Bank paid US$1.6 million (each DLI weights US$400,000) to the Ministry
of Finance and Economic Affairs (MoFEA).
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
Project location is nationwide.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Gernot Brodnig, Social Safeguards Specialist

 Ruma Tavorath, Environmental Safeguards Specialist

6. Safeguard Policies                      Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01        Yes            The civil works under this project will have
                                                          potential environmental impacts, which are
                                                          expected to be moderate, site-specific and
                                                          manageable to an acceptable level. The impacts
                                                          are expected to be related to construction
                                                          related waste management, emissions control
                                                          and noise management, wastewater and
                                                          pollution; soil erosion and loss of trees and
                                                          occupational health and safety of workers and
                                                          the community. The sourcing of materials and
                                                          usage of appropriate materials (lead-based
                                                          paints and asbestos shall not be used) also
                                                          needs to be managed. Quality of water needs to
                                                          be monitored when boreholes are dug.
                                                          Procedures have to be put in place in case of
                                                          any chance find of cultural properties. All these
                                                          issues need to be managed during project
                                                          implementation. Since the project sites were
                                                          varied and were not all fully identified at the
                                                          time of project preparation, the Government
                                                          prepared an Environmental and Social
                                                          Management Framework (ESMF). This has
                                                          been consulted in country with key
                                                          stakeholders. It was publicly disclosed in-
                                                          country and at the Bank InfoShop prior to the
                                                          appraisal. The ESMF formulates standard
                                                          methods and procedures, along with
                                                          institutional arrangements for screening,
                                                          review, approval and implementation and
                                                          monitoring of specific ESIA/ESMPs for school
                                                          construction subprojects, including the
                                                          preparation of environmental clauses to be
                                                          inserted in contractors' bidding documents.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                No             The project does not have any expected
                                                          potential impacts on natural habitats.


                                                Page 5 of 9
Forests OP/BP 4.36                          No             The project does not have any expected
                                                           potential impacts on designated forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09                     No             The project does not involve the use or
                                                           procurement of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11      Yes            It is unknown which sub-project sites may
                                                           contain Physical Cultural Resources (PCR). As
                                                           a measure of prudence potential impacts on
                                                           PCR are assessed in the context of the ESMF
                                                           and mitigation measures commensurate to
                                                           those impacts, including proper handling of
                                                           chance finds, are included in the design,
                                                           screening, implementation, monitoring of
                                                           project activities, in accordance with national
                                                           and Bank policies and procedures are included
                                                           in the ESMF.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10               No             There are no indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                           area.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12         Yes            The project interventions will avoid where
                                                           possible adverse impacts on people, land and
                                                           other economic resources and livelihoods. In
                                                           situations where this cannot be avoided, the
                                                           Borrower has prepared and disclosed in-
                                                           country and at the Bank InfoShop a
                                                           Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to
                                                           address the needs of persons who will be
                                                           affected by loss of economic activities, access
                                                           to resources, land acquisition and/or
                                                           involuntary resettlement.

                                                           In addition, where applicable, site-specific
                                                           Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) or
                                                           Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans
                                                           (ARAPs) will be prepared and disclosed prior
                                                           to school infrastructure construction.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                   No             The project does not involve dams.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No               There are no project activities in international
7.50                                                       waters.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60       No             The project does not involve any activities in
                                                           disputed areas.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project would maintain the Development Objectives (PDO). All activities are governed by the project's


                                                 Page 6 of 9
existing Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) that were prepared, reviewed, approved, and disclosed in-country and at the Bank
InfoShop prior to appraisal of the parent project. During the AF, the ESMF was updated to include a revised
ESSC, and re-disclosed in country as well as at the Bank InfoShop on July 8, 2016.

The ESMF details the environmental and social screening criteria and the mechanisms to be used during site
selection and school infrastructure construction. This screening tool includes a checklist (Environmental and
Social Screening Checklist - ESSC) designed to detect any potential negative environmental or social impacts
linked to individual sub-projects and steps to be taken to ensure that appropriate Environmental and Social
Management Plans (ESMPs) and/or Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) are prepared and appropriate
mitigating measures are implemented as necessary.

With respect to involuntary resettlement, it should be noted that resettlement due to land acquisition for
project activities is expected to be nil or negligible. The social impacts of the project, by the nature of its
development objective are positive. However, the informal practice of cultivating unoccupied land, including
land that belongs to schools, during the rainy season, when schools are out of session, by women from
surrounding communities, continues throughout The Gambia. While the project avoids where possible
adverse impacts on people, land and other economic resources and livelihoods, the Involuntary Resettlement
policy (OP 4.12) has been triggered and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared and disclosed
in country and at the World Bank InfoShop to mitigate any adverse impacts in situations where this cannot be
avoided. In addition, where applicable, site-specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) or Abbreviated
Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs) will be prepared and disclosed in country and at the Bank InfoShop
prior to school infrastructure construction.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
Potential long-term negative impacts during school building construction could include soil erosion; loss of
vegetation; inadequate waste management; poor occupational safety practices etc. However, these are short-
term and can be managed through well-defined mitigatory measures.
In addition, if proper legal titles are not acquired by the MoBSE clearly indicating ownership of land that is
assigned for schools prior to construction, community disputes around land ownership may arise.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment
of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
There is limited Borrower environmental and social safeguard capacity, in spite of the implementation of
several projects in the sector, in recent years. This, for the most part, stems from the limited coordination
among project implementers (MoBSE) and the National Environmental Agency (NEA), in particular, in
carrying out projects' environmental and social function. This concerns mainly the monitoring of the
implementation of mitigation measures and compliance monitoring, a role that was devolved to the NEA
through a MOU for compliance monitoring signed before the effectiveness of the parent project. The NEA
and the PCU conducted on-site monitoring and supervision missions, produced an audit report, and held
working sessions to discuss their findings and recommendations for the PCU. Steps have been to strengthen
the coordination between the PCU and the NEA for better safeguards monitoring in the sector.

In addition, these and other constraints to implementing the project safeguard requirements have been
assessed and addressed in the context of the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The project is set out to strengthen, as necessary, relevant
stakeholders' capacity to meet their safeguard requirements. In other words, the project implements any

                                                  Page 7 of 9
    capacity strengthening measures that will be identified in environmental and social instruments applicable.
    5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
    safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
    The key stakeholders include the local communities (urban and rural), ECD children, lower and upper basic
    and secondary students, lower basic and upper basic teachers, student teachers, school administrators,
    regional education offices, and the Ministry of Education (MOBSE, and Ministry of Higher Education,
    Research, Science and Technology - MOHERST). The two safeguards instruments governing the project, the
    ESMF and the RPF, include institutional arrangements and outline the roles and responsibilities for the
    various stakeholder groups involved for screening, reviewing as well as implementation and monitoring of
    mitigation measures.

    As part of the disclosure of the safeguards instruments governing the parent project (ESMF and RPF) in
    country, a stakeholders' workshop was organized by the Project Coordination Unit, involving relevant project
    stakeholder groups. The workshop presented the results of the studies, fostering ownership and seeking input
    from the stakeholders in order to improve quality and soundness of the instruments. Recommendations from
    both AFTSG and stakeholders' workshop were reflected in the final safeguard reports.
    .




 B. Disclosure Requirements
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to    Yes         [X]     No []          NA          []
 the World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a     Yes         [X]     No []          NA          []
 public place in a form and language that are
 understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
 and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional Yes         [X]     No []          NA          []
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been       Yes         [X]     No []          NA          []
 included in the project cost?
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes           [X]     No []          NA          []
 include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
 related to safeguard policies?
 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been         Yes         [X]     No []          NA          []
 agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
 reflected in the project legal documents?

    III. APPROVALS

    Task Team Leader(s):           Name: Ryoko Tomita

                                                     Page 8 of 9
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:         Name:                 Date:
Practice Manager/Manager:   Name:                 Date:




                                    Page 9 of 9
