INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
0                                             Report No.: ISDSC 12979
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:          Senegal                   Project ID:   P155475
Project Name:     Building Resilience to Food and Nutrition Insecurity Shocks
Team Leader(s): Menno Mulder-Sibanda
Estimated Date    29-Feb-2016
of Approval:
Managing Unit:    GHNDR                     Lending       Lending Instrument
Instrument:
Sector(s):        Health (50%), Other social services (50%)
Theme(s):         Other social protection and risk management (10%), Gender (15%), Child
health (15%), Nutrition and food security (60%)
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:  3.75                 Total Bank Financing: 0
Financing Gap:       0
Financing Source                                                         Amount
Japan Social Development Fund                                                3.75
-       Environment      C - Not Required
Category:
0
B. Project Development Objective(s)
The PDO is to provide access to food and nutrition security enhancing services among vulnerable
households in selected areas of the Recipient's territory as a new and innovative approach of reducing
the recourse to recurrent crises responses. The vulnerable households will be identified by an
objective and verifiable targeting approach that will be developed during project preparation and
build on the best practices from the pilot cash transfer experience. In nutritional terms, the most
vulnerable people to food and nutrition insecurity shocks are women and children in mostly remote
areas of the country. Women generally have limited control over resources yet play essential roles in
household production, consumption, and reproduction. Food and nutrition insecurity is typically
concentrated in certain Regions and areas of the countries. After each economic or climatic shock, a
rapid increase in malnutrition and food insecurity can be observed in these "pockets" of high
vulnerability. The JSDF grant will seek to assist these households and communities in enhancing
their resilience to the negative impacts of external shocks. The immediate beneficiaries will be
women and children in food and nutrition insecure households and communities. The intervention
areas will be identified during project preparation but will likely include selected counties


﻿(d6partement) in the Louga and Diourbel Regions, although Kolda, Kaolack and Matam Regions
may also be considered when selecting the intervention areas.
C. Project Description
The purpose of the Grant is to develop a replicable model for building household and community
resilience to food and nutrition insecurity shocks that when scaled up can contribute to breaking the
cycle of crises response and humanitarian assistance. There is no quick fix to this; instead, an
integrated approach is needed. This new approach will put in place the elements for a nutrition-led
a       food-based economy at community level. It aims to help vulnerable households and communities to
resist the impact of external shocks with a package of innovative household and community
interventions aimed at strengthening a profitable food economy at community level, while ensuring
optimum utilization at household level. The project will build on best practices from the national
community nutrition program, the pilot cash transfer project, as well as relevant experiences with
appropriate technologies on the continent. In doing so, the Project will introduce a range of
innovations related to solidarity measures, appropriate technologies and local governance. These
activities will be piloted while case management programs and relief efforts continue in the same
areas. The design of the project will broadly include four main components:
I) Women organization and empowerment; This component will focus on women with young
children as well as adolescent girls from the most vulnerable households and enhance their capacity
to produce, buy and provide adequate food for the household notably the children and themselves,
and promote their health status. Working with vulnerable women, the Grant will test the
establishment of economic support and solidarity networks for enhanced food production and
utilization. These networks, building on existing women groups, will be composed of beneficiary
women and become a resource for enhanced capacity among women to engage in food production,
transformation and commercial activities. The women groups will be the platform for: (a) the
promotion of innovative solidarity measures such as: (i)"children cereal banks" by which the women
will set apart small amounts of foods to be accessed when children are found to have become
malnourished; and (ii) getting women to join and benefit from the Government subsidized
community-based health insurance scheme; (b) training on new techniques and technologies as well
as basic financial management; and (c) social and behavior change communication aimed at
promoting essential life skills as well as care of pregnant and lactating mothers, and enhancing child
care and feeding practices. With diversified food intake being one of the key messages, the women
groups will be encouraged to develop new recipes for complementary feeding of children aged 6-23
months.
II) Improved varieties and appropriate technologies for micro scale applications at household level;
This second component will identify and test new technologies for year-long household food
production by women, community-based food transformation and preparation adapted to the local
context, household water purification and hand washing facilities. On the production side, the Grant
will test the adoption and dissemination for micro scale production of improved and bio-fortified
plant varieties and/or animal races as well as household-level production technologies which are
better adapted to the changes in climate and provide better quality food. The Project will liaise with
the Senegal Agriculture Research Institute (ISRA) and the International Food Policy Research
Institute (IFPRI) which are jointly concluding research on a number of bio-fortified food
commodities (e.g., vitamin A-rich orange-flesh sweet potatoes, and iron-rich beans) to identify those
that are suitable for the intervention areas. Similarly, where possible, the project will promote new
technologies for water-efficient backyard or micro-gardens. On the conservation, transformation and
utilization side, the project will identify a few promising technologies, such as cheese making from


﻿goat milk, improved granaries, solar drying, firewood-efficient cooking stoves, and hands-free hand
washing techniques for dissemination in the intervention areas. Poor households will receive basic
inputs free of charge on the condition that a percentage of the proceeds go to community revolving
schemes and a moral condition that children and women are the first to benefit through improved
O
U       dietary intake.
I) Community leadership and governance; The third component will develop the governance
structure by which the social objectives of identifying and assisting the most vulnerable households
will be integrated with commercial/economic objectives of enhancing the economic viability of
vulnerable hous  eholds. This component will: (a) develop an approach for community dialog on
resilience development, including the introduction of community score cards, the identification of the
most vulnerable households and consensus on the most appropriate food security enhancing
interventions; (b) test the idea of creating a network of social entrepreneurs in the target communities
who will take on the role of promoting new technologies, varieties and races to the women support
and solidarity networks on a commercial basis, meaning that both social entrepreneurs and
beneficiary households are encouraged to participate in the local food economy while investing in
healthy growth and nutrition of the very young children; and (c) set up revolving schemes for
production inputs to be managed by community governance structures, which will receive coaching
support to ensure that part of the production benefits (e.g., baby chicks; seeds) will be repaid into a
revolving scheme whereby other households can benefit from the same food security enhancing
interventions.
IV) Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation: Based on the Development Objective, the
Project will develop the theory of change for improved food and nutrition security among vulnerable
households. The theory of change will form the basis for the development of a monitoring and
evaluation plan. Simple techniques will be introduced to monitor the progress of the project and
identify best practices. These techniques include community score cards to strengthen the local
authorities' capacity to monitor and evaluation performance of the Project interventions; and lot
quality assurance surveys (LQAS) to track results. In addition, a process evaluation is envisaged to
better understand the efficiency issues in the project. This component will also support essential
project management functions such as planning, budgeting, training, supervision and project
monitoring.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
*       analysis (if known)
The intervention areas will be identified - on the basis of their vulnerability to external shocks -
during project preparation but will likely include selected counties (d6partement) in the Louga and
Diourbel Regions, although Kolda, Kaolack and Matam Regions may also be considered when
selecting the intervention areas.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Knut Opsal (GSURR)
Maman-Sani Issa (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY


﻿Safeguard Policies              Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/    No
BP 4.01
o
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04     No             The project will not affect natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36              No             The project will not affect forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09         No             The proposed activities are micro scale activities
at community and household level. The risk of
any pest management issues is therefore
negligible. The project will not finance
pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  No            The project does not entail large excavations or
BP 4.11                                        movement of earth. The project is not expected
to affect any physical cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10   No             The project does not affect indigenous peoples.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  No             The project does not envisage any taking of
4.12                                           land.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37       No             The project does not entail construction of dams
or relies on dams.
Projects on International       No             The project will not affect international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                           waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
U2 IV. APPROVALS
Team Leader(s):        Name: Menno Mulder-Sibanda
O
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                  Date: 10-Jun-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Trina S. Haque (PMGR)                     Date: 18-Jun-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.


