                                 The World Bank
                                 Togo Extractive Industries Transparency Implementation Support Project ( P163207 )




                                                    Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                  Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                              Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-May-2017 | Report No: ISDSC21237




                         May 30, 2017                                                                                           Page 1 of 5
                                 The World Bank
                                 Togo Extractive Industries Transparency Implementation Support Project ( P163207 )



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                     Project Name                 Environmental Category       Country
                                                          Togo Extractive Industries
                                                          Transparency
                           P163207                                                     C - Not Required             Togo
                                                          Implementation Support
                                                          Project ( P163207 )
                           Team Leader(s)                 Estimated Date of Approval   Managing Unit                Financing Instrument
                                                                                                                    Investment Project
                           Morten Larsen                  09-Jun-2017                  GEEX2
                                                                                                                    Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                           PROJECT FINANCING DATA


                          FINANCING


                          FINANCING SOURCES

                           Select all that apply

                           [ ] Counterpart Funding        [ ✔ ] Trust Funds                [ ] Parallel Financing



                           SUMMARY (USD)

                           Total Project cost                                                                              300,000
                           Total Financing                                                                                 300,000
                           Trust Funds                                                                                     300,000
                           Financing Gap                                                                                        0

                           DETAILS


                           Trust Funds
                           Source                               Currency                          Amount                         USD Equivalent
                           Extractive Industries Transparency
                                                                USD-US Dollars                    300,000                                300,000
                           Initiative(EITI)




                         May 30, 2017                                                                                                      Page 2 of 5
                                 The World Bank
                                 Togo Extractive Industries Transparency Implementation Support Project ( P163207 )



                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective is to support implementation of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative in Togo.
                           This will be achieved through improved reporting procedures for production and revenue data from the extractive
                           industries as well as strategic communication with stakeholders.

                           C. Project Description
                           In 2009, Togo joined the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI). It achieved compliance in May 2013. The
                           scope of the EITI in Togo includes the following resources: oil (exploration), mining (phosphate, limestone, iron, and
                           construction materials), groundwater aquifers, and precious stones. The 2014 Togo EITI Report includes statements
                           from 35 companies and 9 public agencies.

                           An EITI work plan has been prepared for 2017 to 2019 taking into account the EITI mainstreaming objective and the
                           validation according to the requirements of the 2016 EITI standard. The current plan is anchored around four themes:
                           (i) improvement of the legal and institutional framework; (ii) governance of the extractive sector; (iii) coordination of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implementation activities; and (iv) the evaluation of progress in implementation. The proposed grant will
                           predominantly support components (ii) to (iv).

                           Streamlined reporting of production and revenue data will be an essential activity of the proposed grant. The EITI
                           Secretariat intends to move from annual data compilation and reporting exercises to an automated reporting system
                           by which operators and government representatives will generate automatic data logs of payment transfers. This
                           activity will require consultancy inputs in the design of reporting templates and integration with existing computer
                           systems handling tax administration. The outputs are expected to be (i) standardized EITI reporting templates as well
                           as (ii) a “proto-type” EITI Reconciliation Report for 2018.

                           Strategic communication will form the second pillar of the grant support. This component will include various
                           dimensions of communication including (i) impact/perception surveys to understand the impacts of EITI
                           implementation to date in terms of increased awareness of the extractive industries among stakeholders from local
                           community representatives to media and political representatives; (ii) modernization of communication tool-kits such
                           as the EITI web-site, printed hand-outs as well as other audio-visual tools which can benefit the illiterate parts of the
                           population; (iii) support to information campaigns and outreach events in order to ensure that report findings and
                           sector debate are widely disseminated across the country, especially in communities which are affected by mining but
                           isolated from urban centers.

                           EITI Secretariat business planning will be an important third grant component which is intended to address the
                           challenge of the financial viability of the Multi-Stakeholder Group and the EITI Secretariat even after the closure of the
                           current grant financing. Consultancy services, in combination with self-assessments, will assess the long-term staffing
                           needs and the resulting budget estimates for continued EITI reporting, dissemination and stakeholder participation. It
                           is the objective to identify potential financing sources which can be sustained in the absence of continued donor
                           contributions. Financial independence of the MSG and the Secretariat will depend on securing a stable cash flow from
                           domestic or government revenue. Notwithstanding, it is proposed that the present grant allows for funding of
                           incremental staff costs related to grant management and reporting.




                           SAFEGUARDS


                         May 30, 2017                                                                                                        Page 3 of 5
                                 The World Bank
                                 Togo Extractive Industries Transparency Implementation Support Project ( P163207 )




                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          The project will provide institutional capacity building to the National EITI Secretariat, which is based in Lome.
                          Awareness campaigns will be rolled out across the country.




                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          The institutional capacity of the Ministry of Mines and Energy as well as Agence Nationale pour la Gestion
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Environnementale was assessed in preparation of the MGDP (P149277), and found to be adequate. Furthermore, a
                          Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment of the mineral sector is under preparation. Grant implementation and
                          supervision will be informed by the SESA findings




                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team




                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project               Triggered?                     Explanation (Optional)
                                                                                                        This is a technical assistance project
                                                                                                        focused on improving the institutional
                                                                                                        capacity of revenue collection and
                                                                                                        transparency in sector management. There
                                                                                                        are no physical investments supported
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                  No                       under the grant. The grant will not finance
                                                                                                        studies or assessments linked to potential
                                                                                                        mineral extraction. Since none of the
                                                                                                        project activities have any impact on the
                                                                                                        ground nor any derived down-stream
                                                                                                        impacts, the category is proposed to be C.
                                                                                                        This policy is not triggered as project
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                          No                       activities are not expected to have any
                                                                                                        impacts on natural habitats.
                                                                                                        This policy is not triggered as project
                                                                                                        activities are not expected to have any
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                   No
                                                                                                        impacts on or infringe into designated
                                                                                                        forests.

                         May 30, 2017                                                                                                          Page 4 of 5
                                  The World Bank
                                  Togo Extractive Industries Transparency Implementation Support Project ( P163207 )



                                                                                                                      This policy is not triggered as the project
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                                        No                           will not finance the procurement or use of
                                                                                                                      pesticides.
                                                                                                                      This policy is not triggered as project
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                         No                           activities are not expected to have any
                                                                                                                      impact on physical cultural resources.
                                                                                                                      This policy is not triggered given that
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                  No                           project activities are not expected to cause
                                                                                                                      any impacts on Indigenous Peoples.
                                                                                                                      This policy is not triggered given that
                                                                                                                      project activities are not expected to cause
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                            No                           any physical or economic displacement, nor
                                                                                                                      any restriction in access to natural
                                                                                                                      resources.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                      This policy is not triggered given the project
                                                                                                                      is not financing any dam construction or
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                      No
                                                                                                                      rehabilitation nor any activities that rely on
                                                                                                                      the operations of existing dams
                                                                                                                      This policy is not triggered given the project
                                                                                                                      is not financing any activities in
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 No
                                                                                                                      international waterways as defined by the
                                                                                                                      policy.
                                                                                                                      This policy is not triggered given the project
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                          No                           is not financing any activities in disputed
                                                                                                                      areas as defined by the policy.


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? No


                           APPROVALS

                           Team Leader(s):                                     Morten Larsen

                           Approved By

                           Safeguards Advisor:                                 Maman-Sani Issa                                   25-May-2017

                           Practice Manager/Manager:                           Christopher Gilbert Sheldon                       26-May-2017


                          1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country

                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.



                         May 30, 2017                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 5
