                                  The World Bank
                                  Promoting Social Inclusion and Self-Reliant Livelihood Activities in Armenia




                                                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                    Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                 Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Apr-2018 | Report No: ISDSC23116




                         Apr 12, 2018                                                                                              Page 1 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Promoting Social Inclusion and Self-Reliant Livelihood Activities in Armenia



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                         Project Name                  Environmental Category   Country
                                                              Promoting Social Inclusion
                           P165314                            and Self-Reliant Livelihood   C - Not Required         Armenia
                                                              Activities in Armenia
                           Team Leader(s)                     Estimated Date of Approval    Managing Unit            Financing Instrument
                                                                                                                     Investment Project
                           Maddalena Honorati                                               GSP03
                                                                                                                     Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Financing (in USD Million)

                           SUMMARY                 -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                    2.66
                           Total Financing                                                                                                       2.66
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                         0.00


                           DETAILS      -NewFin2




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           11. The proposed project development objective is to (i) increase access to social assistance benefits and services;
                           and (ii) provide self-employment support for about 5,000 extremely vulnerable households in selected regions in
                           Armenia. The PDO will be achieved by strengthening the role of existing community and state social workers as
                           connectors between the families and available social assistance benefits and by providing entrepreneurship support to
                           FBP beneficiaries as a pathway to graduate out of the program.

                           C. Project Description
                           13.     The project will be structured around the following components:

                           14. Component 1: Development and implementation of a pilot counseling program. This component will
                           support the development of :(i) the design of the methodology for social case management as an
                           intermediation service to connect families with available social services (and hence as a model for integrated
                           service provision) building and expanding on existing achievements and material developed by the MLSA,
                           UNICEF, USAID and the World bank through the SPAP I and II projects; (ii) a handbook (or operational
                           manual) for social workers; (iii) tools for social workers such as a comprehensive screening tool to assess

                         Apr 12, 2018                                                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Promoting Social Inclusion and Self-Reliant Livelihood Activities in Armenia




                           households’ needs and vulnerabilities, a mapping of the universe of social services and active labor market
                           programs available in each municipality/communities in the targeted regions; (iv) referral protocols with
                           service providers; (v) an out-reach strategy or plan for social workers to identify and reach out to the poor
                           and vulnerable households living in their communities; and (vi) training material to train social workers on
                           the social case management methodology. The training curricula will include the provision of socio-
                           emotional skills. The component will also support the implementation of the training. Training activities will
                           be conducted to train about 200 state and community social workers in order to serve the poor and
                           vulnerable in the targeted regions, empower and address their social needs, refer them to the appropriate
                           social service and programs and link them with job opportunities and business start-up capital (including the
                           small business grants funded under component 2 of this JSDF grant). The salaries of social workers are paid
                           by the government and respective NGOs, not by the JSDF grant. Local and international experts will be hired
                           to develop outputs (i) to (iv) described above and a local firm will be hired to conduct the training.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           15. Through their front-line position, direct contact with vulnerable households and home visits, social
                           workers have the potential to raise awareness on people’s rights, inform and refer to existing social services
                           available in the community and facilitate access to those services to poor and vulnerable households that are
                           currently out of the system (as they did not register). Based on national household survey data the vast
                           majority of households in the poorest quintile (72.5%) never applied to the FBP because they think they
                           won’t be eligible under the current scoring formula. While the Social Inclusion TA is supporting MLSA to
                           improve the design of the formula, the proposed project will support the improved implementation of the
                           targeting system through social case management. The targeting strategy to reach out excluded household
                           will build on the same approach that is guiding the current scoring formula which is a mix of (monetary)
                           poverty and social vulnerabilities as defined by the Social Assistance Law.

                           16. The Armenia Association of Social Worker (AASW, which will be the implementing agency) held the
                           preliminary consultations with representatives from Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (MLSA) and social
                           workers suggest that social workers are lacking the skills and tools to work with vulnerable people in a
                           holistic way as case managers. In order to transform existing social workers into “social case managers”,
                           social workers need to be trained and equipped with the right skills and tools they need to assess and
                           manage different and difficult “cases”: for example, referral mechanisms, resource books, assessment and
                           follow-up tools, methodological guides on case conferences, mapping of social services that exists in the
                           community and of the network of public and private providers facilitating access to jobs and access to
                           finance for small scale entrepreneurship projects.

                           17. Where previous tools provided to case managers were general introductions to case management
                           (assessment, intervention, monitoring, etc.), the methodology within this project will help to teach practical
                           skills to social workers. Social case management was implemented as a methodology in Armenia since
                           January 1, 2017, and case managers began to accept cases, but this information is not helpful for practical
                           application. Methods for working have not been developed, including community/beneficiary outreach and
                           establishing a working culture among social case managers and local social services and stakeholders. This
                           project will support the government’s design and practical implementation for the social case management



                         Apr 12, 2018                                                                                              Page 3 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Promoting Social Inclusion and Self-Reliant Livelihood Activities in Armenia




                           methodology by building the knowledge, skills, and competencies of these workers in relation to the target
                           issue.

                           18. Component 2: Capacity building and entrepreneurship support to support FBP beneficiaries boost
                           business activities aiming at increasing their incomes; business plan proposals will be evaluated and selected
                           based on the soundness of design, sustainability, organizational capacity and budget. This component will
                           pilot the implementation of a new program consisting of business training activities, advisory services and
                           the provision of small sub-grants to promote self-employment and boosting business activities, aiming at
                           increasing incomes and therefore livelihood state. The beneficiaries of this component are social assistance
                           beneficiaries (poorest and vulnerable households in Armenia) with ‘spare labor’ (not working adults with no
                           caring duties). The sub-component will specifically support: (i) Business Management and Marketing Skills
                           Trainings for about 300 people, (ii) advisory services to assist in the preparation of business plan proposals;
                           (iii) selection and disbursement of small business grants (average amount of USD 4,000) for 250 people, (iv)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           follow-up activities such as visits, “on-the-spot” consultancies and possible support to the beneficiaries on
                           marketing &sales of their products and/or services, organizing regular experience sharing meetings among
                           the grantees within the same marz and between the marzes (inviting successful grantees from previous
                           round of the JSDF grant as guest speakers and mentors); (vi) hosting a trade-fair/exhibition on business
                           opportunities cultivated (products and services) to spread the word and link with financing institutions. The
                           referrals protocols to the program, eligibility criteria for beneficiaries, the selection criteria for the business
                           plans and the small grants payment mechanisms will be defined during appraisal. A Consulting Company will
                           be contracted to conduct the Business Management and Marketing Skills Trainings, present the business plan
                           proposals to the Evaluation Committee (consisting of representatives from MLSA, Ministry of Economy,
                           AASW, from Mission Armenia NGO and one member from an organization protecting the interests of
                           vulnerable people, to be confirmed at appraisal stage), implement follow-up activities such as visits, “on-the-
                           spot” consultancies, updating AASW with the Project state, etc. The implementation of this component will
                           be outsourced through a competitive bidding process to a consultancy firm meeting specific requirements
                           and relevant experience providing advisory services and training for business start-ups and for small and
                           medium enterprise development.

                           19. This component will strengthen the supply of programs supporting entrepreneurship by testing the
                           provision of small business grants and the accompanying business training/coaching to FBP beneficiary
                           households with spare labor to support their “graduation” out of the program. As mentioned above, the
                           government in fact cut substantially the budget for active labor market programs and small business grants
                           in 2017, leaving the country, and especially poor rural areas with very limited opportunities to jump start
                           small scale entrepreneurship activities. The design of component 2 draws on the lessons learned from the
                           implementation of the state-funded small business grants program (provided to 81 individuals annually on
                           average) which was suspended in 2017 and the small business grant component supported through the
                           previous JSDF grant (targeted to women and people with disability) which led to the creation of 90
                           businesses, out of which 71 are still in operation a year after the launch. Differently from previous
                           interventions, the program being piloted under this component will be tailored to the characteristics and
                           needs of social assistance beneficiaries (often lower educated and with motility constraints) as a pilot
                           approach to promote their self-reliance and help them “graduate” them of public cash assistance. The key

                         Apr 12, 2018                                                                                                 Page 4 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Promoting Social Inclusion and Self-Reliant Livelihood Activities in Armenia




                           lessons and success factors that will be taken into account from the previous JSDF project include: (i) need
                           for a regular coaching and face-to-face visits during the first months after business creation provided by
                           experts facilitated by the social workers; (ii) quality assurance for the business training; (iii) entrepreneurial
                           attitude matter for success, not just a sound business plan. To the extent possible this project component
                           with coordinate with the EU funded project implemented by SME Development National Center to boost
                           economic activities within food processing and tourism.

                           20. Component 3: Project Management and Administration, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), and
                           Knowledge Dissemination. This component will be divided in three sub-components: (i) Project
                           Management and Administration; (ii) M&E and (iii) knowledge dissemination.

                           21. The Project Management and Administration sub-component will ensure proper implementation,
                           monitoring and evaluation of the grant. Individual consultants will be hired at AASW (including a project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           coordinator, FM specialist, procurement specialist, M&E specialist, component 1 coordinator and component
                           2 coordinator) to be responsible for the implementation of project activities and reporting. Resources will be
                           allocated to train the FM and procurement consultants on World Bank procedures. The consultant in charge
                           of coordinating component 2 will be responsible for the design and supervision of component 2 activities,
                           including the grants payment. Annual audits by an independent auditing firm and quarterly reports will be
                           produced under this sub-component. The project launch, the mid-term review and final evaluation report
                           will be produced in addition to the regular monitoring reports to the World Bank under the RETF grant. Part
                           of the bank supervision budget will be allocated to the development and processing of the project
                           Implementation Completion Report.

                           22. The Monitoring and Evaluation sub-component will include different M&E activities to assess the work
                           of social workers, the behavioral changes of beneficiaries (knowledge, registration in the social and
                           employment programs, take-up of benefits, services, livelihood grants) as well as the profitability and
                           sustainability of the new businesses. Local and international consultancies will be hired to implement such
                           M&E activities. The M&E plan for component 1 will include: (i) the development of a management
                           information system (MIS) for social workers to regularly track and follow up on specific individual cases
                           within households that register in the Family Benefit Program, monitor the family progress, referrals made by
                           social workers and when possible effective access of beneficiaries to services for which they were referred
                           to; The MIS will be integrated to the Family Benefit Database (used to target different social assistance
                           benefits) and will be hosted in MLSA. (ii) an evaluation to assess social workers’ skills of working with
                           beneficiaries and knowledge of referral mechanisms before and at completion of program activities (baseline
                           and endline data will be collected). A beneficiary assessment will also be undertaken. For component 2,
                           baseline and endline data will be collected to evaluate the impact of the small business grants (impact
                           evaluation). The monitoring of component 2 activities and grant payment will be done by AASW regular visits
                           and through the consultancy firms regular reports. . The M&E plan is expected to be taken up by the
                           government after the pilot. Expected outputs include a beneficiary assessment report, social worker
                           evaluation report, the MIS interface for social workers and the impact evaluation of the entrepreneurship
                           program. ,\.Knowledge dissemination will support social worker workshops and a final event to disseminate



                         Apr 12, 2018                                                                                                  Page 5 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Promoting Social Inclusion and Self-Reliant Livelihood Activities in Armenia




                           the findings of the impact evaluation of the entrepreneurship program and the development and challenges
                           of the counseling program for social case management.

                           23. During the project itself, the Implementing Agency will drive a participatory approach to monitoring all
                           project activities and the results, outcomes, and impacts of the project. The development of the monitoring
                           scheme will be based on the PDO and the project indicators. The project team and the implementing partner
                           coalitions will submit bi-monthly updates on the relevant indicators and activities implemented to the
                           project director for consolidation. For each quarter, a benchmark will be established for each activity output.
                           Quarterly monitoring of activity outputs and reporting will allow the project team to assess performance
                           toward end-of-project targets. If quarterly benchmarks are not met, then AASW will determine any needed
                           corrections so that end-of-project targets are met. The data will be disaggregated by gender, age, refugee,
                           and poverty status. AASW will further consolidate information on the relevant indicators, reveal any gaps,
                           and note lessons learned. These internal exercises will help AASW to make project adjustments if needed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          38. Project may support activities countrywide, but two administrative districts (marzes) – Ararat and
                          Armavir, to be confirmed – are targeted for interventions. Activities will be undertaken in rural settlements
                          and agricultural areas around them.



                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          39. The implementing agency has no prior experience in applying World Bank’s safeguard policies and does
                          not employ a social and environmental specialist. Although the safeguard risks associated with the project
                          implementation are low, AASW NGO will need to undertake institutional arrangements for adequate
                          environmental and social screening of grant applications and establish a grievance redress mechanism to
                          handle any complaints that may arise in regard to the operation of the grant scheme and/or the grant-
                          financed activities.



                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Darejan Kapanadze, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
                          Sophia V. Georgieva, Social Safeguards Specialist




                         Apr 12, 2018                                                                                              Page 6 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Promoting Social Inclusion and Self-Reliant Livelihood Activities in Armenia




                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project               Triggered?                   Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                  No
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                          No
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                   No
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                              No
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11               No
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                        No
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                  No
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                            No
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50       No
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                No


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? Yes
                           SafeguardAppraisalStage
                           a) Tentative target date for disclosing the appraisal stage ISDS
                           12-Apr-2018
                           b) Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                           40. No significant environmental and social risks are related to the project implementation other than those
                           related to on-granting of the project proceeds to the rural poor. This grant scheme, to be operated under
                           Component 2 of the project is intended to create self-employment through encouraging small business
                           initiatives. The project will not finance civil works. The project will exclude any activities that would have
                           resettlement impacts (such as acquiring private land, causing displacement, causing harm to assets or
                           livelihoods, etc.). Use of the grant proceeds for the purchase and/or application of pesticides will also be
                           disallowed. Small business grants may not be provided to support production of weapons, toxic and
                           radioactive chemicals, tobacco and spirits. To ensure that only eligible activities are financed under
                           Component 2, an adequate mechanism will be established for screening and approval of grant applications.
                           An Operations Manual will be developed for Component 2 which will specify the sectors to be supported
                           under the entrepreneurship program and which will articulate the screening and approval process of the
                           small business grants. Overall, the implementation of the proposed project will considerably improve the
                           social setting in communities and reduce social tensions and disparities.


                           APPROVALS




                         Apr 12, 2018                                                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                                   The World Bank
                                   Promoting Social Inclusion and Self-Reliant Livelihood Activities in Armenia




                              Team Leader(s):                                  Maddalena Honorati

                              Approved By

                              Safeguards Advisor:                             Agi Kiss                                          27-Mar-2018

                              Practice Manager/Manager:                       Cem Mete                                          29-Mar-2018


                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Apr 12, 2018                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 8
