INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA13781
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Aug-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Aug-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:         Peru                       Project ID:   P132515
Project Name:    Subnational Transport Support Program (P132515)
Task Team       Anca Cristina Dumitrescu
Leader(s):
Estimated        16-Jul-2015                Estimated     24-Sep-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GT104                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (50%), General transportation sector
(30%), General public administration sector (20%)
Theme(s):        Decentralization (40%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Trade
facilitation and market access (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     600.00             Total Bank Financing:    50.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                           Amount
Borrower                                                                     500.00
P            International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        50.00
Inter-American Development Bank                                               50.00
Total                                                                        600.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Program development objectives are to (i) facilitate sustainable road access of Peru's rural
populations to services, (ii) reduce transport costs on rural roads linked to priority logistics corridors,
Page 1 of 8


﻿and (iii) strengthen decentralized road management.
3. Project Description
The Program Objectives will be achieved through the following four components:
0
The Program Objectives will be achieved through the following four components:
Component 1 - Rehabilitation of Rural Roads Infrastructure (US$406 million of
a which the Bank US$35 million) with the following two subcomponents:
1.1 Infrastructure for Social inclusion (US$169.7 million of which the Bank US$27.7 million): will
scale up the previous rural roads programs by prioritizing interventions that promote accessibility
and social inclusion of the poorest rural areas. Activities include (i) technical design and detailed
engineering studies for roads rehabilitation; (ii) decentralized execution of civil works for
rehabilitation of about 1,100 km of rural roads, including road safety materials and related road users
training; (iii) implementation of safeguards mitigation measures as needed; and (iv) supervision of
related civil works.
1.2 Integration of the Feeder Network into Selected Logistic Corridors (US$236.1 million of which
the Bank 7.3 million): will support MTC's competitiveness agenda by improving the transitability of
subnational roads linked to/feeding into five selected logistic corridors, in the regions of San Martin
(corridor 1), Arequipa and Puno (corridor 5), Cusco (corridors 8 and 11), and Tarapoto-Tingo Maria
(corridor 12). Activities include: (i) technical design and detailed engineering studies for roads
rehabilitation; (ii) centralized execution of civil works for the rehabilitation of about 1,100 km of
rural roads linked to the above-mentioned logistics corridors, including road safety materials and
related road users training ; (iii) implementation of safeguards mitigation measures as needed; and
(iv) supervision of related civil works.
Component 2 - Subnational Road Infrastructure Maintenance (US$151.9 million of which the
Bank US$10 million). This component will finance activities to support an efficient and sustainable
decentralized maintenance of the subnational road network. Activities will include: (i) technical
design for periodic and routine maintenance contracts; (ii) centralized and decentralized execution of
civil works for periodic and routine maintenance of about 2,800 km of rural roads rehabilitated in the
previous program financed by the Bank and IADB, and for routine maintenance of 2,200 km of rural
roads intervened under this Program. The routine maintenance will be executed by microenterprises;
and (iii) supervision of related civil works.
Component 3 - Decentralized Road Management (US$26.7 million, of which the
WB US$4.7 million). This component will finance, technical assistance, training and equipment at
both subnational (RG/PG) and central (PVD) levels to support the consolidation of the decentralized
transport management agenda. It will include five main sub-components: (i) strengthening the
capacity of RG/PG in road transport management; (ii) institutional strengthening of PVD; (iii)
development and implementation of a capacity building program for routine maintenance through
microenterprises; (iv) design and implementation of local and logistics development windows
(LLDW); and (v) Program monitoring and evaluation, including implementation of an information
and reporting system. Activities (i), (iii) and (iv) will include incentives on gender participation and
promotion.
Component 4 - Program Management (US$15.7 million, of which the Bank US$0.4
Page 2 of 8


﻿million). This component will cover the Program incremental administrative costs, including staff,
audits, information dissemination, program activities related trainings, and operational support
through consulting services. The only activity to be financed by the Bank under this component will
be the external audit; the cost will be shared with IADB (Inter-American Development Bank).
O
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The US$600 million Program will finance rehabilitation, periodic and current maintenance works on
subnational (rural and non-motorized transport tracks) throughout the territory of Peru. Under sub-
component 1.1 (Infrastructure for Social Inclusion), the roads targeted are those located in the poor
and remote zones included under the "National Fund for Economic Inclusion in Rural Areas" (Fondo
Nacional para la Inclusion Economica en Zonas Rurales - FONIE), mostly on the Central and Eastern
parts of Peru, including the Andean and Upper Amazon Regions. Under sub-component 1.2
(Integration of the Feeder Network of Selected Logistics Corridors), the roads targeted are those
feeding into 5 of the main 22 road logistics corridors identified in the country. The rural roads
included in the program will be scattered throughout the territory of Peru.
The Program will benefit the rural population of Peru, in particular local farmers and peasant
communities (including indigenous communities), similar to previous projects, by facilitating access
of population from production centers to markets and/or social services. The Program is not expected
to have significant social impacts or bear social risks. The civil works aimed at rehabilitation and
improvement of rural roads are expected to be carried out within existing rights of way. The Program
triggers both social safeguard policies OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement, and OP/BP 4.10 -
Indigenous Peoples. The former was triggered because the civil works may exceptionally affect
property assets and/or crops due to improvements to the roads; however no physical displacement of
people is expected since the Program will address only existing roads. The latter was triggered
mainly because the Program is expected to also benefit Indigenous Communities among the rural
population. In compliance with these policies and because specific roads for rehabilitation and
improvement are not fully known before appraisal, the Borrower through its implementation agency
Provias Decentralizado (PVD) has prepared both a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and an
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) with support from consultants and guidance from
the Bank team.
o
Both social frameworks as well as the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
follow the Bank and the IADB policies and will be applied regardless of the source of financing
whenever deemed necessary as per policies requirements. These frameworks have been prepared
following the requirements of both banks as well as the national legislation; whenever there was a
discrepancy or gaps were found, the frameworks aimed at the highest standards which are those of
the Bank policies.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Alonso Zarzar Casis (GSURR)
Raul Tolmos (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The Program does not foresee significant environmental
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               impacts that could jeopardize the natural environment of
its influential project area. Following the Operational
Page 3 of 8


﻿Policy [OP 4.01] the Program would be "Category B".
This category is justified by the fact that the rural road
works to be supported would not include any new road
construction, while road paving will include some
economic pavements within the right of way of selected
roads, as justified by traffic. While the Program plans to
focus largely on road rehabilitation (restoration of
preexisting conditions), it would most likely also support
some significant road improvements (within the existing
road standards). An Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared before
appraisal and disclosed both in-country and at the Bank's
Infoshop. The ESMF sets the rules, principles and
methodology to be followed during implementation of
each subproject including criteria to classify subprojects
according to their levels of impact. Environmental
Management Plans (EMP) will be prepared for all sub-
projects once the specific locations of roads are known.
The ESMF and EMPs address the whole Program co-
financed by the Government, WB and IADB, and they
meet the requirements of both financial institutions based
on agreed common TOR, as done in previous programs.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes         This policy is triggered since rehabilitation and
4.04                                improvement of rural roads might be located in natural
habitats considered critical. Works will be scattered
across the country, including in potentially fragile
environmental regions in the Peruvian Amazon region.
The ESMF includes measures to screen proposed works
and sub-projects for negative impacts on natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      Yes         This policy is triggered since the Program will include
sub-projects located in some of the 570 districts
prioritized by FONIE. Some of these districts are located
in areas characterized by primary tropical forests. The
ESMF determined that the potential negative impact of
the project is minimal given that the proposed civil works
will include rehabilitation of existing tertiary roads, and
they will not involve any deforestation.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          This policy is not triggered since the Program will not
include procurement and use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural       Yes         This policy is triggered since physical cultural resources
Resources OP/BP 4.11                may be found particularly in the Andean region where the
road rehabilitation works will be executed. The ESMF did
not identify any known physical cultural resource within
the broad Program area, as identified at appraisal time.
However, the ESMF describes the actions that will be
taken to minimize and manage likely impacts. The ESMF
Page 4 of 8


﻿includes the procedures for reviewing sub-projects for
physical cultural resources issues and to manage chance
fmds in accordance with Bank's policy and the national
legislation.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes         This policy is triggered due to the strong likelihood that
BP 4.10                             indigenous communities be benefited by the Program
since its main focus is the central highlands and the upper
Amazon of Peru where a significant number of these
communities are located. Since precise locations for
Program intervention are not known before appraisal, the
Borrower prepared an Indigenous Peoples Planning
Framework (IPPF) that was cleared by the Bank. The
borrower will prepare IPPs for investment sub-projects on
road improvement and rehabilitation whenever this is
relevant, once locations for project implementation are
known. The IPPF was published in-country and at the
Bank's Infoshop. Two IP national organizations have
been invited in writing, by the Borrower's implementing
agency, to provide feedback within a period of two weeks
from disclosure: "Asociaci6n Inter6tnica de Desarrollo de
la Selva Peruana" representing the IP of the Amazon
basin; and "Centro de Culturas Indigenas del Per"
representing the Andean people. None had any comments
or suggestions. Due to the long history of involvement of
the Bank in financing rural roads rehabilitation and the
overwhelming positive reception these have had, a more
formal consultation of the IPPF was not deemed
necessary.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes        This policy is triggered because it is likely that some
OP/BP 4.12                          small areas for cultivation, also crops and maybe some
houses built next to roads, may be affected by civil works
to improve these rural roads. Precise locations for project
intervention will not be known before appraisal, and for
this reason the borrower has prepared a Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF) that was cleared by the Bank
and disclosed both in-country and at the Bank's Infoshop.
This will guide the preparation of Resettlement Action
Plans (RAP) whenever needed.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No          This policy is not triggered as the Program will neither
4.37                                support the construction nor rehabilitation of dams, nor
will it support other investments which rely on services of
existing dams.
Projects on International  No       This policy should is not triggered as the Program will not
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                finance activities involving the use or potential pollution
of international waterways.
Projects in Disputed    No          This policy is not triggered as the Program will not
Page 5 of 8


﻿Areas OP/BP 7.60                     finance activities in disputed areas as defined in the
policy.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Q
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
O
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There are no large scale or significant social impacts.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
There are not known indirect and/or long term impacts.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
There are no project alternatives considered, since adverse impacts are minimal, if any.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
In order to have adequate conditions and needed requirements for the preparation, implementation
and supervision of safeguard related instruments, it has been agreed with the implementing agency
Provias Decentralizado (PVD) that a socio-environmental unit will be created in PVD
headquarters, to include three specialists (on environment, Indigenous Peoples, and resettlement).
PVD will also include social specialists in its local offices in areas where there is a significant
presence of indigenous communities.
PVD will be responsible for the preparation and implementation of the safeguard instruments and
its related supervision, while the Bank will perform safeguards supervision and training as needed.
The General Directorate for Environmental and Social Matters within the Ministry of Transport
and Communications will be responsible for approving safeguard related instruments as required
by the national legislation. The detailed institutional arrangements and procedures for the
preparation, approval, implementation, and supervision of safeguard instruments, are included in
the respective frameworks.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
a           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders are the local farmers and road users, including some indigenous communities,
who will benefit from project investments. Both social frameworks have in place mechanisms and
detailed procedures for consultation with potentially affected people.
The two social frameworks were disclosed in-country (on PVD's website: http://www.proviasdes.
gob.pe/index.html), and PVD invited two national Indigenous organizations to provide comments
on the IPPF.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                02-Jul-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             08-Jul-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Page 6 of 8


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Peru                                                     02-Jul-2015
Comments: The ESMP was published on PVD website: http://www.proviasdes.gob.pe/index.
html
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              02-Jul-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           13-Jul-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Peru                                                     02-Jul-2015
Comments: The RFP was published on PVD website: http://www.proviasdes.gob.pe/index.html
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              02-Jul-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           13-Jul-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Peru                                                     02-Jul-2015
Comments: The IPPF was published on PVD website: http://www.proviasdes.gob.pe/index.html
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  No[X]      NA
C.         report?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes[  No[X]      NA
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes    No         NA
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
Page 7 of 8


﻿If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Ifthe whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [ X] No [  ]   NA [   ]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [   ]
does it include provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
O
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Anca Cristina Dumitrescu
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)              Date: 03-Aug-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Jose Luis Irigoyen (PMGR)            Date: 06-Aug-2015
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


