INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA13185
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Mar-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Djibouti                   Project ID:  P146219
Project Name: Djibouti - ICT Sector Reform (P146219)
Task Team       Isabelle Huynh
Leader(s):
Estimated       02-Mar-2015                Estimated    19-May-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Telecommunications (100%)
Theme(s):       Legal institutions for a market economy (35%), Regulation and competition
policy (55%), State-owned enterprise restructuring and pri vatization (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       2.00            Total Bank Financing:    2.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                 2.00
Total                                                                       2.00
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The PDO is to provide support to the Government in opening up the ICT sector to competition and
setting up the institutional and regulatory foundations of a sustainable open and competitive market
in Djibouti.
3. Project Description
Page 1 of4


﻿The project has three components described below.
Component 1: Enabling environment for an ICT sector open to competition (US$0.75 million). The
objective of this component is to strengthen the legal, regulatory and institutional framework of the
ICT sector in Djibouti and prepare all necessary elements and inputs to set up a regulatory entity.
Specifically this component will finance the improvement of the legal and regulatory framework,
studies and up-front technical work necessary for the set-up of an autonomous regulatory entity, and
capacity building for the MOC as described in the 2004 Law on telecommunications.
Component 2: Telecom sector opening and study on Djibouti T616com strategic repositioning (US
$0.85 million). This component will (i) finance a study to identify the strategic options for opening
the sector to competition (this study aims at informing the Government on the key determining
features of the second license and how the license design may impact sector growth in the long run),
and (ii) support the tender process and the award of a second license to introduce competition and
foster dynamism in the telecommunications sector in Djibouti. This component will also (iii) fund a
study to identify the different options for the strategic repositioning of Djibouti T616com with the
goal of transforming it into a world-class operator (opening of Djibouti T616com's capital to a private
investor). This component will cover only this scoping study, but the Government will have to take a
number of accompanying steps towards effectively preparing Djibouti T616com for a next phase of
strategic repositioning, in particular to cover aspects such as cost accounting (currently Djibouti
T616com follows public accounting rules which is not fit for a commercial entity which inter alia is to
set its tariffs of a cost-oriented basis for instance), human resources and skill gaps analysis, asset
valuation, etc.
Component 3: Project Management (US$0.4 million). This component will finance the establishment
of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) within the Ministry of Communication, the implementing
entity as well as a part of its operational needs.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Djibouti city
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
a        Fatou Fall (GSURR)
Helena Munir Freih Al-Naber (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           No          The project does not contain any infrastructure work, and
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               is likely to have no adverse environmental impacts. The
project is therefore categorized as environmental
assessment category C. Beyond screening; no further
Environmental Assessment action is required.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          The project does not trigger this policy.
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          The project does not trigger this policy.
Page 2 of 4


﻿Pest Management OP 4.09 No           The project does not trigger this policy.
Physical Cultural       No           The project does not trigger this policy.
0         Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           The project does not trigger this policy.
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No          The project does not trigger this policy.
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project does not trigger this policy.
4.37
Projects on International  No        The project does not trigger this policy.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No           The project does not trigger this policy.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There are no safeguard issues associated with the proposed project.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Not applicable.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
U           Not applicable.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
O2          assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Not applicable.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
C on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Not applicable.
B. Disclosure Requirements
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Environmental and Social safeguards documents are not required for this project as the policies are
not triggered.
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Page 3 of 4


﻿Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  No        NA   X
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ x]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [  ] No [   ]  NA [ X]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Isabelle Huynh
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Randeep Sudan (PMGR)                 Date: 11-Mar-2015
Manager:
Page 4 of 4


