                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC19642

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Feb-2017
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Africa                         Project ID:       P161265
                            Project Name:        Engaging Private Sector for Green Growth in the Lake Victoria Basin Project
                            Team Leader(s):      Stephen Ling
                            Estimated Date       28-Feb-2017
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       AFCC2                          Lending           IPF
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 3.53                           Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Africa Climate Change Program                                                               3.53
                              Borrower                                                                                       0
                            Environment        B - Partial Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To enhance private participation in resource-efficient and cleaner production and sustainable land
                           management within the Lake Victoria Basin
                           C. Project Description
                           The project is an RETF small grant of $3.5m, to be financed from a total of Euro 4m from the NDF,
                           the remainder of which would be used for related Bank-executed activities (both supervision and
                           some additional technical assistance). The project consists of the following three components.

                           Component 1: Scaling-up the RECP Activities: This component aims to expand the scope of
                           engagement, for a broader and more sustainable program of resource-efficient and cleaner production
                           (RECP) activities with the private sector. The existing RECP program is based on training and
                           detailed, joint in-plant assessments, mainly with larger firms. The scale-up of this program is
                           necessary not only to build on the lessons learned so far and carry momentum through to the possible
                           next phase of LVEMP, but also because it has been shown to generate genuine win-wins for the
                           environment and bottom line, which provide an entry point to engage the private sector on
                           environment and climate activities more broadly. Through the joint in-plant assessment, it also
                           provides the perfect experiential platform for identifying the opportunities. The aim is to extend and
                         expand the current program beyond large enterprises, to include small and medium enterprises
                         (SMEs) and their umbrella associations. The expected outcomes of this component are increased
                         adoption of RECP by targeted industries including SMEs, contributing to the compliance
Public Disclosure Copy




                         enforcement on regional effluent standards and the reduction of industrial pollution that are
                         discharged into Lake Victoria.

                         Subcomponent 1.1: Scaling up existing RECP activities: This subcomponent provides for a
                         continuation of the cleaner production program under the LVEMP, bridging the gap to an expanded
                         next phase. It will also bring in the new aspect of industrial symbiosis, exploring possible waste
                         exchange and recycling relationships between businesses. The main activities include: (a) expanding
                         training of targeted industries on cleaner production technologies; (b) undertaking cleaner production
                         in-plant assessments; (c) conducting award events to promote recognition and peer-learning; (d)
                         continued monitoring and mapping of industries and effluents to assess the environmental impacts of
                         the program and the level of compliance with the regional effluent standards developed under
                         LVEMP II; and e) assessing options for and promoting symbiotic waste exchange between
                         industries.

                         Subcomponent 1.2: Expanding partnership: Expanding the reach of the program to SMEs is critical
                         to achieving wider impact. This will involve conducting surveys and rapid assessments of SMEs to
                         determine the number, locations and types of industries, their environmental impacts, and common
                         opportunities, challenges and entry-points for introducing RECP technologies. Potentially key
                         industries within which SMEs are important include a variety of agro-processing industries, fish-
                         processing, mining (which is largely carried out at small scales within the Basin and motor vehicle
                         servicing centers. Experience in reaching out SMEs to date suggests that successful engagement will
                         require: a) making guidance on simple, industry-specific green technologies more readily available,
                         rather than only conducting in-depth site-specific assessments that limit the number of industries that
                         can be assisted; and b) potentially addressing the availability of finance for green investments by
                         engaging the financial sector, particularly providing training on the financial returns from RECP
                         technologies and how to assess loan applications. Accordingly this subcomponent will help address
Public Disclosure Copy




                         these aspects through i) Strengthening knowledge products such as industry-specific manuals and
                         guides for simple green technologies; ii) Developing institutional knowledge networks establishing
                         an accessible and interactive on-line resource center (including use of social media); iii) Conducting
                         workshops for raising awareness and study tours for knowledge exchange; iv) Introducing
                         partnerships between local clean technology SMEs and investors for technology development ; iv)
                         Building capacity through providing training opportunities such as financial analysis; and (v)
                         Engaging and building capacity of industry associations to support members in RECP.

                         Component 2: Strengthening the Facilitating Environment for RECP: Participation in the RECP
                         program is and will remain voluntary, but this component aims to strengthen the incentives for
                         companies to adopt RECP technologies. The expected outcomes of this component are promotion of
                         private sector engagement in resource efficient and cleaner production through raising awareness and
                         strengthening monitoring capacity and increased transparency.

                         Subcomponent 2.1: Enabling environment for cleaner production. While RECP remains as a
                         voluntary environmental governance tool, incentives can be created to encourage companies to adopt
                         RECP technologies. These can be done through i) Strengthening enforcement of environmental
                         regulations (command-and-control); and ii) Empowering the public with information to check on
                         industries to reduce pollution (environmental performance disclosure). Strengthening enforcement (i)
                         will be done through institutional assessment and capacity building for enforcement of environmental
                         regulations. It will take stock of the existing policies and regulatory environments and emissions
                         standards to identify gaps and recommendations for incentives to strengthen the overall enabling
                         environment for cleaner production. There are a number of legal and regulatory policies that can be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         investigated, such as tax incentives, taxation on pollution or natural resources use, incentives to
                         attract skilled labor. Environmental performance disclosure (ii) will be conducted through
                         strengthening data collection and monitoring and making information related to environmental
                         performance of the industries available to the public.

                         Subcomponent 2.3: Designing financial scheme for sustainability of RECP programs. The
                         subcomponent aims at developing the sustainable financial mode/market for making RECP advisory
                         services available to make RECP program self-sustained. This will include potential market survey
                         for willingness to pay for advisory services as well as type of advisory services where demands of
                         industries exist. It will also identify sources of expertise required for providing such services.

                         Component 3: Piloting Green Growth instruments: This component aims at engaging private sector
                         support for more sustainable agricultural supply chains, particularly targeting important local
                         agricultural commodities (e.g. sugar, tea, coffee, honey) which have intrinsic land management
                         benefits or which offer options for improved production systems that also benefit environmental
                         functions. The aim is therefore to engage the private sector with the Basin (much of which is
                         involved in some form of natural resource-based or agri-processing industry) on sustainability issues
                         beyond the factories themselves, and to promote private sector investment in sustainable land and
                         watershed management. The expected outcomes of this component is successful pilot of green supply
                         chain through collaboration with the private sector.

                         Subcomponent 3.1 Analysis of opportunities for greening agricultural value chains. Agriculture is a
                         major livelihood source in the Basin, and at the same time is identified as a key driver of land
                         degradation. It is therefore strategic to stimulate investments in agriculture that can increase the
                         economic productivity of its value chains whilst reducing its environmental impact. Such
                         investments can be made through the process of greening of agricultural value chains which aims for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         environmentally sustainable agriculture and economically sustainable agriculture. Several
                         approaches exists for greening agricultural value chains such as creating markets and improving
                         market connect ions for example creating access to market premiums for eco-certification and eco-
                         labeling and capacity development; introduction of out-grower schemes;introduction of new
                         technologies for example associated with climate smart agriculture; and developing new
                         infrastructure such as feeder roads.

                         This subcomponent will therefore include analysis of approaches for greening value chains for
                         selected commodities in the Lake Basin. Activities will include analysis of (i) the options for
                         products or production systems, which provide direct environmental benefits or have potential as
                         alternative livelihoods to reduce fishing effort, and/or can be produced in more sustainable /
                         environmentally-friendly systems; (ii) the incentives and barriers for private companies to support
                         those products / production systems in terms of increased production, quality, market access or
                         premium pricing; and (iii) practical means by which those companies can work with producers /
                         suppliers to collectively discuss opportunities and potential innovative solutions to promote those
                         changes. Finally, an action plan for private sector outreach and engagement will be developed.

                         Subcomponent 3.2 Green supply chain pilots. Based on the analysis of opportunities above and the
                         interests of private sector partners, this component will provide funds to support the initiation of
                         some green supply chain activities at a demonstration scale. This will be on a cost-sharing basis (e.g.
                         the project could fund analysis and verification of eco-certification requirements in support of a
                         company➢❨ s sustainability investments, or could support the adoption of improved agronomic
                         techniques amongst farmers to complement private sector investment in improved collection /
Public Disclosure Copy




                         storage / processing infrastructure). These pilot initiatives would provide a platform for larger
                         programs during the possible next phase of LVEMP investment, and would help to assess the best
                         mechanisms for their delivery (e.g. focusing on training and facilitation, establishing matching-grant
                         funds, working with other partners in this sphere, such as the Livelihoods Fund for Family Farming,
                         which already has a pilot project on improved dairy production in the Basin).

                         Bank-executed activities:

                         For speed for implementation, harmonization with preparation and design activities for the possible
                         next phase of LVEMP funding, and to leverage other Bank-executing funding, some analytical work
                         under the Euro 4m NDF grant is proposed as Bank-executed activities. These include:
                         i. Mapping of spatial data on point-source pollution, including locations, types & emissions of
                         industries, and sources of waste water and solid waste & treatment systems.
                         ii. Institutional analysis of wastewater and solid waste management systems. This will assess
                         potential for greater private sector involvement in the financing and management of waste
                         management systems, building in part on regional activities under the Bank➢❨ s Water & Sanitation
                         Program.
                         iii. Value chain analyses to identify opportunities to engage private companies in greening of supply
                         chains.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented within Lake Victoria Basin, specifically in five countries, Burundi,
                         Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda. The Lake, with a surface area of about 68,800 km2, is the
                         second largest freshwater body in the world. Its catchment area of 194,000 km2 is shared by the five
                         EAC States members as follows: Burundi (7 percent), Kenya (22 percent), Rwanda (11 percent),
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Tanzania (44 percent), and Uganda (16 percent). Rwanda and Burundi are a part of the upper
                         watershed that drains into Lake Victoria through the Kagera River. The Basin is a home to around a
                         third of those below the poverty line in (EAC, living on around a ninth of its land surface. The Lake
                         is also part of the Nile River basin system, shared by ten countries: Burundi, Democratic Republic of
                         Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Kenya, Rwanda, Sudan, Tanzania, and Uganda.

                         LVB has immense ecological values and is greatly valued for its social and economic potential. The
                         potential based on the human resource, rich agricultural soils, abundant water resources, minerals,
                         fisheries, wetlands, diverse forest resources, wildlife and tourism potential and a rich biodiversity.
                         Besides, its water serves vital multipurpose functions for domestic uses, hydropower generation,
                         agricultural and industrial uses, and medium of transport and climate modulation. Despite its
                         potential, the Basin is threatened by ecological and environmental degradation, widespread poverty,
                         high population growth and unsustainable pressure on existing resources.
                         E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         LVBC, an institution of the EAC, will be responsible for overall project oversight at regional level to
                         guarantee a uniform strategy and establish a strong basis for coordination among Partner States. In
                         the LVBC structure, the office of the Environment and Natural Resources Management Officer
                         (ENRO), is an established position under the Deputy Executive Secretary Projects and Programmes
                         and is responsible for managing and coordinating environment and social safeguard issues in LVBC.
                           Environmental and Social Safeguard management capacity of LVBC has been enhanced through
                           coordination of LVEMP II implementation. At the national level, the existing arrangement for
                           managing environmental and social issue under the respective national environment management
Public Disclosure Copy




                           agencies be maintained. Each National Project Coordination team has adequate experience in
                           safeguard management and operates in close collaboration and oversight from the national
                           environmental regulatory authorities. The project team will play an oversight role on the
                           implementation of the project and to ensure quality and compliance with country regulations.

                           The environmental and frameworks, namely: Environmental and Social Management Framework
                           (ESMF) and Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP), prepared for the second phase of the Lake
                           Victoria Environmental Management Project (LVEMP II) remain relevant and adequate to provide
                           strategic and operational guidance for the integration of environmental and social considerations into
                           the planning and implementation of the proposed NDF activities. ESMF in all instances has been
                           applied for the initial screening of the proposed project activities for any negative environmental and
                           social impacts which would require attention prior to project implementation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Jane A. N. Kibbassa (GEN01)
                           Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (GSU07)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              Although the project activities largely comprise
                           BP 4.01                                               TA, RECP training and assessments will result
                                                                                 in physical changes to production processes, and
                                                                                 value chain greening pilots may also result in
                                                                                 some limited physical changes to land
                                                                                 management. These will be entirely within the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 scope of the existing ESMF and IPMP for
                                                                                 LVEMP 2.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          Yes              As above.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09              Yes              As above.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No
                           Projects on International                    TBD                  Although the project involves working with
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                              industries within the basin of an international
                                                                                             waterway, it will only lead to activities that
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             reduce pollution. It is not therefore considered
                                                                                             likely that the policy needs to be triggered or a
                                                                                             new notification provided to riparian states, but
                                                                                             this will be confirmed during preparation.
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                           A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?: Yes
                               i. Explanation
                                  Safeguards instruments used for the LVEMP II (ESMF and IPMP) are applicable to this project
                               ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
                                  15-Feb-2017
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.
                              N/A
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Stephen Ling
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)                                         Date: 17-Jan-2017
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Nevena Ilieva (PMGR)                                         Date: 25-Jan-2017
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
