The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Cities and Climate Change (P123201)




                       Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                    Restructuring Stage


        Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 31-Jan-2017| Report No: ISDSR18762




                        Regional Vice President:    Makhtar Diop
                               Country Director:    Mark R. Lundell
                 Senior Global Practice Director:   Ede Jorge Ijjasz-Vasquez
                    Practice Manager/Manager:       Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst
                             Task Team Leader:      Michel Matera
          The World Bank                                                                    RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          Cities and Climate Change (P123201)



.

I. BASIC INFORMATION

1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

Project ID                                                Project Name
P123201                                                   Cities and Climate Change
Task Team Leader(s)                                       Country
Michel Matera                                             Mozambique
Approval Date                                             Environmental Category
03-Apr-2012                                               Partial Assessment (B)
Managing Unit                                             Is this a Repeater project?
GSU13

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

Total Project Cost                                        Total Financing
135,750,000.00                                            135,750,000.00
Financing Gap
0.00
OLD_FIN_DTL
Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
International Development Association (IDA)                                                120,000,000.00
Trust Funds                                                                                 15,750,000.00
Total                                                                                      135,750,000.00



2. PROJECT INFORMATION

    Current Project Development Objective
    The PDO is to strengthen municipal capacity for sustainable urban infrastructure provision and environmental
    management whichenhance resiliency to climate related risks.


    Proposed New PDO
          The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          Cities and Climate Change (P123201)



    The PDO is to strengthen institutional capacity for local revenue enhancement and land use management in targeted
    municipalities, and to enhance climate resilience in the coastal cities of Beira and Maputo.
.


1. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

The project responds to two distinct but related requests from the Government of Mozambique (GOM): (1) to finance
investments that reduce the immediate (and ongoing) vulnerability of strategic coastal cities to climate-related
environmental threats; and (2) to resume Bank support for the development of the national municipal system, which
has been interrupted since the closing of the Municipal Development Project in 2007. The project has two components:
Component 1 – Strengthening the Municipal Sector (US$ 35 million IDA); and Component 2 – Enhancing Resilience of
Strategic Coastal Cities (US$ 85 million IDA and US$ 15.75 million from Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR) under
the Strategic Climate Fund (SCF), added under an Additional Financing approved in October 2014). Due to the different
nature of the two Components, the project has two implementing agencies: (1) the Ministry of State Administration and
Public Function (MAEFP) for Component 1; and (2) the Administration for Water and Sanitation Infrastructure (AIAS) for
Component 2.
Component 1 provides institutional development assistance at the local and national levels to strengthen the municipal
sector. At the local level, it focuses on strengthening the institutional capacity of targeted intermediate municipalities
for local revenue enhancement and land-use management through Municipal Performance Grants (MPGs) and
accompanying capacity building and technical assistance measures. The technical assistance is intended to enhance
municipal capacity to implement the systems and methodologies defined in national policies. The average amount of
annual MPGs for most participating municipalities is approximately US$150,000; only the five largest municipalities are
expected to get more than this amount. Most of the investments funded by MPGs are thus small and simple, consisting
mainly of the rehabilitation of existing infrastructure and/or the purchase of equipment. At the national level,
Component 1 provides technical assistance and capacity building support to key units in MAEFP and the Ministry of
Economy and Finance that regulate and support the municipal system. This is intended to contribute to the continued
development of the national policy and regulatory framework for municipal governance. This Component also supports
strengthening the capacity of the National Municipal Association (ANAMM) to provide services to its member
municipalities, and establishment of a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) under the Directorate for Local Governance
Development (DNDA) within MAEFP.
Component 2 aims to enhance municipal capacities in strategic coastal cities for sustainable resilience to weather-
related environmental threats. Beneficiary cities are selected based on their strategic economic importance and
vulnerability to climate-related environmental risks. At Project Appraisal, the regional port cities of Beira and Nacala
were identified as the cities that most fully satisfied these criteria. The Component finances improvements in storm-
water drainage infrastructure and supports the operation and maintenance of these systems as well as environmental
management so as to meet existing and climate adaptation deficits and provide the basis for future investments to
reduce climate change-related risks. In the case of Beira, the component aims to strengthen the municipality’s resilience
with regards to flood control via: (1) improving the city’s storm-water drainage system (detailed engineering designs for
upgrading the existing open-air drainage network, as well as subsequent works, such as rehabilitating, lining, and
widening, based on data, feasibility studies, and engineering designs already available from the European Union; and (2)
further strengthening the institutional capacity of Beira’s Autonomous Sanitation Service, including its financial base, to
ensure sustainable operation and maintenance for sanitation, drainage, and coastal management. Support to Nacala
under Component 2 was expected to address the adaptation deficit in infrastructure investments to tackle erosion by:
(1) developing a Drainage Master Plan; (2) executing priority structural drainage works; and (3) strengthening municipal
           The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Cities and Climate Change (P123201)



capacity to maintain the drainage system and other critical infrastructure and environmental services. Component 2 is
also designed to strengthen the resilience of the Maputo Metropolitan Area (MMA) to control floods, including through
the development of a Master Drainage and Sanitation Plan for the Greater Maputo Area.
An Additional Financing (AF) was approved in October 2014, leveraged additional funds from the PPCR/SCF to finance
green infrastructure investments in the municipality of Beira under Component 2, to protect and improve natural
drainage within the urban area that plays a key role in abating flooding in the city. The intervention areas include the
banks of the Chiveve River, sections of the banks along the open-air canals, and some low-lying areas identified for flood
retention basins. This activity is implemented with parallel financing from the German Development Bank (KfW) and as
the second phase of the broader Chiveve River rehabilitation. The first phase of the Chiveve River rehabilitation,
exclusively financed by KfW (EUR 13 million) and completed in December 2016, was restricted to the downstream
portion of the basin and included the reopening of the Chiveve River with a sea-outlet at the fishing port, rehabilitation
of the riverbed, and dredging of the fishing port. The rehabilitation included deepening and widening of sections of the
riverbed, including creation of a flood retention basin, as well as cleaning the flood plains of accumulated sediment and
solid waste, in order to restore the hydraulic function of the river and mitigate flooding events. The second phase of the
Chiveve River rehabilitation (co-financed by the Bank under the AF and the KfW) consists of a restoration project of
about 19 hectares along the river basin denominated green urban infrastructure that includes, among other things,
developing an urban park, a botanical garden, pedestrian paths, sport courts and social centers, as well as revegetating
some areas along the Chiveve basin with exotic trees. The Project Restructuring proposes the following changes:
  (i)     Revision of the Project Development Objective (PDO) to more clearly spell out the two-fold intent of the project
          to strengthen institutional capacity in selected secondary cities and carry out infrastructure investments to
          enhance climate resilience in the coastal cities of Beira and Maputo;
  (ii)    Adjustment of the project results framework to reflect changes in project activities and improve the coherence of
          results indicators with the PDO;
  (iii)   Regularization of the triggering of Safeguards Policy OP/BP 4.04 for Natural Habitats, which had been included in
          the AF ISDS disclosed in January 2014 but not in the corresponding Project Paper approved by the Board in
          October 2014, and triggering of Safeguards Policy OP/BP 4.36 on Forests;
  (iv)    Extension of the project closing date by just over 12 months to December 31, 2019;
  (v)     Cancellation and change of selected activities under existing components financed by the IDA Credit;
  (vi)    Reallocation between disbursement categories for the IDA Credit to align remining funds with changes in planned
          activities under Component 1; and
  (vii)   Reallocation between disbursement categories and subsequent elimination of a disbursement category under the
          SCF-PPCR Loan and Grant.

Regarding the change of project activities, the Project Restructuring proposes, among other things, canceling planned
activities to strengthen climate resilience in Nacala, considering that the remaining uncommitted project funds, after
considerable losses due to exchange rate fluctuations, would not be sufficient to finance both design and
implementation of the planned erosion control and drainage rehabilitation works there. It is proposed that the
remaining funds will instead be used for implementation of priority storm-water drainage works in Maputo that were
identified in the Master Plan and for which technical designs already available. These priority drainage works encompass
the expansion/conclusion of three macro drainage canals, denominated System 8 (Viveiros canal), System 9 (Golf course
canal), and the Mozal canal, all located in the Polana Caniço neighborhood, a well-developed urban area. System 9, the
largest one, is around 1.5 km long.
A Level 1 Restructuring is necessary given the triggering of new Safeguards Policy, mainly due to the impacts on the
mangroves in the Chiveve basin, and the revision of the PDO.
          The World Bank                                                                     RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          Cities and Climate Change (P123201)



.

3. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
   KNOWN)
The Project finances construction works in cities in southern and central Mozambique. Component 1
finances small grants for the rehabilitation of existing urban infrastructure in more than 20 municipalities.
Component 2 finances large storm water drainage works in Beira and Maputo. Mozambique is highly
vulnerable to climate change and has experienced major natural disasters at least every five years. Sea-level
rise is expected to have significant implications for low-lying coastal areas, such as Beira and Maputo,
including inundation, loss of coastal wetlands, increased rates of shoreline erosion, saltwater intrusion,
higher water tables, and higher extreme water levels, which lead to coastal flooding. The project area is in
the southern subequatorial zone and has a rainy tropical climate with a dry winter. The annual precipitation
reaches 1500mm, with a maximum in January and a minimum in September. Beira stretches over a coastal
plain, geologically formed by the accumulation of alluvial material. The project area is comprised of clay and
sand terrain. Due to its geomorphology, characterized by low and flat terrain, the tidal influence on the
project area is high. This exposure is further increased by strong variations in the tidal range from 0.5m to
7m, one of the highest in Africa. Urbanization has had a major effect on most of the city’s watercourses, the
Chiveve River being a prominent example. The partial environmental protection zone along the Chiveve River
canal had been severely degraded due to formal and informal constructions, earth embankments, solid
waste, and economic activities. The water quality of the rivers and canals has further deteriorated, due to
pollution by solid waste and sewage disposal. Urbanization has significantly altered the original flora and
fauna conditions in the project areas in Beira, once characterized by a predominance of grey mangroves.
Maputo is also located on the coast. The project area in the Polana Caniço, Sommerschield, and Hulene B
neighborhoods constitutes the transition from a sandstone plateau to the coastal zone, inclined to the sea,
comprised of dunes and wetlands. The area is characterized by the occurrence of environmental and
engineering geological risks, including flooding, landslides and slope instability, gullying, coastal erosion,
informal settlements, and inadequate solid waste management. Most of the area is densely occupied with
few remains of the original vegetation.



4. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Augusto Ferreira Mendonca (GWA04), Maria Do Socorro Alves Da Cunha (GSU07)
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
5. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED


    Safeguard Policies                      Triggered         Explanation


                                                              The proposed Project Restructuring does not add
    Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes               any new type of intervention. The original project
                                                              design encompassed the rehabilitation of a large-
       The World Bank                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Cities and Climate Change (P123201)



                                               scale drainage system in Beira and erosion control
                                               measures in Nacala; the green infrastructure
                                               works along the Chiveve river basin were added
                                               under an AF in October 2014. This intervention
                                               and the proposed priority drainage works in
                                               Maputo are notably smaller and do not involve
                                               significant adverse environmental impacts. The
                                               Project remains, therefore, a Category B.
                                               The green infrastructure works will be developed
                                               in an area of about 19 hectares along the Chiveve
                                               river basin located in the downtown area of Beira,
                                               which had been largely degraded due to urban
                                               use, waste disposal and land use changes. The
                                               Polana Caniço drainage system in Maputo will be
                                               developed in urbanized areas, and the
                                               construction works will not interfere directly with
                                               natural habitats. However, the system’s outfall will
                                               be in a region known as the Costa do Sol
                                               mangrove, a 15-km large low land area along the
                                               coast, flooded during the rainy season. Mangrove
                                               degradation in this area is at an advanced stage,
                                               due to long-term use for agriculture and ongoing
                                               conversion to urban use. The updated ESMF
                                               prepared for the Restructuring found that there
                                               was no other feasible option for the outfall
                                               location and determined the construction of a
                                               retention basin (“debris trap?) aiming to reduce
                                               the storm water discharge impact on the
                                               mangrove water quality.
                                               Phase 1 of the Chiveve river basin rehabilitation
                                               (financed by KfW) was subject to a comprehensive
                                               environmental assessment, which laid out detailed
                                               mitigation measures to minimize habitat loss
                                               within the vicinity of the basin. The Chiveve basin
                                               is located in the Beira downtown area and
                                               occupies around 143 ha, mostly already degraded
                                               due to urban use, waste disposal and land use
                                               changes. The area of the basin not urbanized (but
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)          Yes
                                               partially occupied) was around 45 ha and the
                                               remaining mangrove encompassed around 5.8 ha.
                                               Given that the rehabilitation works would partially
                                               and temporarily affect the mangrove, a protected
                                               and ecologically sensitive ecosystem, OP 4.04 was
                                               triggered to set forth procedures and measures to
                                               address OP 4.04 requirements. The area affected
                                               during the construction phase of the basin
                                               rehabilitation works financed by KfW (completed
       The World Bank                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Cities and Climate Change (P123201)



                                               in December 2016) was about 2.75 ha, including
                                               the removal of around 1,110 trees, mainly in the
                                               area of the new retention basin. Notwithstanding,
                                               a restoration plan was implemented to
                                               mitigate/compensate the project impacts,
                                               comprising the recuperation of the degraded
                                               mangrove, revegetation of 2,2 ha inside the
                                               Chiveve river basin (plantation of 2,745 trees in
                                               sub-basin one). The permanent impacts on the
                                               mangrove are restricted to the retention basin,
                                               with an area of approx. 0,6 hectares. The EA
                                               prepared under the restructuring project found
                                               that this conversion was needed for the project to
                                               achieve its objectives on urban flood protection
                                               (no other feasible alternatives). To compensate
                                               this impact, the project included additional
                                               mitigation measures with the revegetation of 3.2
                                               ha in another site, outside the Chiveve river basin,
                                               planting around 3,500 mangrove trees.
                                               Phase 2 of the Chiveve River Rehabilitation
                                               (financed by the Bank and KfW) includes
                                               development of so-called green infrastructure
                                               along the river basin (i.e. development of
                                               pedestrian paths, park, botanical garden, sport
                                               courts, social centers, and plantation of exotic
                                               trees along the river basin). It will also include the
                                               revegetation of the mangroves in sub-basins two
                                               and three. The proposed works will not result in
                                               significant impacts on native vegetation, notably
                                               on the remaining mangroves areas, but aim to
                                               maintain and protect them. The works do not
                                               require mangrove cleaning or removal. The Green
                                               Infrastructure ESMP has specific directions for
                                               mangrove monitoring and restoration, including
                                               additional revegetation of sub-basins 2 and 3.
                                               It is important to note that the EA (2017 ESMF)
                                               concluded that the Project may result in net
                                               positive impacts on the health and quality of the
                                               Chiveve mangroves, interrupting its continuous
                                               degradation due to the urban pressure and
                                               uncontrolled use, as well as revegetating
                                               previously degrades areas.
                                               The implementation of Phase 1 (funded by KfW)
                                               did not affect the rights and welfare of people
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                   Yes   depending on interaction with forests, as the
                                               remaining mangrove area in the Chiveve basin was
                                               highly degraded and was not used as a source of
       The World Bank                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Cities and Climate Change (P123201)



                                                raw material by the surrounding population. The
                                                second phase (green infrastructure funded jointly
                                                by the Bank and KfW) presents an analogous
                                                situation. OP 4.36 was triggered aiming to assist
                                                the client to conduct the mangrove restoration in
                                                a sustainable manner, as supporting socially
                                                beneficial and economically viable activities
                                                associated to the basin rehabilitation.

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                 No    n/a



Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No   n/a



Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)         No    n/a

                                                OP 4.12, on Involuntary Resettlement, was
                                                triggered at Project Appraisal, due to the potential
                                                for impacts on households and small-scale
                                                economic activities under Component 2. The RPF
                                                and implementing arrangements in Component 2
                                                have generally worked well and will continue
                                                unchanged under this Restructuring. A RAP for the
                                                storm-water drainage improvement works in Beira
                                                was prepared (disclosed in InfoShop on August 7,
                                                2014) and fully implemented: 21 families were
                                                permanently resettled; small structures of another
                                                19 families were rehabilitated/rebuilt in place, and
                                                589 people were compensated for the loss of
                                                cultivation area. Several smaller, unforeseen
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)   Yes
                                                affectations caused by the construction works are
                                                being handled in accordance with Bank Safeguards
                                                policies as they occur (e.g. reconstruction of walls
                                                damaged by vibration caused by construction
                                                works).
                                                A RAP for the green infrastructure works was
                                                prepared and disclosed in InfoShop on March 6,
                                                2017. Nine (9) families will be permanently
                                                resettled, and latrines of another 18 families will
                                                be rehabilitated/reconstructed. An associated
                                                resettlement action of 44 families from precarious
                                                dwellings in the informal settlement of Mangal
                                                along the Chiveve river, financed by KfW before
                                                the start of the Bank-financed project, was subject
       The World Bank                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Cities and Climate Change (P123201)



                                                to an agreement between KfW and the Bank and a
                                                subsequent independent audit. The audit was
                                                reviewed (including site visits) and approved by
                                                the Bank. The resettlement was deemed to have
                                                been carried out in accordance with the principles
                                                of the Bank Resettlement Policy and the PAPs
                                                were successfully relocated to improved
                                                conditions.
                                                The priority drainage works in Maputo (which will
                                                be added to the Project under the proposed
                                                Restructuring after their financing was cancelled
                                                under the Maputo Municipal Development Project
                                                closed on June 30, 2017) would have required the
                                                resettlement of approximately 5 families living in
                                                an informal settlement along Ravine 3. This
                                                resettlement was to have been carried out by AIAS
                                                (the PIU for Component 2) in coordination with
                                                the Municipality based on a RAP acceptable to the
                                                Bank. However, before the RAP was prepared, the
                                                Municipality facilitated a direct negotiation
                                                between a private developer and the affected
                                                families along Ravine 3, who left the area on
                                                payment of monetary compensation in March
                                                2017. The Bank has requested an audit to verify
                                                the compensation values and process followed,
                                                and to identify any additional measures as
                                                needed. The Bank will receive the audit findings
                                                before the end of September 2017. No permanent
                                                resettlement will be needed along Ravine 4, but a
                                                limited number of small structures located along
                                                the corridor of the works may have to be
                                                removed, relocated on site, repaired or
                                                compensated for due to damages caused by
                                                vibration from construction equipment during the
                                                construction phase. These affectations will be
                                                treated according to the provisions of the RPF as
                                                they arise.

Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)              No   n/a


Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                           No   n/a
(BP 7.50)
       The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Cities and Climate Change (P123201)




Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)   No                    n/a

KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A. SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
   potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
   It is proposed to finance drainage works in Maputo instead of the civil works in Nacala. The ISDS also addresses the
   Chiveve River rehabilitation, included as an AF in 2014. The new works comprise the development of drainage
   systems that are significantly smaller than the one in Beira. Phase 1 of the Chiveve rehabilitation required the
   permanent conversion of 0.6 ha of native vegetation in the area of the new retention basin (no other feasible
   alternative for the project to achieve its objectives on urban flood protection), but the long-term impacts on the
   ecosystem may be positive as the rehabilitation aims to avoid complete degradation and conversion of the basin to
   urban use and includes mangrove revegetation of previously degraded areas. The Maputo drainage canals will be
   developed in urbanized areas. One of the system's outfalls is in a wetland known as Costa do Sol Mangrove that
   occupies 15 kilometers along the coast, but is at an advanced stage of degradation due to long-term use for
   agriculture and ongoing conversion to urban use. The project includes measures to mitigate the impact of the
   drainage on its water quality. The revised EA found that expected impacts would be localized and limited in scope.
   The Project thus remains Category B. Both works, however, result in impacts on mangroves, requiring the triggering
   of additional Safeguard policies OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats) and OP/BP 4.36 (Forests).
   The revised Comp 2 ESMF concluded that the Chiveve River rehabilitation was an environmentally feasible
   alternative for restoring the river basin and overall project benefits far outweigh environmental costs, as the
   remaining mangroves could be completely degraded in a few years without the implementation of the
   rehabilitation works. The riverbed rehabilitation works, river mouth opening, sea-gate construction, and cleaning of
   the riverbanks required the removal of 1,110 native mangrove trees that were compensated by planting over 6,200
   mangrove trees in the basin and nearby mangroves.
   The Maputo works are expected to cause limited and temporary adverse impacts, mostly related to construction
   (such as noise, dust, vibration). One canal outfall may cause permanent impacts on the downstream Costa do Sol
   mangrove, a wetland partially occupied by houses and plantations and surrounded by urbanized areas. The
   technical design includes a retention basin to catch waste before it can reach the mangroves, mitigating the impact
   on the mangrove water quality.
   Issues related to involuntary resettlement for the new works remain unchanged. No physical cultural resources at
   risk were identified in the pre-feasibility studies for the Chiveve and Maputo works.
   There is, however, a recent health and safety-related issue regarding the ongoing drainage improvement works in
   Beira that merits attention. In April 2017, the bodies of two children were found (later determined to have
   drowned) in drainage ditches that are part of the storm water drainage to be rehabilitated by the Project in Beira.
   Although investigation of the incident confirmed that Project facilities were fenced, signed, and under surveillance,
   AIAS has since taken additional measures to strengthen both physical control and surveillance of the area
   surrounding the works and to re-emphasize community information regarding safety. At the Bank’s request, a
   Health and Safety Audit of the works is being undertaken to identify any remaining safety issues and security
   enhancement needs to be addressed and included in the ESMP and Health and Safety Plans for the remainder of
   the construction and operations phase.
      The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
      Cities and Climate Change (P123201)




2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  Institutional strengthening activities and macro-drainage system development will reduce risks and vulnerability
  associated with climate-related impacts in the selected cities. Project-supported activities will improve the quality
  of life of the beneficiary population, reducing flood damages and public health impacts. Flood control may,
  however, potentially result in real-estate valuation, favoring an influx of more affluent residents to areas benefited
  by the drainage works.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  The designs for the Chiveve River rehabilitation and the Maputo drainage system are based on technical feasibility
  studies, which include an evaluation of social and environmental impacts. Both studies consider non-development
  scenarios, such as other dimensioning alternatives.
  The Chiveve Rehabilitation feasibility study has a separate item assessing environmental and social aspects, which
  concluded that the selected alternative had no “significant negative impacts that could impede the project
  implementation, providing instead a highly relevant intervention in view of the need of Beira City to face extreme
  weather events, predicted to occur with more frequency and intensity in the decades to come.? It noted, however,
  that “the success of the project in terms of socioeconomic and environmental viability will be directly linked to the
  rigorous application of the Environmental and Social Management Plan and subsequent compliance with mitigation
  measures.?
  The Polana Caniço Drainage system non-implementation scenario was not considered, as it would have resulted in
  the persistence of recurrent flooding problems, with serious public health and safety impacts. The denominated
  System 9, however, had at least two main design alternatives. The first would entail an outfall directly into the
  ocean, with a canal crossing downhill from Julius Nyerere Avenue. This alternative was rejected, due to high
  resettlement and compensation costs. The adopted alterative outfall involves less intervention in occupied areas,
  but is located in a nearby wetland, the Costa do Sol Mangrove. The engineering design contemplated measures to
  minimize impacts on the mangrove, such as a retention basin to hold solid waste transported by the drainage.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The GoM has considerable experience with Bank Safeguard requirements from the implementation of several Bank
  and other externally-financed projects following Bank Safeguards policies. For Project Appraisal, it prepared 3
  environmental and social assessment instruments: (1) an Environmental and Social Management Framework
  (ESMF) for Component 2 activities; (2) a separate ESMF for both Component 1 and initially-envisioned Nacala works
  under Component 2; and (3) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for Component 2.
  The Component 2 ESMF was updated in October 2013 and February 2015 to reflect changes in project design, such
  as the addition of green infrastructure works in Beira. It was amended and complemented in 2017 to include a
  comprehensive EA of the Chiveve and Maputo works considering OPs 4.04 and 4.36, assess the environmental
  feasibility of the new drainage works, and define the environmental management procedures applicable to these
  works. The 2017 ESMF was consulted in Beira and Maputo and disclosed in Mozambique and the Bank InfoShop on
  May 23, 2017. Both works were also object of specific EIAs and EMPs, which were reviewed by the Bank and are
  being updated by AIAS to attend to the Bank's comments and fully comply with OPs 4.04 and 4.36. EIA and EMP for
  the drainage improvement works in Beira had been prepared and disclosed in November 2014. The Chiveve
  Rehabilitation Phase 1 EAs (funded by KfW) were reviewed and considered consistent with the Bank requirements.
  In addition, the Chiveve Phase 1 works financed by the KfW were inspected by the Bank task team, confirming that
     The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     Cities and Climate Change (P123201)



 its environmental management practices were consistent with Bank safeguards policies.
 In Component 1, the screening out of all minor and temporary resettlement-related impacts proved too limiting on
 the selection of urban infrastructure subprojects under the Municipal Performance Grants. Bank implementation
 support missions, while finding no evidence of major resettlement impacts, grievances or conflicts, did identify the
 potential for minor impacts in sub-projects (e.g., movement of walls, removal of trees, temporary relocation of
 street vendors, etc.). Actions taken to date include: the preparation of an Addenda to the RPF in March 2017 and
 revision of the Project Operational Manual to strengthen screening procedures and mitigation measures (e.g.,
 consultation, compensation, and documentation) for minor/temporary resettlement impacts associated with the
 small works under Component 1; as well as the hiring by the PIU of a dedicated Safeguards Specialist. The updated
 RPF was consulted and disclosed in Mozambique on June 16, 2017, and the Bank InfoShop on June 19, 2017. In
 addition, the following actions are underway: the hiring by the PIU of a dedicated Social Safeguard Specialist (to
 prepare and implement retroactive ARAPs in cases in which gaps in past implementation are identified, oversee
 future impact screening and mitigation, and provide supervision and technical support to the municipalities); and
 the undertaking of a comprehensive review of all sub-projects executed to date, to: (i) identify any potential
 unidentified and/or unsatisfactorily addressed minor resettlement impacts; (ii) confirm and document how these
 were managed, and identify any gaps with regard to OP/BP 4.12; and (iii) develop an action plan to address any
 gaps identified. Bank social safeguards support to the client has also been strengthened.
 To date, two Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) have been prepared under the RPF in Component 2, both in Beira: (1)
 one for the storm-water drainage improvement works (disclosed in InfoShop on August 7, 2014); and (2) one for the
 green infrastructure works (disclosed in InfoShop on March 6, 2017).
 The Project has two separate PIUs. The Component 1 PIU under MAEFP has dedicated technical and administrative
 staff but has faced challenges complying with Safeguards requirements on some works funded under the Municipal
 Performance Grants. In 2016, on the Bank’s recommendation, the PIU hired a full-time Safeguards specialist, with
 technical support and capacity building from Bank Specialists, and strengthened technical support to the
 municipalities via routine monitoring and supervision visits.
 AIAS (Component 2 PIU) has highly qualified dedicated staff for Environmental and Social Safeguards, and has
 consistently demonstrated strong performance in the application of Bank Safeguard Policies. The Beira construction
 works include challenging environmental and risk conditions, and the PIU staff, supported by the Engineer’s social
 and environmental specialists, has responded well to new issues as they arise and designed and implemented
 resettlement actions that can be considered good practice. The revised ESMF has a budgetary provision for
 environmental management activities, including the allocation of social and environmental specialists, independent
 audits, and several environmental and social programs.
 Both PIUs and contractor staff attended Bank environmental and social Safeguards trainings in Maputo in 2017;
 more in-depth training on key aspects, such as Health and Safety, is planned going forward. Additional training
 efforts are also planned for staff of the municipalities benefiting from grants under Component 1.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies,
 with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
 The main stakeholders are people living in the municipalities participating in the Project. The beneficiaries of the
 Chiveve River rehabilitation are the inhabitants of Beira (mainly those living and working in the Chiveve basin area),
 and the beneficiaries of the priority drainage works in Maputo are inhabitants of the Polana Caniço, Sommerschield,
 and Hulene neighborhoods. Other key stakeholders include public entities, civil society organizations involved in
 urban planning and environmental protection, international organizations supporting public health, hospital,
 schools, and neighborhood associations.
 Mozambique has a well-established culture of consultation, as set forth in the Directive for the General Case on
 Public Participation in the EIA Process, requiring, for example, that public consultation include all interested and
 affected parties. The general methodology established by the 2012 Directive on Resettlement to govern the public
                      The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                      Cities and Climate Change (P123201)



                  participation process to ensure effective consultation consists of five steps: (1) identification of stakeholders and
                  affected persons; (2) dissemination of information; (3) dialogue with stakeholders and affected persons; (4)
                  incorporation of comments raised during consultations; and (5) providing feedback.
                  The Project carried out extensive participatory consultations with stakeholders and PAPs during preparation and
                  appraisal (particularly, for the Chiveve River rehabilitation and the environmental licensing of priority drainage
                  works in Maputo), in which participants were briefed on the Project scope and given the opportunity to comment,
                  ask questions, and express concerns. The revised Component 2 ESMF was also extensively consulted in accordance
                  with the national directives, both locally (on December 8, 2016) and at the Central level (on December 14, 2016).
                  Preliminary versions of the revised ESMF were publicly disclosed and consulted with PAPs, and feedback captured
                  and included in the ESMF. The final version of the revised ESMF was publicly disclosed in Mozambique and in
                  InfoShop on May 23, 2017. Public consultations were also carried out for the Addenda to the RPF for Component 1
                  on April 13, 2017.
                  A RAP and an ESIA for the green infrastructure works were prepared in 2016. Consultations on both documents
                  were held on August 24 and on November 15, 2016. The RAP was publicly disclosed in Mozambique on February 21,
                  2017, and in the World Bank's InfoShop on March 6, 2017. The ESIA was reviewed by the Bank and is being updated
                  by AIAS to attend to the Bank's comments and fully comply with the newly triggered safeguards policies OP/BP 4.04
                  and 4.36. An ESIA was also prepared for the priority drainage works in Maputo, publicly consulted on December 21,
                  2015, and disclosed in Mozambique on March 28, 2016. It is currently being updated by AIAS to attend to the Bank's
                  comments and fully comply with the newly triggered safeguards policies OP/BP 4.04 and 4.36. The updated ESIAs
                  will be disclosed in country and in the Bank's InfoShop.

            DISCLOSURE_TABLE
            B. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

        Date of receipt by the Bank                                       Date of submission for disclosure
        10-Feb-2017                                                       23-May-2017
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                          Date of Disclosure
            Mozambique                                                       23-May-2017
            Comments
            The original ESMF was disclosed in-country on December 8, 2011. The revised ESMF, which includes was disclosed on
            AIAS website and the Bank InfoShop on May 23, 2017.


RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process
           The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Cities and Climate Change (P123201)



Date of receipt by the Bank                                    Date of submission for disclosure
01-Sep-2011                                                    19-Jun-2017
“In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                         Date of Disclosure
 Mozambique                                                      16-Jun-2017
 Comments
 The original RPF was disclosed in-country on December 8, 2011. The addenda to the RPF was disclosed nationally in the
 Noticias newspaper on June 16, 2017, and in the Bank's InfoShop on June 19, 2017.
 The RAP for the green infrastructure works in Beira was disclosed in-country and in the Bank's InfoShop on March 6,
 2017.
 COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                 Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                   Yes
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the
                                                                                                   Yes
 credit/loan?



 NH_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical
                                                                                                   Yes
 natural habitats?

 If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other
 (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures                     Yes
 acceptable to the Bank?



 IR_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy              framework/process
                                                                                                   Yes
 framework (as appropriate) been prepared?

 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice
                                                                                                   Yes
 Manager review the plan?



 FO_TABLE
        The World Bank                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Cities and Climate Change (P123201)



OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints
                                                                                   Yes
been carried out?

Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these
                                                                                   Yes
constraints?

Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include
                                                                                   No
provisions for certification system?



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                   Yes
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups     Yes
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                   Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                   Yes
cost?

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
                                                                                   Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal               Yes
documents?




III. APPROVALS


                                          Michel Matera
 Task Team Leader(s)
                                          Andre Herzog
          The World Bank                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          Cities and Climate Change (P123201)



    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor                    Nathalie S. Munzberg        11-Sep-2017

    Practice Manager/Manager              Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst   12-Sep-2017

.
