                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC13383

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-May-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Nov-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Indonesia                        Project ID:      P154948
                            Project Name:      National Affordable Housing Program (P154948)
                            Task Team          Taimur Samad
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          14-Nov-2016                      Estimated        17-Jan-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSU08                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     450.00                    Total Bank Financing:        450.00
                            Financing Gap:         -757.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    757.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       450.00
                              Total                                                                      1207.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           A.      Proposed Development Objective(s)

                           The development objective of the proposed operation is to improve access to housing for lower-
                           income households.

                           The Program will fulfill this objective by supporting the Government of Indonesia in the design and
                           implementation of the National Affordable Housing Program. Specifically the Program will:

                           (i)     Strengthen housing sector governance and the enabling environment for affordable housing
                           through the development of a Targeting System and a Housing and Real Estate Information System.
                         (ii)    Improve access to affordable housing finance with the design and implementation of
                         specialized financial products for informal and low-income households, including a Savings-Linked
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Mortgage Subsidy Product and a Savings-Linked Housing Microfinance Subsidy Product.

                         (iii)   Expand supply of affordable housing with assistance for the design and implementation of
                         supply-side programs, specifically scaling up the existing home improvement subsidy (BSPS) to
                         urban areas, developing a Core Starter Home Product, and facilitating access to urban land for
                         housing.
                         C. Project Description
                         The Ministry of Public Works and Housing (MPWH) has been entrusted with a mandate to enable
                         the provision of one million homes per year over the next five years as part of the Satu Juta Rumah
                         initiative, officially launched on April 30, 2015. GoI considers Satu Juta Rumah to be a broad
                         umbrella initiative that encompasses a suite of programs and interventions.

                         A core instrument launched under the initiative is a revised FLPP (Fasilitas Likuditas Pembiayaan
                         Perumahan or Liquidity Facility for Housing Finance) scheme (referred to in this document as FLPP
                         2.0) which aims to deepen concessional liquidity provision for housing loans to provide an
                         immediate stimulus for home production targeting the lower-middle class. Under FLPP 2.0, the
                         scheme has been recalibrated to incorporate the following incentives: (i) reduced cost of concessional
                         funds for banks from the FLPP liquidity facility (from 0.5 percent to 0.3 percent); (ii) increase in the
                         ratio of FLPP to bank own funding for each mortgage (from 75:25 to 90:10); (iii) provision of a IDR
                         4.0m down payment subsidy; (iv) reduction in the cost of mortgage insurance (from 30 basis points
                         to 25 basis points); and, enabled by the above, (v) a reduced interest rate of 5 percent (from 7.25
                         percent) to the consumer for a fixed rate mortgage. These changes to the FLPP scheme will enhance
                         the affordability of mortgages for lower-income households and provide an immediate stimulus to
                         home production. However, the FLPP 2.0 scheme also will prove more expensive to GoI on a per
                         unit basis, raising questions as to the long-term sustainability of the scheme. Additionally, the FLPP
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2.0 scheme would only serve formal-income and bankable households that are able to qualify for
                         mortgages.

                         The Government of Indonesia has recognized that it will need to do more under the Satu Juta Rumah
                         initiative to target low-income households. In this regard, GoI has requested World Bank assistance
                         on delivering affordable housing through a broader suite of instruments that reorient support towards
                         the bottom 40 percent of Indonesian households. These activities would be structured as components
                         under the umbrella of the overall Affordable Housing Program, with a specific focus on targeting
                         low-income and informal-earning households. Figure 4 shows the way in which the proposed
                         operation fits into the larger government housing program.

                         The specific components of the proposed operation are organized around the key results areas,
                         including: (i) strengthening the environment for effective affordable housing policy by developing
                         key prerequisites, (ii) the development of demand-side financing products capable of reaching
                         informal and low-income households, and (iii) the reform and introduction of supply-side social
                         housing products. Each of these components is described below in more detail.

                         Results Area 1: Enabling Environment for Affordable Housing

                         This component is focused on development of key systems essential to the effective implementation
                         of affordable housing policy: specifically (i) developing a functioning Targeting System for
                         identifying and selecting beneficiaries, and (ii) investing in a Housing and Real Estate Information
                         System (HREIS).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Program Component 1.1: Targeting Systems. Create an effective and common targeting system
                         across housing programs to inform the design of subsidies, eligibility criteria and selection of
                         beneficiaries. The Targeting System will use existing consumer surveys and census data collected by
                         BPS (Badan Pusat Statistik or Central Statistical Agency) and TNP2K (Tim Nasional Percepatan
                         Penanggulangan Kemiskinan or National Team for the Acceleration of Poverty Reduction) as a
                         starting point to:

                         (i)      develop a more concrete understanding of consumer segmentation and housing need by a
                         range of socio-economic factors;
                         (ii)     put in place a clear process to allow easy calculation and updating of the housing backlog
                         deficit (both quantitative and qualitative);
                         (iii)    determine eligibility guidelines and extent of subsidy needed in different geographic
                         locations, on a program-by-program basis, to allow MPWH to improve the design and targeting of
                         housing programs and subsidies; and
                         (iv)     rank order the housing needs by district and province to help the MPWH prioritize its
                         housing program support, subsidy budget as well as capacity building efforts towards those districts
                         and provinces with highest needs.

                         Additional consumer surveys may be conducted as necessary to complete the understanding of the
                         consumer segmentation.

                         Program Component 1.2: Housing and Real Estate Information System. Build out a Housing and
                         Real Estate Information System (HREIS). The HREIS will serve as a depository of housing and real
                         estate related data, with indicators collected from areas of housing supply and housing finance, as
                         well as tracking of home price movements and the implementation of public housing programs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Figure 5 below presents a schematic summary of the key data that will constitute the HREIS. The
                         process starts with the collection of data from local governments, relevant ministries and public
                         agencies, developers, and financial institutions. This data would be aggregated for trend analysis and
                         key indicators will be developed for ongoing reporting. MPWH will work in close cooperation with
                         the Bank of Indonesia to further extend the quality and geographical coverage of the quarterly
                         Residential Home Price Index. Over time, once the HREIS has achieved the necessary depth, quality,
                         consistency and reliability of information, regulators can use the database for forecasting and stress-
                         testing of the market, allowing them to put in place early warning indicators and address potentially
                         negative trends that could impact the stability in the market.

                         Processes for administering and maintaining the targeting system and HREIS (including the precise
                         institutional set up and data management responsibilities) will be developed in collaboration with
                         MPWH stakeholders at the QER (Quality Enhancement Review) and Appraisal stage

                         Results Area 2: Access to Housing Finance

                         This component focuses on improving access to finance for low-income and informal-earning
                         households, with the design and implementation of two savings-linked subsidy and financing
                         products: (i) a Savings and Subsidy-Linked Mortgage (SSM) product targeting the informal middle-
                         income sector, and (ii) a Savings and Subsidy-Linked Housing Microfinance (SSHMF) product
                         targeting the low-income sector.

                         Program Component 2.1: Savings and Subsidy-Linked Mortgage (SSM) Product. The SSM product
Public Disclosure Copy




                         would be targeted to informal-earning households from mid to low-income who may be able to
                         afford a mortgage to purchase or self-construct a home with formal land title but lack access to
                         finance. Successful lending to the informal income sector requires lenders to assess income despite
                         the lack of income documentation. Income proxies for informal households may be established
                         through a minimum period of savings (e.g., 12 months) or a pre-existing savings or lending history.
                         The savings amount is then linked to a subsidy to increase the borrower➢❨ s total equity for a
                         mortgage loan to be provided by a participating commercial bank priced for the relevant risk at the
                         prevailing market rate. Eligibility criteria and relevant subsidy levels would be developed with a
                         progressive scale with more support for the lower-income segments. This product design allows the
                         government to maximize subsidy effectiveness and reach an underserved market segment while
                         attracting private sector participation and funding.

                         MPWH is currently designing a savings-for-housing scheme that may form the basis for the proposed
                         product. The government KUR guarantee schemes for small businesses could be assessed to draw
                         best practices for adoption if deemed applicable. Finally, housing finance companies in India have
                         brought the underwriting of informal income borrowers to a high level of expertise and standards that
                         can inform the development of this product.

                         Program Component 2.2: Savings and Subsidy-Linked Housing Microfinance (SSHMF) Product.
                         The second housing finance product, tentatively called SSHMF (Savings, Subsidy, Housing
                         Microfinance) follows the same principle as the SSM product, but would link the government
                         subsidy to housing microfinance instead of a mortgage to support the incremental expansion or
                         upgrade of a home with informal tenure. The target market segment would be low-income
                         households in the bottom 40 percent. Given that the loans are uncollateralized and that both
                         household income and tenure are informal, loan amounts would be smaller and interest rates
                         relatively higher than other housing finance products. Larger construction projects may require
Public Disclosure Copy




                         successive loan cycles, possibly increasing in size as the household proves more credit-worthy.

                         Payment capacity is established through a period of savings if pre-existing savings or lending history
                         does not exist. The savings would be accompanied by a subsidy enhancement as well as construction
                         technical assistance to ensure quality of construction. This technical assistance could include
                         construction techniques, advisory from professionals and/or access to lower-cost construction
                         materials. Successful models include Patrimonio Hoy in Mexico, where the cement maker CEMEX
                         provides construction materials at a competitive price point to households. This model has since been
                         expanded to other Latin American countries. In addition, a Habitat for Humanity-led pilot bundling
                         construction technical assistance with HMF has proved successful in Nigeria and the Philippines.
                         The development of the SSHMF has some unique advantages in Indonesia as the SME micro-lending
                         market is robust both in volume and geographical footprint and large commercial banks such as BRI,
                         Mandiri and Danamon are key players in the sector. Converting micro-lending to housing micro-
                         finance has been done successfully in many countries and good practices exist for replication.

                         Results Area 3: Supply of Affordable Housing

                         This component focuses on increasing supply of affordable housing through the reform and
                         expansion of the existing BSPS Home Improvement program, technical assistance to the
                         Government➢❨ s public rental (Rusunawa) program, the design and delivery of a Core Starter House
                         program, as well as development of a Land for Housing initiative that facilitates supply of urban land
                         for affordable housing.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-Component 3.1: BSPS Home Improvement Subsidy. The BSPS home improvement subsidy
                         product enables low-income households to purchase construction materials and undertake self-help
                         (swadaya) construction. The subsidy is currently IDR 10 million for incremental home
                         improvements, such as upgrading of materials or addition of floor space, and IDR 20 million for
                         complete reconstruction of preexisting but structurally insufficient homes. The BSPS program
                         primarily targets rural areas but it is increasingly expanding to peri-urban zones. The GoI intends to
                         address the acute housing need in cities in part by scaling up BSPS in urban areas and is working on
                         adapting the swadaya program for cities.

                         The BSPS product will be developed to utilize improved targeting characteristics, more efficient
                         delivery systems, output-based approach and the provision of construction technical assistance to
                         support sound home improvement and expansion in urban areas. Specifically, the product will
                         involve:

                         ➢❨¢ Improved targeting by linking with the Targeting System (developed under Program
                         subcomponent 1.1 above) as well as the triangulation of targeting system results with community-
                         based systems under the PNPM program and the proposed National Slum Upgrading Program;
                         ➢❨¢ Enhanced delivery systems, by focusing the product in urban areas on clusters of substandard
                         houses and aligning with slum upgrading initiatives under the proposed National Slum Upgrading
                         Program;
                         ➢❨¢ Use of an output-based mechanism, by which subsidy disbursement will be linked to
                         physical improvements;
                         ➢❨¢ Improved construction quality through the provision of technical assistance. This allows for:
                         (i) reduction in project cost through up-front technical support; and (ii) construction supervision
Public Disclosure Copy




                         during the project.

                         Program Component 3.2: Core Starter Homes Product. The Program includes a Core Starter Homes
                         Product that would deliver basic or ➢❨ core➢❨ units to low-income households in rural, peri-urban
                         and urban areas in smaller agglomerations where land supply constraints are less acute. This program
                         would provide a cost-effective option for government to target very low income households who
                         cannot afford to purchase a formal completed unit. Core units are typically one-floor with a
                         minimum floor area of approximately 25m2, are move-in ready and can be extended incrementally
                         over time by households on a self-help basis according to their changing needs and preferences. The
                         core starter home component➢❨ s main principles are: (i) affordability to enable replication and scale
                         without exhausting public resources; (ii) access to basic infrastructure and amenities to eliminate
                         negative externalities; and (iii) land tenure security to enable private investment. The World Bank
                         will provide support to GoI to structure and implement this product during preparation.

                         Program Component 3.3: Urban Land for Housing. GoI is also focused on the challenge of urban
                         land and finding solutions to access land for the successful implementation of the Satu Juta Rumah
                         program. This component is focused on an Urban Land for Housing intervention that sets up a
                         special unit and framework for identifying and mobilizing publically-controlled land assets for
                         affordable housing, in particular, unused or under-utilized, state-owned and waqaf (donated) land.
                         The special executing unit would work with local governments, MPWH, and BPN to identify land
                         needs, ascertain the location of developable public lands, and put in place a clear process to negotiate
                         with the land-owning entities in order to prepare land for release, under certain protocols. The
                         preparation of the Urban Land for Housing framework may require regulatory changes to clarify land
Public Disclosure Copy




                         release regimes or to ensure that the conditions of land release are transparent and that land prices are
                         fairly set between the agencies involved in each case. This approach will simplify the release of
                         urban land for housing, without requiring complex and costly acquisition of land by one central
                         agency. The Roadmap for Housing Policy Reform contained a detailed but preliminary analysis of
                         the key issues related to land supply, land demand for housing, the legal framework, urban land
                         administration/management, and current and proposed policies and programs to improve urban land
                         supply for housing. The Bank will study these issues in depth at the QER and Appraisal stage in
                         order to confront the complexity inherent in releasing land for affordable housing in an environment
                         of high land values and overall land shortages in urban areas.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The increased access to mortgage and down-payment subsidized financing under component 2 would
                         lead to increased affordability for low income households to purchase or self-construct a home with
                         formal land title and undertake incremental expansions or upgrades of a an existing home. Houses
                         will be built individually or in small clusters on the households➢❨ own land or government land
                         within the already build-up areas in a district or city.

                         Home improvement or new construction financed by component 3.1 will be located in the existing
                         individual land plots owned or occupied by the beneficiaries, typically spread out in a district or city
                         with one or two houses in each cluster. Core-starter units (component 3.2) would deliver basic or
                         ➢❨ core➢❨ units to low-income households in rural, peri-urban and urban areas in discrete, smaller
                         agglomerations where land supply constraints are less acute.

                         Initiatives under component 3.3 would increase the availability of urban land for affordable housing
                         development by releasing unused or under-utilized, state-owned and waqaf land according to certain
Public Disclosure Copy




                         protocols. The increased urban land available would lead to increased government capacity in
                         facilitating low income and poor families➢❨ access to affordable homes. The project anticipates that
                         acquiring unused or under-utilized state owned urban land and waqaf urban land involving transfers
                         of assets will be complicated and may take few years, and also, the size of each land area that can be
                         obtained will be relatively small as urban land is scarce and expensive.

                         In summary, location for houses potentially financed by component 2 and 3 will be in discrete sites,
                         geographically spread out within districts or cities, and consist of individual to small clusters of
                         houses. Hence, there will be no cumulative social impacts within the area of influence. The intensity
                         of involuntary land acquisition and resettlement in each site will be small-scale. The likely
                         environmental and social impacts would occur during construction, including disturbance to the
                         communities in the area such as noise, dusts, materials stocking, and access to the sites. Component 2
                         and 3 will not be used for supporting housing development or improvement that will involve large-
                         scale involuntary land acquisition and resettlement that will lead to significant, irreversible adverse
                         significant environmental and social impacts.

                         The project is a nation-wide program and therefore will ultimately cover all districts and cities in the
                         country, covering rural, peri-urban and urban areas. Gradually the focus of the project, particularly
                         those to be financed by component 3, will move more towards urban areas as the pressures for
                         affordable housing accessible to low-income and poor families in cities has significantly increased.
                           Environmental and social impacts will take place in already developed areas where houses financed
                           by component 2 and 3 are built. Potential environmental and social impacts are expected to be
                           insignificant, non-irreversible, small-scale, and site-specific. As a nation-wide project, it is
Public Disclosure Copy




                           anticipated that IPs communities or ➢❨ Masyarakat Hukum Adat➢❨ (MHA) would be part of the
                           target beneficiaries and/or affected by the project. Due to the project nature, sites of housing
                           improvement and housing development as well as typical positive and adverse environmental and
                           social impacts ➢❨ including on IPs ➢❨ are unknown at this stage. Housing improvement and
                           development will improve the living conditions of the occupants, which will ultimately lead to better
                           health and social quality of life. Participating districts and cities will be identified during project
                           preparation, but the exact sites of housing improvement and housing development in each districts
                           and cities would only be known during project implementation.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Ministry of Public Works and Housing has extensive experience in implementing Bank-financed
                           projects and therefore has good understanding and capacity in environmental and social safeguards
                           management in accordance with Bank and GoI safeguards policies. However, the DGs of Housing
                           Finance and Housing Production (the Executing Agency) within MPWH have limited experience
                           with Bank projects. The project will develop a strategy to strengthen their environmental and social
                           safeguards management capacity, which will be discussed and agreed with the Bank during project
                           preparation. The Bank will provide support to the Executing Agency and participating Local
                           Governments (LGs) involved during the course of the project preparation and implementation,
                           including awareness and technical training and guidance during the preparation and implementation
                           of the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Indira Dharmapatni (GSUID)
                           Virza S. Sasmitawidjaja (GEN2A)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment          Yes            The project will involve improvements of existing
                           OP/BP 4.01                                       homes and construction of new houses. New
                                                                            construction activities will typically involve small-
                                                                            scale civil works (for example, roof, floor and wall
                                                                            repair and small new house construction ➢❨ max 25
                                                                            m2), that takes place in individual land plots or small
                                                                            land areas with small group of houses in each cluster.
                                                                            Each site is distinct and discrete from others,
                                                                            geographically spread in wide areas in a district or
                                                                            city, and located in developed areas. Cumulative
                                                                            impacts are unlikely. Given the nature of the project
                                                                            as explained in Section I.C and I.D, it is expected
                                                                            that the project will have minor, non-irreversible,
                                                                            small-scale, and site-specific environmental and
                                                                            social impacts. Overall environmental impacts will
                                                                            be positive whereby low income and poor families
                                                                            will enjoy better housing quality that will lead to
                                                             improved health quality and social life.
                                                             No natural habitat, no forest, no sensitive or
                                                             protected areas will be affected or involved in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             project. Given the nature of the potential site-specific
                                                             nature of the environmental impacts of the project,
                                                             the project is proposed to be a Category B for
                                                             environmental assessment.

                                                             As explained in Section I.D, the potential
                                                             participating LGs will be identified during project
                                                             preparation, however, the exact site and scale of
                                                             home improvement and new development will be
                                                             known during project implementation. The project
                                                             will adopt an Environmental and Social Management
                                                             Framework (ESMF) in compliance with the World
                                                             Bank safeguards policies identified at this stage and
                                                             with the relevant Government of Indonesia laws and
                                                             regulations. As part of the ESMF, the project will
                                                             develop practical guidance to screen, identify
                                                             potential environmental and social impacts (beyond
                                                             involuntary resettlement) and to develop mitigation
                                                             measures to address the identified impacts. The
                                                             ESMF (which will focus on the ECOPs) will be
                                                             prepared during project preparation, to be reviewed
                                                             and approved by the Bank, consulted with
                                                             stakeholders and disclosed in the MPWH➢❨ s
                                                             website and Infoshop prior to project appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No    The project activities will take place on already-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             developed land/areas. The project will not finance
                                                             activities that involve significant conversion or
                                                             degradation of critical natural habitats or natural
                                                             habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No    The project will not finance activities that involve
                                                             conversion or degradation of critical forest areas or
                                                             natural forests as defined under the policy. The
                                                             project is not intended for commercial plantation and
                                                             there is no project component to improve the forest
                                                             function.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No    The project will not procure or use any pesticide or
                                                             support activities that may lead to the use and/or a
                                                             significant increase in the use of pesticide.
                         Physical Cultural Resources   No    The project will be located in already developed
                         OP/BP 4.11                          locations that are known as residential areas, and will
                                                             not change the landscape with large construction
                                                             development.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      Yes   As described in Section I.C and I.D, the project may
                         4.10                                 benefit or affect (positively or adversely) IPs or
                                                              ➢❨ Masyarakat Hukum Adat➢❨ (MHA)
                                                              communities. According to the World Bank
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              Screening Study (2010), IPs or MHA communities
                                                              are present in many locations across the country,
                                                              including inland, coastal areas and highland. Further
                                                              confirmation and verification of IPs or MHA
                                                              presence in the sub- project area of influence will be
                                                              done once the list of participating districts and cities
                                                              as well as the sitting of the sub-project are confirmed
                                                              and identified during the project implementation.
                                                              This will be followed up with identification of
                                                              positive and adverse potential environmental and
                                                              social impacts and agreed measures to address such
                                                              impacts with IPs or MHA communities through a
                                                              Social Assessment that will be carried out with a
                                                              free, prior, informed consultation. The project will
                                                              adopt an IPPF to screen, identify positive and
                                                              adverse potential environmental and social impacts,
                                                              and develop measures to address such impacts based
                                                              on Social Assessment carried out through a free,
                                                              prior, informed consultation with the IPs or MHA
                                                              communities, in compliance with OP 4.10. The IPPF
                                                              will be part of the ESMF as well as a stand-alone
                                                              document. As part of the ESMF, the IPPF will be
                                                              prepared during project preparation, to be approved
                                                              by the Bank, consulted with stakeholders and
                                                              disclosed in the MPWH➢❨ s website and Infoshop
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              prior to project appraisal.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   Given the project nature as described in Section I.C
                         BP 4.12                              and I.D, the project will involve on-site housing
                                                              improvement and new housing development on
                                                              existing land plots owned by the beneficiaries or on
                                                              unused or under-utilized government land that have
                                                              been made available through asset transfers. On-site
                                                              home improvement and new house development on
                                                              existing individual land plots or new individual land
                                                              plots (component 2 and 3.1 and 3.2) will be located
                                                              in discrete, wide spread and in some cases on land
                                                              with groups of houses in small clusters located in
                                                              various sites geographically dispersed within
                                                              developed areas in a district and city. The project
                                                              will not finance any involuntary land acquisition or
                                                              resettlement causing significant social impacts,
                                                              particularly to informal occupants, if any, on the
                                                              unused or under-utilized government land or waqaf
                                                              land that will be converted for housing development
                                                                                                                        for low income households to be financed by
                                                                                                                        component 3.3. As described in Section I.D, unused
                                                                                                                        or under-utilized government urban land conversion
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        to land for housing development is a complicated
                                                                                                                        process and may take years. As well located urban
                                                                                                                        land is scarce and expensive; it is very likely that
                                                                                                                        land made available for housing development under
                                                                                                                        this scheme will take place in limited scale. Overall,
                                                                                                                        the project will have limited adverse social impacts
                                                                                                                        due to involuntary land taking, but at the same time,
                                                                                                                        will create positive social impacts to the beneficiaries
                                                                                                                        as improved house quality and access to new housing
                                                                                                                        will lead to better social living condition.

                                                                                                                        As the participating districts and cities will be
                                                                                                                        identified during project preparation and the exact
                                                                                                                        sites and areas of sub-project influence will be
                                                                                                                        identified during project implementation. Involuntary
                                                                                                                        land acquisition and resettlement would take place,
                                                                                                                        although it would be in limited scale. The project
                                                                                                                        will prepare a Land Acquisition and Resettlement
                                                                                                                        Policy Framework (LARPF) as part of the ESMF
                                                                                                                        during project preparation, to be approved by the
                                                                                                                        Bank, consulted with stakeholders and disclosed in
                                                                                                                        the MPWH➢❨ s website and Infoshop prior to
                                                                                                                        project appraisal. The LARPF, which will also be a
                                                                                                                        stand-alone document, will specify the screening of
                                                                                                                        the scope and intensity of project affected persons
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        (PAPs), assess the potential social impacts, define
                                                                                                                        the measures to address such impacts and define
                                                                                                                        appropriate instrument to be developed
                                                                                                                        (comprehensive or abbreviated Resettlement Action
                                                                                                                        Plan or RAP), as well as guidance for the
                                                                                                                        participating districts and cities to prepare the RAP.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         The project will not finance construction and/or
                                                                                                                        rehabilitation of dams.
                                 Projects on International      No                                                      The project will not be located in the watersheds of
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   any international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The project is not located in any known disputed
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                areas as defined under the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 27-May-2016
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      ESMF will be completed in July 2016



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader(s): Name: Taimur Samad
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)        Date: 08-Nov-2016
                           Practice Manager/    Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)   Date: 08-Nov-2016
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
