                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC13367

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Oct-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:              Benin                           Project ID:       P155822
                            Project Name:   Nutrition Sensitive Agriculture & Capacity Building of Small & Marginal
                                            Farmers Project
                            Team Leader(s): Samuel Taffesse
                            Estimated Date 10-Feb-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:        GFA01                           Lending           Lending Instrument
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Crops (80%), Animal production (20%)
                            Theme(s):           Nutrition and food security (60%), Other rural development (40%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    2.475                      Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:         0
                              Financing Source                                                                             Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                                           0
                              Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund                                              2.475
                            Environment         B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objectives of the PHRD grant are to support selected small and marginal farmers to diversify
                           their production and to enhance the consumption of nutrient-dense foods.

                           The PDO will be achieved by: (a) promoting production of nutrient-dense foods (fruits and
                           vegetables, pulses, dairy, non-wood forest resources or products, dairy and eggs, and aquaculture),
                           both for consumption and commercialization; (b) reduction of post-harvest losses (including support
                           to community food storage, processing and conservation) and support to market linkages; and (c)
                           nutrition education for consumers and institutional and technical capacity development of local
                           authorities and farmers on agriculture-nutrition linkages.
                           C. Project Description
                           This project design recognizes the potential of agriculture in contributing significantly to sustainable
                           nutrition outcomes and the challenges faced to achieve that goal such as: limited product
                           diversification, reliance of single (mostly) crop production; seasonality of food availability; limited
                         knowledge and capacity on nutrition and agriculture-nutrition linkages; weak local organizations;
                         low consideration on women’s contribution to agriculture and household food and nutrition security,
                         particularly for the children aged less than 5 years; limited/inexistent tracking of agricultural
Public Disclosure Copy




                         investments’ impact on food consumption and nutritional outcomes. The design also takes into
                         consideration the limited resource envelope available and therefore will prioritize specific defined
                         regions, leveraging resources from other projects in the sector and beyond.

                         The project will have three components: Component 1 will focus on improving food production and
                         diversification. Component 2 will support value addition to agricultural products and access to
                         markets. Component 3 will promote institutional and technical capacity development on agriculture-
                         nutrition linkages, including nutrition education. The proposed grant will complement ongoing
                         Bank-supported projects and national programs. In particular, the proposed project will: (i)
                         complement the Bank-supported Multisectoral Food Health Nutrition Project by supporting
                         communities with appropriate methods and technologies for diversified food production throughout
                         the year (e.g., vegetables, fruits, small livestock), conservation (e.g., drying), storage (e.g.,
                         community grain banks) and transformation (e.g., fermentation, cheese production); and (ii) seek
                         synergies with technology generation and adoption activities by the Bank-funded West Africa
                         Agricultural Productivity Program as well as value chain improvement activities by the Bank-
                         supported Agricultural Productivity and Diversification Project.

                         Component 1: Production intensification and diversification: The aim of this component is to support
                         the intensification and diversification of food production by promoting and providing agricultural
                         inputs, technologies and services related to the diversification of production. This activity will be
                         linked to research and will use various community channels such as farmer field schools and
                         extension workers. Agricultural inputs will include improved variety seeds, fertilizers, as well as
                         livestock and fisheries inputs. The services will consist in technical assistance in farming activities.
                         Where feasible, the practice of mix-cropping and mix-farming will be encouraged. This component
                         will work with and build on the farmer organizations’ platform established under the IDA
                         Agricultural Productivity and Diversification Project. A list of improved on-farm and post-harvest
Public Disclosure Copy




                         technologies has been identified for the targeted value chains by the IDA project and the PHRD
                         supported project will make use of this readily made list. Further, the proposed Grant also will build
                         on the experience gained by the IDA project in dissemination of planting materials and promotion of
                         best farms management practices through farmers field schools. Partnership with the IDA’s West
                         Africa Agricultural Productivity Program will be instituted to extend the demand based agricultural
                         technologies and adoption system to small and marginal farmers towards diversification of their
                         products to include high nutrient crops varieties including introduction of new crops from their
                         partnering institutions research fields. The project will target areas that are covered both by the IDA
                         APDP and the Multi-sectoral FoodHealth and Nutrition Project (MFHNP), so as to crowd-in support
                         by strengthening synergies with IDA projects and partnering with other interventions in agriculture
                         and other sectors involved in nutrition.

                         Component 2: Value addition and market linkages: The aim of this component is to reduce food
                         losses and seasonality in food availability as well as increase the market value of foods by: (i)
                         improving access to storage and conservation facilities, as well as nutrition-sensitive processing
                         technologies; and (ii) support to the creation of formal links between private sector and farmer
                         associations. The aim of this priority area is to complement diversification activities implemented
                         through component 1 by supporting farmer organizations to engage with private sector and build
                         partnerships between farmers and private sector operators including small and medium scale food
                         processing industries. This should be a “win-win” partnership where both part will benefit. The
                         strengthening of farmers’ associations will therefore be very useful. In fact, the more the small scale
                         farmers’ associations are strengthened, the better they can defend they interest and be competitive.
                         The support will include preparation of business plans; marketing, demand creation and facilitating
Public Disclosure Copy




                         partnership with the private sector – Business Partnership (BP). At least 30 BPs are expected to be
                         supported under this component. The range of support will vary from assistance in marketing,
                         facilitation of local processing, and development of supply line for nutrient-dense foods (including
                         biofortified crops, fortified fertilizers, or fortified processed foods). Small innovation fund (matching
                         grant) will be allocated to help BP undertakings and support investment. Eligible expenditure for
                         support as an investment under this component will include: small micro irrigation for home garden
                         vegetable crops; acquisition of improved agricultural technologies and tools; micro-and-small scale
                         processing equipment; technology and tools that reduce waste such as post-harvest loss; livestock
                         rearing activities that are directly related to enhancing nutritional impact; support to post-harvest
                         quality enhancing and processing activities. Forty-percent of the Grant will be allocated to women
                         beneficiaries and special support will be provided to them to prepare proposal, such as business plan
                         preparation. Priority will be given to those activities that can demonstrate improved nutritional
                         outcome and contribute to climate smart agriculture This component will be aligned with the IDA
                         Agricultural Productivity and Diversification Project and to leverage additional resource for
                         financing this component’s activities.

                         Component 3 : Capacity development on nutrition-sensitive agriculture and nutrition education: The
                         aim of this component is to promote consumption of nutrient-rich foods and build the capacity of
                         local authorities and farmer organisations to promote nutrition-sensitive agriculture through (i)
                         nutrition education for farmers and consumers, (ii) capacity development of national and local
                         authorities on agriculture-nutirtion linkages; (iii) support to multi-sectoral coordination for nutrition;
                         (iv) integrating nutrition outcome indicators in the monitoring and evaluation of agricultural projects,
                         starting with the PHRD and IDA supported agriculture project. This component will align its
                         activities with the Multi-sectoral Food Health Nutrition Project and support the involvement of
                         stakeholders working in agriculture in multi-sectoral efforts to improve nutrition with a focus on
                         improved infant and young child feeding practices and knowledge on care practices. The activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will include organization of nutrition trainings, development of food recipes books based on locally
                         available foods, communication campaigns on nutrition (community and mass-media) and
                         community food demonstrations. The component will effectively use existing learning centers and
                         community nutritional points. The project will use nutrition education materials and expertise
                         available through the MFHNP and complement these as necessary. The project will also sensitize
                         policy makers, program planners and farmer organizations at central and local levels on nutrition-
                         sensitive agriculture, and support the engagement of these stakeholde rs in multi-sectoral
                         coordination mechanisms for nutrition. Finally, the project will develop capacities to monitor and
                         evaluate the nutritional impact of agricultural projects, with an emphasis on dietary intake and
                         feeding practices.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project activities will cover about 8 priority rural Communes in 4 “Départements”. The
                         preliminary four selected “Départements” are Atacora, Donga, Mono and Couffo. Selection of the
                         eight Communes will be based on two major criteria: commune need to be in the food and nutrition
                         insecure area; and is part of the selected Commune for the National Food Security Program (42
                         Communes are selected).
                         E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The grant receiver and most importantly Ministry of Agriculture is implementing the ESMF
                           developed for the Benin Agricultural Productivity and Diversification Project (PADA). Through this
                           project, the Ministry and the PIU have developed capacity in handling safeguard policies and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           overall safeguard has been rated as satisfactory.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Abdoul Wahabi Seini (GSURR)
                           Abdoulaye Gadiere (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             This operation intends to support small micro
                           BP 4.01                                            irrigation for home garden vegetable crops. It is
                                                                              anticipated that potential adverse impacts
                                                                              related to the project will be small, sites specific
                                                                              and easily manageable. While the exact location
                                                                              where these investmentswill be realized are
                                                                              unknown to date, an ESMF should be prepared,
                                                                              reviewed consulted upon and disclosed both in
                                                                              Benin and at the infoshop. However, the
                                                                              proposed project will be implemented by the
                                                                              implementation unit that is coordinating the
                                                                              ongoing Word Bank funded operation named
                                                                              Agricultural Productivity and Diversification
                                                                              Project (PADA) that has already developed an
                                                                              ESMF. In this regards, this instrument will be
                                                                              used to deal with environment matters related to
                                                                              this new operation. The existing ESMF will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              updated as needed and will then be consulted on
                                                                              and redisclosed.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No              This project will not result in conversion or
                                                                              degradation of natural resources and it will not
                                                                              have any impact on critical or other natural
                                                                              habitats. The project merely improves the
                                                                              performance of existing small farms.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No              The project does not operate in forest areas and
                                                                              the target beneficiaries are farming dependant
                                                                              rural poor.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09            Yes             The project will support an improved
                                                                              agricultural practices at a micro level. This may
                                                                              include using pesticide and other improved
                                                                              agricultural inputs such as fertilizers. However,
                                                                              only a very low level of pest management will
                                                                              be introduced at village level to support small
                                                                              farmers. The IPMP developed for the Benin
                                                                              Agricultural Productivity and Diversification
                                                                                             Project (PADA) will be utilized in the
                                                                                             implementation of the activiteis to be financed
                                                                                             under this grant. This instrument will serve as a
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             guidance for pest management under the
                                                                                             proposed operation.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/              No                   The grant intervention areas do not have
                           BP 4.11                                                           physical cultural resources.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No                   No indigenous people in the project area.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               TBD                  The grant will not finance any investment which
                           4.12                                                              may lead to land acquisitions. Some activities
                                                                                             that the project could support, despite their very
                                                                                             small size, could be interpreted as they have
                                                                                             potential for triggering OP4.12. This will be for
                                                                                             certain determined once the activities are clearly
                                                                                             defined.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No                               No relationship with dams.
                           Projects on International        No                               Project will not affect and operate on
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                              international rivers or their tributaries.
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                               The project selected areas are not in disputed
                           7.60                                                              areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                           A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?: Yes
                               i. Explanation

                                 ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.


                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Samuel Taffesse
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Glenn S. Morgan (SA)                                         Date: 21-Aug-2015
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Martien Van Nieuwkoop (PMGR)                                 Date: 25-Aug-2015
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
