                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC17078

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 31-May-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Afghanistan                    Project ID:      P159291
                            Project Name:        Afghan Women's Economic Empowerment
                            Team Leader(s):      Matthew H. Morton,Najla Sabri
                            Estimated Date       30-Sep-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GSP06                          Lending          IPF
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 2.751725                      Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Japan Social Development Fund                                                           2.751725
                            Environment        C - Not Required
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to increase women's participation in business support services
                           and income-generating activities in pilot areas of Afghanistan.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project will pilot innovative CDC-level platforms and interventions tailored to the local Afghan
                           context for promoting women's economic empowerment. The pilots--to be implemented over a three-
                           year period--include an emphasis on local participation, sustainability, and contributing to the
                           development and success of the Government of Afghanistan's emerging national priority program on
                           women's economic empowerment. The project proposes to implement pilots in select districts of four
                           provinces (Badakhshan, Bamyan, Takhar, and Nangarhar).

                           Importantly, consultations and Implementing Agency experience indicate that, in many areas of
                           Afghanistan, investments in women's platforms and economic opportunities would only be accepted
                           by men in the community if some level of investment is made in the same for men. As such, while
                           the below components emphasize women's economic empowerment, a smaller portion (up to 30
                           percent) of grant funding will be devoted to supporting men-only platforms (Clusters) and related
                           services. The interventions targeting men would naturally benefit men and their families in
                           impoverished communities, but the primary aim is to foster a more enabling environment for
                         interventions to benefit women's economic empowerment. The results indicators, targets, and
                         evaluations will disaggregate by gender.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Formation of Cluster platforms for economic empowerment (0.31 million USD).
                         Under this component, the project will finance the development and implementation of Clusters of
                         community-based saving groups as platforms at the CDC level for impoverished women's economic
                         and social empowerment, with a focus on income-generating activities in rural and peri-urban areas.
                         Clusters will be gender-specific platforms (women-only or men-only) given cultural constraints and
                         the need for gender-specific supports. Activities will include (A) selection, training, and support of
                         community facilitators who will work with communities to form Clusters and provide ongoing
                         assistance and capacity-building to the Clusters themselves; and (B) formation, support, and
                         capacity-building of Clusters--including (i) participatory local vulnerability and poverty assessments
                         to ensure that the most vulnerable women are identified and emphasized in targeting and outreach,
                         community mobilization, engagement of local stakeholders and CDCs (with a strong focus on
                         engaging men and local elders to foster a more enabling environment for women's economic
                         empowerment), and initial assistance to the Cluster to build capacity for functioning, inclusiveness,
                         and formation of a development plan (outlining opportunities, priorities, actions, and needs for the
                         Cluster's economic empowerment); (ii) helping members form into entrepreneurship/producer groups
                         consistent with their individual preferences and group development plans for more targeted business
                         support and cooperation; and (iii) ongoing support and capacity-building of the Clusters to serve as
                         effective local platforms for economic empowerment of the poor.

                         The overarching innovation and focus of this component is to create an effective, replicable, and
                         community-owned platform--through the Clusters--at the CDC level for women to gain stronger
                         opportunities and supports to engage in income-generating activities and access services. No such
                         platform currently exists in these communities. As observed in other countries (such as with SEWA
                         self-help groups in India or PEKKA women's groups in Indonesia), creating such community
                         platforms for impoverished women can have positive effects that extend beyond income-generation.
                         Additional benefits include stronger social networks, increased local voice and political participation,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         better access to services, and a heightened sense of dignity and respect in the community and the
                         hous        ehold. Where existing business support services and training exist, the Clusters will serve
                         as a platform to link women with existing programs (e.g., through AREDP, HNLP, or other NGO
                         interventions) rather than duplicate existing services. In most areas of the country, however,
                         including those covered under this pilot, adequate women-friendly interventions for business support
                         services and access to finance are lacking.

                         Component 2: Community-based business centers, training, and market access (1.10 million USD).
                         This component will pilot the delivery of sustainable business support services to Clusters. While
                         many poor women possess basic skills that can support livelihoods and the motivation to generate
                         income from their work and start businesses, they generally lack the knowledge, support, and
                         connections to actualize their economic empowerment. Under this component, activities will include
                         (A) design and delivery of demand- and market-driven training modules including both hard and soft
                         skills, with an emphasis on skills required for supporting group empowerment and income-
                         generating activity--e.g., literacy, leadership, business development, financial literacy, budget
                         management, and vocation/trade-specific skills. Training and business support services will be
                         informed by local market assessments with a gender lens to identify viable options for women's
                         income-generating activities.; (B) establishment of CDC-level business centers operated by trained
                         local women para-professionals operating out of CDCs or community members' homes on a part-
                         time basis to offer ongoing guidance and business support to Cluster members; and (C) NGO-led
                         efforts to identify and facilitate purchasing and export partnerships on behalf of local women
                         producers.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Increasing access to finance (1.07 million USD). A challenge for women's savings
                         groups alone is that poor women often lack sufficient cash to save and lend for enabling productive
                         income-generating activities. Additionally, microfinance institutions can be complicated to establish
                         and difficult for many poor women to access. This component will pilot a model to address poor
                         women's liquidity constraints to productive income-generating activities by (A) enabling Clusters to
                         access seed grants for establishing Cluster-owned sharia-compliant revolving funds to support
                         Cluster members' proposals for productive activities (e.g., financing productive inputs or additional
                         skilling); and (B) providing capacity-building to Clusters to develop a level of maturity required to
                         access and effectively manage revolving funds, including ensuring that access is inclusive of poor
                         and vulnerable women. The Clusters will also promote more and stronger community-based savings
                         groups linked to Clusters as a modality to increase women's savings and access to finance.

                         Component 4: Project management, monitoring and evaluation, knowledge dissemination (0.27
                         million USD). This component serves to ensure high-quality implementation of the aforementioned
                         pilots, generation of new evidence, and support for knowledge transfer to inform policy and practice
                         on women's economic empowerment. Subcomponents shall include (A) project management--
                         comprised of a project manager, procurement specialist, financial management specialist,
                         implementation completion report, annual audits, and operating costs; (B) monitoring and
                         evaluation--comprised of baseline and final evaluation surveys, training for participatory monitoring
                         by beneficiaries, a monitoring and evaluation specialist consultant, and final impact evaluation
                         analysis and reporting; and (C) knowledge dissemination--including a knowledge management
                         specialist and at least two knowledge sharing events (one in Afghanistan and one in Washington, D.
                         C.).

                         Notably, the aforementioned activities proposed to be financed by a Japanese Social Development
                         Fund (JSDF) grant would be complemented by an awarded 700,000 USD grant from the World Bank
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Jobs Multi-Donor Trust Fund to pilot additional interventions focused specifically on women's
                         engagement in select value-chains. This Bank-executed technical assistance (Promoting Women's
                         Livelihoods & Opportunities in Select Value Chains (P159738)) will involve in-depth gender-
                         sensitive value-chain diagnostics, development of innovative partnerships and market linkages with
                         buyers in those value-chains, and interventions to increase women producers' access to information
                         and capacity to me et buyer standards and increase their productivity and earnings potential. The
                         activities under this technical assistance are expected to target a small subset of the Clusters funded
                         by JSDF for enhanced support for economic empowerment.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will pilot interventions in select districts of Badakhshan, Bamyan, Takhar, and
                         Nangarhar provinces. These provinces present diverse contexts in terms of baseline female labor
                         force participation rates (15, 19, 12, and 18 percent, respectively, according to team NRVA 2011/12),
                         and three are located in lagging regions in poverty terms with high exposure to climatic shocks and
                         food insecurity. Selection of pilot provinces was informed by these considerations along with the
                         security situation and the implementingagency's field infrastructure and capacity to mobilize the
                         required interventions relatively quickly and efficiently. Nangarhar is the only province not generally
                         served by the Implementing Agency and will be subcontracted to another NGO in order to examine
                           thefeasibility of implementing the model under a different organization, which will be important for
                           scale up.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The project is not expected to have any safeguards impacts. However, the project staff will be
                           vigilant to identify and address any issue that might arise with the help of relevant Bank staff.

                           MoLSAMD will be the Client in this project given its coordinating role with the national priority
                           program, but it will not have an implementing or fiduciary role in this project. As proposed, the
                           Grant Recipient and Implementing Agency will both be Aga Khan Foundation. Aga Khan
                           Foundation has substantial institutional capacity both centrally and in the field with extensive
                           experience in participatory processes, implementing environmentally and socially-sensitive projects
                           with vulnerable populations, and delivering relevant training and capacity building.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Mohammad Arif Rasuli (GEN06)
                           Mohammad Ateeq Zaki (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
                           BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No
                           Projects on International            No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP     No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                           A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?: Yes
                               i. Explanation

                               ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
                                 15-Jul-2016
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Matthew H. Morton,Najla Sabri
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Zia Al Jalaly (SA)                                           Date: 31-May-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Pablo Gottret (PMGR)                                         Date: 31-May-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
