                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                             ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                      Report No.: ISDSA12684

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Jun-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:           Papua New Guinea                  Project ID:    P154412
                                                        Parent         P114042
                                                        Project ID:
   Project Name:      PNG Urban Youth Employment Project Additional Financing (P154412)
   Parent Project     Urban Youth Employment Project (P114042)
   Name:
   Task Team          Sonya M. Sultan
   Leader(s):
   Estimated                                            Estimated   30-Oct-2015
   Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
   Managing Unit:     GSURR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                        Instrument:
   Sector(s):         Other social services (90%), Public administration- Other social services (10%)
   Theme(s):         Social Safety Nets/Social Assistance & Social Care Services (50%), Conflict
                     prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (20%), Other social protection and
                     risk management (20%), City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (10%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      11.80           Total Bank Financing:                   0.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                         Amount
     Borrower                                                                                    1.00
     Free-standing Cofinancing Trust Fund                                                       10.80
     Total                                                                                      11.80
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a          No
   Repeater
   project?



                                              Page 1 of 8
 2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The Project's development objectives are to provide urban youth with income from temporary
   employment opportunities and to increasetheir employability.
   B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


 3. Project Description
The Project includes three main components: 1) Youth Job Corps (YJC); 2) Skills Development and
Employment Scheme (SDES); and 3) Project Management.

Under the AF, the Youth Job Corps will continue to roll out public works scheme. As originally
envisaged in the project design, the public works will now include activities such as the construction
of concrete footpaths and drains, in addition to road repair and maintenance, and grass cutting and
cleaning on the road-sides. It is hoped that the broader range of public works activities, and the
construction work in particular, will increase the transfer of skills (since it involves semi-skilled
work), and should help increase the employability of youth involved. Contractors will be trained on
the supervision of this type of public works and in general contract administration. The scaled up
activity will increase the number of youth going through the YJC from 7,500 to 11,500 and increase
the number of labor days generated by an additional 120,000 to a total of 420,000 labor days. The AF
will also strengthen measures to ensure that both women and men share in the social and economic
benefits of the project.

The SDES provides Pre-Employment Training (PET) of 20 days, and a five month On-the-Job
Training (OJT) with employers in Port Moresby, for eligible youth. The SDES component will
continue its activities for an additional 18 months, with the provision of two types of Pre-
Employment Training, and the continuation of the On-The-Job Training scheme. The focus will be
on strengthening the quality of inputs in this component to increase the chances of youth securing
employment at the end of it. It is expected an additional 1500 youth will receive Pre-Employment
Training of 20 days. With additional time, it is expected that the current OJT target of having a total
of 2400 youth complete a 5 month internship with employers in Port Moresby will not only be met,
but also exceeded.
Some of the new elements being added under this component include: (i) piloting Adult Literacy and
Livelihoods Training for select participants; and (ii) coaching, and social services and training
referrals for program participants.

The AF will be used to increase and strengthen capacity of Project Management Unit (PMU) to
respond to the needs of the current project as well as the scaled up activities. The AF will also
support technical assistance activities to help NCDC effectively design and oversee implementation
of the YJC and SDES schemes. The PMU will continue to manage rigorous monitoring and
evaluation of project activities to assess impact.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
All project activities will continue to be located in the National Capital District of PNG, in Port
Moresby.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                                              Page 2 of 8
Ly Thi Dieu Vu (GSURR)
Roberto B. Tordecilla (GSURR)

6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental            Yes        Overall, the AF project will bring about positive social
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               and environmental impacts such as temporary work and
                                    income transfer, creation of safer roads, reduced emission
                                    by cars during travel, improved local sanitation,
                                    vegetation control and waste collection services.
                                    There will be some potential negative environmental
                                    impacts and risks associated with the civil works under
                                    Component 1. The potential impacts and risks are related
                                    to waste generation and temporary storage, increased dust
                                    and noise level, safety risks, and traffic disturbance. These
                                    types of impacts are mostly small-scale, short term, site
                                    specific, reversible and manageable through simple
                                    mitigation measures. The Environmental and Social
                                    Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared under the
                                    parent project and has been effective in managing the
                                    negative social and environmental impacts and risks of
                                    the parent project. The ESMF will continue to be applied
                                    in the AF, particularly to ensure health and safety of youth
                                    workers at the work sites, by providing safety gear and
                                    orientation on their proposer use. All these safety
                                    precautions are contained in the agreement with
                                    contractors and employers, in the case of YJC and OJT
                                    participants, respectively.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No

Pest Management OP 4.09 No

Physical Cultural        No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes        As in the case of the entire country, the NCD has a
BP 4.10                             predominantly IP population comprising the different
                                    ethnic groups coming from the provinces as well as the
                                    Motu-Koita people who are recognized as having
                                    collective attachment to the land and being the customary
                                    landowners of the NCD.
                                    Since most of the target beneficiaries and participants of
                                    UYEP are IP youth belonging to different ethnic groups,
                                    and to help diffuse growing tensions between IP youth
                                    groups, it was decided during preparation that a separate
                                    IP framework or plan is not needed. Instead, the elements



                                      Page 3 of 8
                                             of OP 4.10 were embedded into the project design. Part of
                                             it is the comprehensive communication and consultation
                                             framework that was developed and made a critical section
                                             of the ESMF to ensure IP-sensitive project activities and
                                             in the process achieve the objectives of the IP policy.
   Involuntary Resettlement    No
   OP/BP 4.12
   Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
   4.37
   Projects on International   No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed        No
   Areas OP/BP 7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     ENVIRONMENT
     The parent project’s physical activities have been limited to Component 1 which involves small-
     scale road maintenance and repairs, cleaning of storm drains, garbage collection and grass cutting.
     These types of works have been labor-based/intensive and the use of heavy construction
     equipment/plant was very limited. The potential environmental impacts and risks were mostly
     related to safety risks, traffic disturbance and risks, increased dust and noise level, waste
     generation and disposal. These impacts/risks have been site specific, minor and entirely
     construction-related, and can be readily reversed and/or otherwise effectively managed through
     tangible mitigation measures. Under Component 2, UYEP provides job placements for youth in
     existing offices and businesses within Port Moresby. There may be some due diligence impacts
     related to the businesses involved in Component 2 where trainees are placed.

    Under the additional financing, existing parent project activities will continue under existing
    project modalities, with a scale-up in some activities, to increase coverage. Given that the nature of
    investments and geographical coverage are unchanged in the AF project, the nature and scale of
    the potential environmental impacts and risks will be similar to the original parent project.
    Therefore, the AF project will remain EA category B in compliance with Environmental
    Assessment OP4.01. The ESMF which has been updated during the implementation of the parent
    project will be applied in the AF for managing the potential negative impacts and risks.
    SOCIAL
    The Motu-Koita people live within the project area and are recognized as having collective
    attachment to the land and being the customary landowners of the NCD. In addition, the Motu-
    Koita self-identity is distinct (and are recognized by others as such); they have separate customary
    institutions and a system of local government--the Motu Koita Assembly (which is entrenched in
    the Motu-Koita Assembly Act, 2007) and they have their own language (Motu).

    Overall, the project is anticipated to have positive impacts on all youth in the NCD including
    Motu-Koita youth. There may be some tension and feelings of discrimination between the Motu-


                                               Page 4 of 8
  Koita youth and youth from other ethnic groups (who are more recent migrants to the NCD) if
  there is real or perceived favoritism of one ethnic group. There are existing sensitivities among
  Motu-Koita youth, as they feel that certain socio-economic opportunities are bypassing them in
  favor of non-Motu-Koita migrants to the capital cisty, even though they are the customary
  landowners. The project design has put in place measures to ensure that (i) Motu-Koita youth
  receive culturally-appropriate benefits; (ii) Motu Koita youth participate and benefit from the
  project, and that their rates of participation in the project is carefully tracked and monitored; and
  that (iii) by regularly consulting with the MKA and working regularly in Motu Koita villages,
  efforts are made to prevent any perception of prejudice or exclusion on Motu Koita, and therefore
  mitigate against potential social conflict.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  n/a
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  n/a
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  During the preparation of the parent project, the NCDC prepared an Environmental and Social
  Management Framework (ESMF). The ESMF assessed the potential social and environmental
  impacts and risks of project activities and introduced standard mitigation measures applicable for
  each type of physical activities. For component 2, the ESMF also included screening criteria for
  businesses proposed for youth job placements, based on the Bank’s exclusion list (such as alcohol,
  security, exploitation or processing gem stones industries) to ensure the Project complies with the
  Bank’s safeguard policies.

  To ensure that the ESMF is effectively implemented, the NCDC has assigned responsibility for
  implementing the ESMF to the Project Engineer.

  The PMU arranged to conduct training on project safeguard requirements for PMU staff, the
  Project Engineer and his assistants at the beginning and during project implementation. The
  ESMF has been reviewed and updated during the implementation of the parent project taking into
  account the activities identified during the implementation of the parent project and the
  opportunities to incorporate greening and environment-friendly activities into the public works
  contracts. The latest ESMF revision (May 2015) includes environmental specification and
  compliance for UYEP civil work contracts. Monitoring environmental compliance has been
  incorporated into civil work supervision. No major safeguard non-compliance issues were
  identified in the parent project. Therefore the revised ESMF (version from May 2015) is adequate
  for ensuring environmental compliance of the AF project.

  SOCIAL

  As agreed with the Bank, the Borrower has integrated elements of an Indigenous Peoples’ Plan
  into the project design to ensure that the project activities will respect the dignity, human rights,
  economies and culture of affected indigenous peoples. These elements include:

  (i)     Free, prior, and informed consultation leading to broad community support which was


                                              Page 5 of 8
 conducted during project preparation.

 (ii) A framework for free, prior and informed consultation during project implementation - a
 Community Consultation Framework – which has been incorporated into the ESMF.

 (iii)   Measures to ensure that the Motu-Koita people receive culturally-appropriate benefits
 have been put in place. These include targeted awareness raising and communication efforts, and
 targeted screening and recruitment efforts in Motu-Koita neighborhoods. Motu-Koita youth
 participation in the project is being reviewed every mission to ensure that the minimum agreed of
 10% of Motu Koita youth are at least involved in project activities and if this is not the case,
 measures are being put in place to remedy the situation through future recruitment efforts (as
 relevant). Mechanisms and benchmarks for monitoring, evaluating, and reporting on the inclusion
 of the Motu-Koita in the Project have been put in place.

 (iv)     Measures to ensure that adverse impacts are mitigated have been put in place. These
 include a culturally appropriate grievance redress mechanism and a robust communication
 campaign to ensure that there is widespread understanding of the project, its objectives, the target
 group it hopes to reach, and the criteria and procedures for participation.

 Furthermore, as Component 2 entails provision of youth employment opportunities in the private
 sector, the Bank and the GoPNG have agreed on a due diligence review process (a negative list of
 company activities to ensure participating companies are ones that are not engaging in activities
 that would cause unacceptable reputational risks to the World Bank) to be undertaken by the
 GoPNG with regards to the activities of the participating private sector companies to determine
 whether any follow up actions will be required on the part of these companies.

  The World Bank and the GoPNG have also agreed on a terms of reference for a Safeguards Focal
  Point, to be situated in the Project Management Unit (PMU) whose main tasks will be to (i) be
  responsible for implementing the ESMF for Component 1 activities and (ii) manage the due
  diligence process for participating private sector companies in Component 2.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The main stakeholders are the youth groups in the Port Moresby area, who are the target group of
  the project. Consultations have been carried out with these groups, as well as with other
  community-based groups and faith-based groups, in the areas in and around Port Moresby using
  appropriate methods such as focus group discussions, individual interviews and community
  meetings. The main areas of concern raised during these discussions were concerns about food
  security, lack of opportunities for education and work, low self-esteem and stigmatization of
  youth. The project is designed to precisely address the root causes of these concerns.

 The revised ESMF has been disclosed both locally in Port Moresby and at the Infoshop of the
 World Bank.
  During the preparation of the Social Assessment, consultations were undertaken in an effort to
 ascertain the level of community support. These consultations were carried out in March 2010.
 Approximately 3,000 people participated in a total of 15 Motu-Koita villages. Participants were
 both Motu-Koita and non-Motu-Koita youth, non-youth, representatives of civil society
 organizations, church groups, and representatives of the Motu Koita Assembly.



                                            Page 6 of 8
  The project design also includes a Community Consultation Framework which will guide
  consultations through the project implementation period.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      24-Mar-2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09-Apr-2010
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      ////
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Papua New Guinea                                                 10-Jun-2015
  Comments: The ESMF has been published in the National Capital District Commission's website
                since early June 2015. To view the document go to www.ncdc.gov.pg under “public”
                page.
 Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      ////
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   05-May-2010
"In country" Disclosure

  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 report?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
 Indigenous Peoples?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 place in a form and language that are understandable and
 accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?

                                          Page 7 of 8
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader(s): Name: Sonya M. Sultan
   Approved By
   Practice Manager/    Name: Helene Monika Carlsson Rex (PMGR) Date: 29-Jun-2015
   Manager:




                                            Page 8 of 8
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
