                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                             ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                      Report No.: ISDSA13033

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-May-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:           Tajikistan                        Project ID:    P153709
                                                        Parent         P122694
                                                        Project ID:
   Project Name:      Environmental Land Management and Rural Livelihoods - Additional Financing
                      (P153709)
   Parent Project     Environmental Land Management and Rural Livelihoods Project (P122694)
   Name:
   Task Team       Angela G. Armstrong
   Leader(s):
   Estimated       27-Apr-2015                          Estimated   07-Jul-2015
   Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
   Managing Unit: GENDR                                 Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                        Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Agricultural extension and research (25%), Public administration- Agriculture,
                     fishing and forestry (25%), General agriculture, fish ing and forestry sector
                     (20%), Irrigation and drainage (15%), Sub-national government administration
                     (15%)
   Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (25%), Other rural development (25%), Rural
                     policies and institutions (25%), Land administration a nd management (15%),
                     Climate change (10%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:       4.06           Total Bank Financing:                  1.80
   Financing Gap:            0.00
      Financing Source                                                                      Amount
      BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                      0.00
      IDA Grant                                                                               1.80
      Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                            2.00
      LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                                     0.26
      Total                                                                                   4.06


                                             Page 1 of 10
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a     No
Repeater
project?

2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The overall Project Development Objective (PDO) and Global Environmental Objective (GEO) is
   to enable rural people to increase their productive assets in ways that improve natural resource
   management and resilience to climate change in selected climate vulnerablesites
   B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


3. Project Description
Scope. The proposed project would comprise three components implemented over five years: (1)
Rural Production and Land Resource Management Investments; (2) Knowledge Management and
Institutional Support; and (3) Project Management and Coordination. The design incorporates
lessons from previous and on-going projects in the sector, notably the Bank- and GEF-financed
Agriculture and Watershed Management Project (CAWMP, 2005-2012), but also successful
approaches supported by other donors in the field.

Component 1. Rural Production and Land Resource Management Investments. The purpose of this
component is to provide funding at the community level that would allow rural people to adopt
innovative and appropriate practices that reduce land degradation and increase resilience to climate
change.

Sub-Component 1.1. Village-based sustainable rural production and land resource management in
selected climate vulnerable sites. At the village-level, the project would finance rural productivity
investments in three categories: (i) farm production (activities that improve field and horticultural
crop productivity and diversity, livestock production efficiency, agro-processing and market access);
(ii) land resource management (activities that improve water conservation; soil fertility; pasture
management, sustainable sloping lands cultivation, including orchards, woodlots, shelter-belts); and
(iii) small-scale rural production infrastructure (activities that improve irrigation/drainage systems,
minor transport infrastructure, renewable energy, energy efficiency measures). These activities
would be selected based on their potential to reduce land degradation, improve livelihoods and
increase resilience to the impacts of climate change.

Sub-component 1.2. Larger-scale Initiatives in Sustainable Community Land Management. Certain
natural resource issues are better addressed at scales beyond the village. Of particular concern, to
both sustainable land management and productive rural livelihoods in the context of climate change,
are pasture management and on-farm water management.

Sub-Component 1.2.1. Sustainable Community Pasture Management. This sub-component would
finance the development of sustainable participatory pasture and livestock management plans in
selected jamoats. The participatory plan would define: (i) measures to improve pasture productivity,


                                             Page 2 of 10
such as rotational grazing, protecting areas for regeneration, pasture rehabilitation, improving access
to remote pastures, and needs for supplementary fodder production; (ii) grazing utilization levels;
(iii) animal health requirements such as vaccinations; (iv) investment needs; and (v) implementation
targets and indicators. Investments could include: (i) infrastructure to access and use remote
pastures, such as spot road improvements, stock watering points, shelters, and milk cooling
equipment; (ii) machinery to produce and harvest fodder; (iii) rehabilitation measures for degraded
areas such as fencing, weed and shrub control, and re-seeding; (iv) inputs for supplementary fodder
production such as seeds; (v) animal health measures; and (vi) breed improvement t hrough artificial
insemination.

Sub-Component 1.2.2. On-Farm Water Management. This sub-component aims to introduce
sustainable on-farm water management practices in irrigated cropland, particularly in lowland
districts. The sub-component would support farmersto introduce, test and demonstrate practices that
could contribute to improving on-farm water management and efficiency, maintain soil quality and
reduce land degradation, and increase resilience to climate change. Investments could include: (i)
provision of equipment for drip irrigation and land-leveling; (ii) cleaning drainage systems to
alleviate waterlogging and for salinity control; (iii) provision of seedlings for planting shelter belts,
protecting canals and as an intercrop; (iv) materials for conservation agriculture; and (v) seeds of
improved varieties tolerant to drought, pests, diseases, and soil salinity.

Component 2: Knowledge Management and Institutional Support. This component will provide
facilitation services and technical support for rural populations to plan, implement and manage rural
investments. The component would comprise the following activities:

Sub-Component 2.1. Facilitation support and technical advice for mobilization, participatory
planning, and implementation of development plans at the village and/or jamoat level.

Sub-Component 2.2. Training, analysis, dissemination and networking. A program will be instituted
to improve skills and knowledge in key topics such as environmental assessment and monitoring;
integrated land, water and grazing management; integrated pest management (IPM); pollution
control; and climate change adaptation. The project will support analytical work on topics that
include soil quality and extent of land degradation, market development and access, grazing
management and livestock production, potential incentive policies for sustainable land management
practices, and changes in productivity and environmental conditions resulting from technological
change. Dissemination and knowledge exchange will be supported through a focus on exchange and
learning between project sites and with similar initiatives, including farmer-to-farmer exchanges and
best farmer practice competitions, the use of ICT tools, and the use of regional SLM platforms.
Results and lessons learned will be shared with national and regional stakeholders. Support will also
be included for project evaluation, including assessments at project mid-term and completion.

Component 3: Project Management and Coordination. This component will finance the operating
costs of an Implementation Group (IG) within the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) to
carry out project management functions for both Components 1 and 2. Support will be provided for
procurement, financial management, coordination, reporting, and monitoring and evaluation.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Project sites comprise districts in three different agro-ecological zones - uplands, hill lands and
lowlands – as recommended by the PPCR Component A5 Phase 1 Agriculture and Sustainable Land


                                              Page 3 of 10
Management Report. These districts have been selected on the basis of: (i) degree of climate and
other environmental vulnerability; (ii) degree of farmland restructuring (secure land tenure is an
important aspect of sustainability); (iii) representation of upland, middle hills and lowland areas and
contiguous sites where possible to facilitate resource management approaches (watershed, river
basin); (iv) donor complementarity (to help ensure support not provided by ELMARL, e.g., in market
development, and thus make use of parallel co-financing from agencies such as DFID/GIZ), as well
as avoidance of overlap; and (v) relative potential for the project to sustainably increase food security
and agricultural growth, and successful environmental management (i.e., ensuring that project targets
can be met – number of households benefiting and area under effective land and agricultural
practices). Care has also been taken to coordinate with and not to duplicate efforts of other projects
and donors, including the Bank's Second Public Employment Project (PAMP 2), International Fund
for Agricultural Development (IFAD), United States Agency for International Development
(USAID) and Asian Development Bank (ADB).
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
German Stanislavovich Kust (GENDR)
Nandita Jain (GENDR)

6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental                Yes            No major adverse environmental impacts are anticipated
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                       under the proposed project, and subprojects financed
                                            through the provision of grants to farmers will be
                                            screened to ensure that they do not result in adverse
                                            impacts on the environment. Subproject proposals will
                                            identify potential environmental impacts of activities, and
                                            include mitigation measures for any likely negative
                                            impacts. Subproject agreements will specify conditions,
                                            including environmental compliance, for release of
                                            tranche payments to farmers.

                                            For this project, an update of the CAWMP Environmental
                                            Management Framework, which was also Category B, has
                                            been prepared covering Component 1 activities. This
                                            update takes into account the expanded scope of the
                                            project, as well as other findings and lessons learned from
                                            CAWMP. The updated EMF continues to provide details
                                            on subproject preparation and approvals, and sets out
                                            responsibilities for environmental monitoring by project
                                            partners that include beneficiaries, facilitating
                                            organizations, IG and relevant line ministries.
Natural Habitats OP/BP       Yes            Project impacts on natural habitats are expected to be
4.04                                        generally positive. Investments to reduce grazing
                                            pressures around settlements through increased access to
                                            remote summer pastures may affect the biodiversity
                                            values of these areas. OP 4.04 will be triggered to take
                                            into account that risks associated with access to summer
                                            pastures may involve adverse impacts on biodiversity.



                                             Page 4 of 10
                              The EMF includes procedures for screening the risks of
                              proposed subprojects and identifying measures to
                              mitigate, as well as enhance biodiversity values. Rapid
                              ecological baselines and assessments of potentially
                              affected areas will be conducted as needed on a case-by-
                              case basis. Adverse impacts did not occur in CAWMP
                              and therefore are unlikely, if at all, to arise in this project.
                              The project will include capacity-building activities to
                              assist local institutions, NGOs and beneficiaries to engage
                              in adaptive management of natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No   The project would not involve significant conversion or
                              degradation of critical natural forest areas or related
                              critical natural habitats, nor finance commercial
                              harvesting operations. Project investments will include
                              planting of small woodlots and orchards by local families
                              and community groups on degraded lands.
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes   The project will support more systematic adoption of
                              Integrated Pest Management (IPM) as elements of rural
                              production investments. However, investments financed
                              by the project could lead to agricultural intensification
                              and increased production of high-value crops, which can
                              trigger an increased use of agrochemicals, including
                              pesticides.

                              Experience with other projects (e.g., CAWMP, LRCSP)
                              showed that a complicated and comprehensive separate
                              Pest Management Plan (PMP) was too ambitious to
                              implement as a result of low skills and knowledge among
                              local farmers. As result, for this project a more effective
                              approach to reducing the application of harmful pesticides
                              will focus increasing knowledge with field trainings on
                              demonstration plots selected from the practices of
                              innovative and effective farmers. The EMF includes a
                              special section on pest management-related environmental
                              risks. The main elements of this section are: (i)
                              promotion of Integrated Pest Management (IPM) and safe
                              and rational pesticide use as elements of rural production
                              investments to be supported by advisory and capacity-
                              building elements of the project; and (ii) preparation of a
                              limited, positive list of pesticides and biological methods
                              of pest control, which would be eligible for financing for
                              rural investments.
Physical Cultural        No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/   No
BP 4.10



                               Page 5 of 10
   Involuntary Resettlement No                The project will not fund any activities that may result in
   OP/BP 4.12                                 land acquisition, involuntary resettlement and livelihood
                                              displacement. Under component 1, subprojects financed
                                              through grants to farmers will be screened to ensure they
                                              will not result in the involuntary resettlement of any third
                                              parties. This will be done using a checklist in the Project
                                              Operational Manual. Community rangeland management
                                              plans may restrict access for regeneration, but as
                                              temporary measures that will increase grazing resources
                                              in the long-term. The OP is not considered to be triggered
                                              since such restrictions would be community-driven. The
                                              Project Operational Manual provides guidelines for
                                              parties to negotiate mutually agreeable arrangements in
                                              cases where conflicts may arise from pastoral activities.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             The project does not include any investments for
   4.37                                       infrastructure that would depend upon the continued
                                              safety of upstream dams.
   Projects on International   Yes            The project also triggers OP 7.50 on International
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       Waterways because project activities will use water from
                                              “international waterways,” and in particular, one of the
                                              main river basins in Central Asia, the Amu Darya, and its
                                              tributaries. However, the activities to be financed would
                                              be limited to rehabilitation, modifications and minor
                                              additions or alterations to existing irrigation and drainage
                                              infrastructure schemes in ways that would not increase the
                                              amount of water abstracted or lead to appreciable impact
                                              on the water sources or local hydrological regimes.
   Projects in Disputed        No
   Areas OP/BP 7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The environmental impact of the project is expected to be largely positive and no major adverse
     environmental impacts are anticipated. The project supports investments in rural production and
     land resource management, which will be selected and designed by local communities with
     technical assistance from NGOs and specialists. The project is expected to increase the adoption of
     effective agricultural, land water management practices in the project sites and thus contribute to
     soil and water conservation, and building climate resilience.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
     Project impacts on natural habitats are expected to be generally positive. As mentioned,
     investments to reduce grazing pressures around settlements through increased access to remote
     summer pastures may affect the biodiversity values of these areas. OP 4.04 is triggered to take into
     account risks associated with access to summer pastures that may involve adverse impacts on


                                               Page 6 of 10
 biodiversity. The Environmental Management Framework (EMF) includes procedures for
 screening the risks of proposed subprojects and identifying measures to mitigate, as well as
 enhance biodiversity values.

 The project also supports a more systematic adoption of Integrated Pest Management (IPM) as
 elements of rural production investments. However, investments financed by the project could
 lead to agricultural intensification and increased production of high-value crops, which can trigger
 an increased use of agrochemicals, including pesticides. The project supports knowledge and skills
 building with field trainings on demonstration plots selected from practices of innovative and
 effective farmers, in order to reduce the application of harmful pesticides The EMF also includes a
 special section on pest management-related environmental risks.

  Because project activities will use water from 'international waterways' (in particular, Amu Darya
  and its tributaries), OP 7.50 is also triggered. However, activities to be financed are limited to
  minor modifications or additions to existing irrigation and drainage schemes in ways that would
  not increase the amount of water abstracted or lead to appreciable impact on local hydrological
  regimes.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The Implementation Group (IG) within the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) has
  primary responsibility for addressing the environmental and social aspects of the project. The IG
  ensures that related safeguard measures (such as Environment Management Plans) are effectively
  implemented. The CEP is responsible for natural resource management and climate change policy,
  as well awareness raising and environmental monitoring. Safeguards implementation activities,
  such as environmental reviews and environmental management activities, draw upon the capacity
  of the Committee which has experience with environmental assessments, environmental
  management and legal and regulatory requirements. Additional capacity is needed to support
  environmental management and social development aspects including training, data analysis, as
  well as for environmental assessment to prepare documentation such as EMPs and/or EMP check
  lists. The Project Operational Manual and the EMF provides detailed guidance on measures to
  help ensure compliance with safeguards.

 In addition, the EMF takes into account lessons learned from relevant projects (e.g., CAWMP,
 LRCSP) to help ensure that the measures included are within the country's implementation
 capacity. These lessons and resulting actions for ELMARL include:
 • A workable four-part environmental monitoring system for small-scale rural investments;
 • Shifting from a less effective approach of “preventing negative environmental impact” to a more
 successful and clear message to local people of “promotion of environmental benefits”, which
 implicitly covered the environmental risks assessment issues by using matrices of
 environmentally eligible and ineligible types of activities, participatory environmental analysis and
 management trainings (including conceptual modeling of threats, impacts and relationships,
 ranking of threats, mapping of agro-ecosystem functions, local environmental assessment);
 • Limited success in collaboration with the government agencies and field officers responsible for
 environmental monitoring and control primarily due to inadequate project management capacity.
 With the CEP responsible for project management, its field staff will be more engaged in the

                                            Page 7 of 10
  environmental management aspects of field activities; and
  • Potential facilitating organizations operating in Tajikistan, e.g., the Aga Khan Foundation,
  UNDP, and others, have acquired better environmental management and monitoring skills and
  capacities over the past five years, which have been tested in Tajik conditions. This more
  experienced and larger pool of skills is potentially available to ELMARL.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Primary project beneficiaries are expected to be at least 24,350 rural households in seven districts
  representing a population of approximately 147,000 persons (average six persons per household).
  The EMF remains the same for the additional activities to be supported, that is the following
  sections of the original (parent project) EMF will not change: (a) rules and procedures; (b)
  potential environmental and social impacts associated with the proposed investments; (c)
  guidelines on conducting sub-project Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) including
  mitigation measures and monitoring activities for different types of climate resilience and
  mitigation investments; (d) roles and responsibilities in EA processes and in supervision and
  reporting; (e) the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and/or EMP Checklist to be applied
  within the EA process; and (f) capacity building activities to ensure an efficient EA
  implementation.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      28-Dec-2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   05-Feb-2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      ////
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Tajikistan                                                       06-Feb-2013
  Comments:
 Pest Management Plan
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      28-Dec-2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   05-Feb-2013
"In country" Disclosure
  Tajikistan                                                       06-Feb-2013
  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment




                                             Page 8 of 10
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
 project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
 in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
 Management Specialist?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
 Have the other riparians been notified of the project?           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
 Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
 Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 place in a form and language that are understandable and
 accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the project cost?
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
 related to safeguard policies?




                                          Page 9 of 10
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader(s): Name: Angela G. Armstrong
   Approved By
   Practice Manager/    Name: Kulsum Ahmed (PMGR)                         Date: 28-May-2015
   Manager:




                                            Page 10 of 10
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
