                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSR17577
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Apr-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            India                                        Project ID:           P096019
                            Project Name:       Himachal Pradesh State Roads Project (P096019)
                            Task Team           Mesfin Wodajo Jijo
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           19-Feb-2007                                  Estimated   05-Jun-2007
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GTI06                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:             Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (96%), Sub-national government
                                                administration (3%), Other social services (1%)
                            Theme:              Infrastructure services for private sector development (40%), Other social
                                                development (20%), HIV/AIDS (20%), Injuries and non-commu nicable diseases
                                                (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                         No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       303.43           Total Bank Financing:                                       220.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                              83.43
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                220.00
                              Total                                                                                                303.43
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to reduce transport costs and to improve traffic flows


                                                                                  Page 1 of 8
                         on priority segments of the core road network of Himachal Prad                                     esh.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to reduce transport costs and to improve traffic flows
                         on priority segments of the core road network of Himachal Prad                                 esh.
                          3. Project Description
                         The restructuring is to extend the closing date of the additional loan by one year. All other terms of
                         the loan, project design, scope and safeguards triggered for the original project remain the same.

                         The Project has two components. The components are:

                          A) Core Network Improvement Component consisting of widening and strengthening of about 447
                         km of existing state highways to two lane roads.

                          B) Core Network Maintenance and Management Component consisting of (a) periodic maintenance
                         and minor rehabilitation of about 2,000 km of Core Road Network (CRN ); (b) piloting
                         performance-based maintenance contracts; (c) accident black spot improvements; (d) pre-
                         investment studies for road network improvement and maintenance; and (e) capacity enhancement in
                         road maintenance, financing, and management.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is located in Himachal Pradesh, a hilly and mountainous state (area size of 55,673 square
                         km, population of about 6 million) in Northern India. The state is rich in natural resources, and is
                         divided into four agro-climatic zones (Shiwalik Hills, Mid Hills, High Hills, and Cold Dry Zone).
                         The majority of the population is concentrated in the Shiwalik hills and the Mid Hills, which also
                         house the majority of the forests, natural habitats, and economic infrastructure. The project roads
                         have been selected through a feasibility study of a set of 1,670 km of candidate roads identified
Public Disclosure Copy




                         already by a strategic options study (SOS). Roads being upgrading are largely concentrated in the
                         Shiwalik and Mid Hills zones.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra (GEN06)
                         Parthapriya Ghosh (GSU06)
                         Tapas Paul (GEN06)
                         Venkata Rao Bayana (GSU06)
                         Warren Waters (GSU02)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP      Yes
                          4.04
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36          Yes
                          Pest Management OP 4.09     No
                                                      Yes


                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                            Physical Cultural
                            Resources OP/BP
                            Indigenous  Peoples4.11
                                                 OP/    No
                            BP 4.10
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement    Yes
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Environmental Issues/Impacts: The fragile ecosystem in the hilly and mountainous state posed
                              greater than average environmental risks. The key environmental issues were associated with
                              activities such as strengthening and widening of carriageway; provision/repair of shoulders;
                              provision of ditches and drains; construction/repair of culverts; reconstruction and rehabilitation of
                              bridges; and rehabilitation works. The environmental issues in the original project included: (i)
                              direct/indirect impacts on rich natural resources (reserved/ protected forests); (ii) felling of
                              roadside trees; (iii) destabilization of slopes with consequent damage to forests, water sources,
                              pastures, properties, orchards and farmlands; (iv) issues associated with management and disposal
                              of debris and other wastes; (v) unavoidable impacts on water resources used by the people such as
                              springs, river/streams, hand pumps and canals (vi) impact on local and regional drainage; (vii)
Public Disclosure Copy




                              conversion of some marginal agricultural lands for road works; (viii) road safety concerns; (viii)
                              moderate impacts on sensitive sites including community assets and religious places; and (ix)
                              construction phase impacts including those related to camp site operation, dust generation and
                              pollution from plants, machinery and vehicles.

                              The said impacts have been by and large addressed through effective management as detailed in
                              the contract specific Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) that were prepared for the original
                              project. The key features of the EMP include sound environmental management of temporary
                              impacts during construction phase (including adherence to SPCB and EMP conditions);
                              compliance with regulatory clearance conditions stipulated for the road packages adjacent to
                              sensitive environs, such as forest and wildlife areas; piloting and use of bio-engineering techniques
                              for slope stabilization; sound debris management practices and; environmental enhancements for
                              cultural and community assets along the project corridors.

                              No significant, large scale or irreversible environmental impacts are envisaged from the activities/
                              sub-components proposed under Additional Financing for HPSRP. The key issues identified for
                              the original project and the management strategy/measures to mitigate the adverse impacts remain
                              valid for this project also. The environmental safeguard policies triggered for the parent project
                              (HPSRP) will also continue to apply to the additional loan.



                                                                         Page 3 of 8
                          The overall implementation of Environment Management Plans in the project has been
                          ‘satisfactory' despite the challenges posed by topographic and climatic conditions in the state.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          While there were some deficiencies/gaps in EMP implementation in the initial stage of project
                          implementation, the over-all progress with regard to environmental management in the project has
                          been ‘satisfactory’ and more or less in line with the progress of civil works. The required
                          regulatory clearances for forest land diversion and permissions for tree cutting, operation of
                          construction camps, plant sites and borrow areas (as applicable in the sub-project context) have
                          been obtained.

                          The project has also been able to address successfully and demonstrate good practices in dealing
                          with key environmental issues faced during hill roads development. These include: (a) integration
                          of environmental aspects, including reflection of findings from the consultation process with key
                          stakeholders, into the engineering design; (b) incorporation of EMP into the Bidding Documents
                          towards improved compliance of environment, health and safety requirements by the contractor;
                          (c) management of hill cutting and disposal of debris/spoils (includ ing its utilization for various
                          productive uses such as playgrounds, terrace farms, orchards, plantation areas, valley view
                          locations etc.) and; (d) provision of protection measures (such as retaining structures and gabions)
                          to avoid adverse impacts on properties, forests, irrigation channels and potable/other water sources
                          (such as springs). More so, the piloting of bio-engineering techniques for hill slope protection in
                          the state has been successful, benefiting the road assets, road users (through enhanced safety),
                          flora and fauna and residents along the highways (through protection of their properties, farmlands
                          and orchards).

                          Social Issues/Impacts:

                           The Restructuring has no large scale, irreversible and or significant social safeguard issues. The
                           proposed components under Restructuring are all existing in the main project and the present
                           restructuring merely relates to completion of incomplete works. The land acquisition and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Resettlement and Rehabilitation for the project as a whole is complete almost. Out of 131.638
                           hectares, a total of 131.48 hectares of private land has been acquired for the project and
                           disbursement of compensation and R&R assistance has also been complete except for the cases
                           which are under subjudice. Only a small quantity (158 sqm) of land proposed for a junction
                           improvement at chainage 24.750 kms is in the process of acquisition in Package 5. As much as
                           above 99 percent of land acquisition is complete.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            There are no indirect and/or long term impacts envisaged as social issues such as landlessness,
                           loss of livelihood, shelterlessness, road safety and spread of communicable diseases. All the issues
                           haves been adequately addressed under the original project. Likewise, environmental issues such
                           as adverse impacts on hydrology, water sources, forest/biodiversity rich areas due to poor planning
                           and management of construction camps, plant sites and debris/wastes during the construction stage
                           have also been adequately addressed under the original project and therefore no indirect and/or
                           long term impacts are likely to arise due to activities under the proposed additional financing.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            This is not relevant as additional financing is required to achieve the original Project
                           Development Objective, which continues to remain relevant. The proposed additional loan would

                                                                     Page 4 of 8
                          help finance the costs associated with cost overrun, which are significant and need to be provided
                          to meet the original PDO. There would be no changes to the original design and ongoing activities
                          of the Project. The environmental impacts have been/are being by and large addressed through
Public Disclosure Copy




                          implementation of the contract specific Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) and
                          Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) that were prepared for the original project. Alternatives were
                          also considered in the original project to minimize adverse environmental impacts that included re-
                          alignments, changes in cross-sections and various safety measures/options in line with site
                          requirements.

                           All social issues have been adequately addressed under the original project through provision of
                           bypass to avoid displacement, livelihood training, negotiated settlement for land, and other R&R
                           assistances to cushion immediate loss.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             Himachal Pradesh Roads and Other Infrastructure Development Corporation (HPRIDC), the
                           implementing agency for the project has developed capacity to address environment and social
                           issues, as these issues are being increasingly mainstreamed in its regular business processes.

                          Environment Management: An Environment Officer within HPRIDC (corporate level) is
                          responsible for the over-all management of environmental aspects of the project. In addition, a
                          senior forest official deputed to the HPPWD helps HPRIDC’s on the following matters: (a)
                          regulatory clearances, including follow-up with the concerned GoI/GoHP Departments; (b)
                          monitor plantation works including compensatory afforestation activities; and (c) co-ordinate with
                          the Forest Department (including its Wildlife Wing) to ensure proper implementation of proposed
                          biodiversity protection measures. The Horticulture Wing of PWD has been strengthened and
                          mandated under the project to carry out bio-engineering works. In addition to this core team at
                          headquarters, an environment officer and a bio-engineering specialist in the supervision consulting
                          team and an environment and safety officer in the contractor's team manage the day-to -day
Public Disclosure Copy




                          environment (including bio-engineering), health and safety issues in the field. At the PIU level,
                          one engineer has been designated to oversee the functioning of field level environment personnel
                          and co-ordinate with the local administration on various aspects pertaining to EMP
                          implementation. All concerned, including contractors have been provided training on environment
                          management requirements that includes both Bank’s requirement stated in the Operational Policies
                          and regulatory requirements of the GoI/GoHP.

                          The same arrangements for environment management and safeguards will continue for this project
                          also. More so, the HPRIDC headquarters, two divisions of National Highways, three CMU units
                          and the Finance Wing of RIDC have obtained ISO 9001 (Quality Management System) and ISO
                          14001 (Environment Management System) certification, which is currently valid until August
                          2013.

                          Social Safeguards: A retired IAS officer is serving as full time Social Development Officer under
                          the Project Director for internal monitoring and implementation of the RAP. An NGO had assisted
                          the PMU in implementing the RAP. The RAP implementation was also evaluated at the midterm
                          by an independent consultant. The PMU is now in the process of hiring a Consulting Agency for
                          undertaking End Term Impact Evaluation of the RAP implementation. Same arrangements will be
                          followed for this project.



                                                                     Page 5 of 8
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           onA safeguard  policies, with
                               strong participatory      an emphasis
                                                    approach            on potentially
                                                              in the selection,        affectedand
                                                                                                people.
                                                                                implementation     monitoring of project
                           interventions through direct participation of beneficiary communities was adopted in the original
Public Disclosure Copy




                           project. The RAP and the entitlement matrix (developed on the basis of consultations with key
                           stakeholders and affected communities) provides guidance on the over-all consultation strategy
                           and mechanisms to ensure community awareness and involvement in the project, as well as
                           participatory monitoring and evaluation modalities.

                            A stakeholder analysis and extensive consultations with key stakeholders and beneficiary
                           communities were carried during the Environment and Social Impact Assessments. This included
                           consultation with experts and officials on specific issues related to forests, wildlife, horticulture
                           and pollution management. The executive summaries of the environment and social safeguard
                           documents were translated in local language and made public through Bank’s Info shop,
                           HPRIDC’s web site in ddition to disclosure in district public libraries, offices of District Collectors
                           and PIUs.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          29-Dec-2006
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       15-Jan-2007
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive          15-Jan-2007
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          29-Dec-2006
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       15-Jan-2007
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)           Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [     ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice          Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [     ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?




                                                                       Page 6 of 8
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?



                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Mesfin Wodajo Jijo
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                     Date: 12-Apr-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Karla Gonzalez Carvajal (PMGR)              Date: 12-Apr-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 8 of 8
