INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA6878
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Nov-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Nov-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:         Brazil                     Project ID:   P129342
Project Name: Piaui: Pillars of Growth and Social Inclusion Project (P129342)
Task Team        Michael Drabble
Leader(s):
Estimated        22-Oct-2015                Estimated     18-Dec-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GED04                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Secondary education (50%), Health (20%), General agriculture, fishing and
forestry sector (10%), General public administration secto r (10%), General
water, sanitation and flood protection sector (10%)
Theme(s):        Education for all (50%), Public expenditure, financial management and
procurement (10%), Health system performance (20%), Rural poli cies and
institutions (10%), Rural services and infrastructure (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
ci 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
O
Total Project Cost:    1150.33             Total Bank Financing:    120.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                           Amount
Borrower                                                                    1030.33
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        120.00
Total                                                                       1150.33
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The objectives of the project are to: (a) reduce dropout of students in public secondary education; (b)
increase access to diagnosis and treatment for patients with chronic diseases; (c) expand the
Page 1 of 16


﻿registration of groundwater users in rural areas and land tenure regularization; and (d) increase the
participation of poor rural women and Quilombola communities in productive value chains.
3. Project Description
The proposed Investment Project Financing (IPF) complements and leverages policy and institutional
reforms enacted by the GoPi 2012-15 PPA and 2016-19 draft PPA supported by the proposed Piaui
Productive and Social Inclusion Development Policy Loan (DPL, P146981), which has been
strategically prepared in conjunction with the IPF in order to maximize impact in the State's priority
a        sectors and activities. The alignment of the proposed IPF and DPL results chains with the state's
PPA objectives, synergies that served as a basis for the design of the two operations, are described
below in Table 1.
In order to reduce poverty and inequality, the Project would support the Government's efforts for
enhanced productive and social inclusion. The operation targets the State's poorest and most
vulnerable citizens. Through the activities supported by the IPF, rural families will benefit from: (i)
financial incentives to encourage students in state schools to complete secondary education and
participate in extracurricular activities on gender equality; (ii) enhanced health treatment to respond
to chronic diseases, the leading cause of death in Piaui; (iii) better planning and management of
water resources, the scarcity and inefficient use of which have hampered production among
subsistence and small farmers; and, (iv) financial and technical support to improve productivity
through a more adequate and efficient use of natural resources. Furthermore, the Project would
strengthen the results-based monitoring framework and its decentralization in State secretariats in
order to oversee the implementation of strategic programs associated with enhanced productive and
social inclusion. Additionally, the proposed IPF supports the GoPi to mainstream a gender
perspective into its strategic policies, such as income generation programs in rural areas, and to
facilitate the access of poor citizens to grievance redress mechanisms in sectoral agencies whose
actions are key to reduce poverty in Piaui. In this way, the proposed Project supports an integrated
approach of inter-related policies aimed to improve the income and living conditions of the bottom
forty percent of Piaui's population.
0
The Project would have two components, the first of which would provide support for the
implementation of the Eligible Expenditure Programs (EEPs), and the second of which would
provide technical assistance to strengthen the State of Piaui's public management.
Component 1: Implementation of EEPs in public SE, Chronic diseases, WRM, Land management
and rural productive chains (estimated total cost: US$1,135.3 million; Bank: US$105.0 million)
Subcomponent 1.1: Improving retention in public SE (estimated total cost: US$686.8 million; Bank:
US$56.4 million)
Carrying out activities aimed at improving retention in public secondary education through, inter
alia: (a) expanding the Youth Saving Program for public secondary education students in targeted
municipalities; (b) expanding the full-time school model in secondary education; (c) expanding
secondary technical education; (d) expanding distance learning for general secondary education; and
(e) reestablishing a student assessment in the Borrower's public schools.
Subcomponent 1.2: Expanding access to health care for patients with chronic diseases (estimated
total cost: US$289.5 million; Bank: US$27.7 million)
Carrying out activities aimed at expanding access to diagnosis and treatment for patients with chronic
diseases through, inter alia: (a) the setting up and operationalization of five SCCDs; and (b) the
Page 2 of 16


﻿elaboration and enforcement of state protocols and medical regulation.
Subcomponent 1.3: Expanding the registration of groundwater users (estimated total cost: US$55.7
million; Bank: US$7.3 million)
O
Q)        Carrying out activities aimed at implementing the CERH through inter alia: (a) elaborating and
implementing information and communication campaigns for registering groundwater users in the
CERH; and (b) carrying out verification of registration of groundwater users.
Subcomponent 1.4 Strengthening real property rights (estimated total cost: US$58.3 million; Bank:
US$7.7 million)
Carrying out activities aimed at supporting the implementation of the Land Tenure Regulation
Program and strengthening real property rights through, inter alia: (a) strengthening and modernizing
INTERPI; (b) carrying out the identification, demarcation and registration of state land; (c) carrying
out the Land Tenure Regularization Program of land reform settlements; (d) carrying out the Land
Tenure Regularization Program of Quilombola territories; and (e) supporting the operationalization
of the Land Tenure Regularization Center.
Subcomponent 1.5 Strengthening participation of poor women and Quilombola communities in rural
productive chains (estimated total cost: US$45.0 million; Bank: US$5.9 million)
Carrying out activities aimed at increasing the participation of poor rural women and Quilombola
communities in productive value chains by: (a) financing Productive Investment Plans; and (b)
building capacity on technical and managerial assistance, as well as on institutional organization and
logistics.
Component 2: Provision of technical assistance to strengthen the Borrower's public management
(estimated total cost: US$15.0 million; Bank: US$15.0 million).
Subcomponent 2.1: Modernize expenditure and investment management in the public sector
(estimated total Bank cost: US$3.3 million)
Provision of technical assistance to modernize expenditure and investment management practices in
the public sector, including, inter alia: (a) the strengthening of the process of planning, monitoring
and evaluation of investment projects in a single results-based system; (b) the carrying out of a study
on the Borrower's public expenditure and financial accountability and the strengthening of the
Borrower's capacity to implement streamlined financial management processes and an accrual
o        accounting system in line with national accounting norms and International Public Accounting
Standards; (c) the provision of training on the adoption of standards of the International Organization
of Supreme Audit Institutions; (d) the modernization of the Borrower's procedures and processes to
carry internal audit; (e) the designing and implementation of the Borrower's new procurement
information and contract management system; and (f) Project management, including the hiring of
key project staff, the Independent Verification Agency and Operating Costs.
Subcomponent 2.2: Build state capacity for WRM, land management and rural development
(estimated total Bank cost: US$8.6 million)
Provision of technical assistance to strengthen the Borrower's capacity to carry out the water
resources cadaster, land tenure regularization and rural development including, inter alia: (a) the
operationalization and maintenance of the CGEO; (b) the piloting of an integrated real estate
registration system for notaries; and (c) the establishment of a computerized monitoring, information
and management system for PROGERE II.
Subcomponent 2.3 Generate evidence to support policy-making and practice in education, health,
Page 3 of 16


﻿gender and citizen engagement (estimated total Bank cost: US$3.1 million)
Provision of technical assistance to generate evidence supporting policy-making in education, health,
gender and citizen engagement including, inter alia: (a) carrying out of an impact evaluation and
studies of secondary education; (b) elaborating a State Health Regulation Plan and carrying out an
O
)         impact evaluation and studies on Neglected Diseases; (c) carrying out of studies on gender in the
Borrower's territory; and (d) capacity building for the Borrower's Ombudsman Office.
O
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Overall the Project is expected to have a positive social impact and pro-poor effects, particularly in
the state's rural areas. Levels of poverty and extreme poverty remain very high in Piaui; 21.3 percent
of the 3.18 million inhabitants live in extreme poverty. Piaui also faces high levels of inequality.
Income distribution remains highly unequal: the 20 percent poorest live with a monthly per capita
income of R$ 85.70, while the 20 percent richest have a monthly per capita income of R$ 1.349,37.
Piaui's Gini coefficient was 0.57 in 2012, which is above the national coefficient of 0.53 and the
second highest among Brazilian states. This situation is exacerbated in rural areas, where 54 percent
of residents are considered poor and 40 percent live in extreme poverty. In urban areas, the share of
the population living with earnings smaller than one and smaller than three minimum wages are 17.8
and 64.7 percent, respectively; whereas in rural areas, they equal 39.2 and 87.7 percent. The average
per capita household monthly income of the rural population is just 47 percent of the state average
and 38 percent of the same average among the urban population. The bottom quarter of the rural
population lives with average per capita household monthly incomes that are only 32 percent of their
urban counterparts.
Rural poverty is directly related with poor family farmers, especially in the semi-arid regions, who
derive their income mostly from subsistence, small-scale and rain-fed agriculture characterized by
rudimentary techniques (such as slash-and-burn agriculture) and low productivity. Land
concentration and lack of tenure regularization contribute importantly to rural poverty in Piaui. Land
distribution in Piaui is highly unequal, with the Gini coefficient in excess of 0.85 and increasing.
Family farms comprise 90.0 percent of the rural landholdings in the state, but holds just 39.5 percent
of the agricultural areas. The average area of family farming landholdings equal 17.0 hectares,
whereas the average area of non-family farming landholdings equals 233.2 hectares. A share of 60.7
percent of the landholdings in the state has an area smaller than 10 hectares and they hold only 3.1%
of the total agricultural area. Meanwhile, a proportion of 0.5 percent of the landholdings has more
than 1,000 hectares and hold 35.1 percent of the total agricultural land.
The small-scale agriculture often takes place in non-titled land areas and relies on outdated
techniques and the high incidence of uncertainty and conflicts in land affect the most the security and
the livelihood of the vulnerable. In spite of the progress made in the past 10 years, land titles are still
insecure in Piaui. In 2006, only 53 percent of the family farmers and 62 percent of the non-family
farmers held secure land titles and the lack of land title has significant socioeconomic implications.
Land tenure insecurity is especially harsh for poor communities living in public lands (including
Quilombola settlements and smallholders engaged in subsistence family agriculture), because their
livelihoods continue to be heavily reliant on the lands which they are at risk of losing if their
occupation is not regularized.
It is estimated that there may be nearly 200 traditional Afro-descendent communities in the state of
Piaui. They may comprise more than 10,000 families, who traditionally occupy an area of
approximately 670,000 hectares. Nevertheless, the overlap with other land categories is not clear and
Page 4 of 16


﻿there are just five quilombola communities already been regularized. They occupy an area of 21,215
hectares (0.1 percent of the state territory). Prioritized quilombola communities are the most
vulnerable group among the rural poor.
O
Q)        Poverty is also strongly related to water scarcity, which increases the vulnerability of poor rural
families - particularly those living in the drought prone areas of the semi-arid region - to extreme
climate events and has led to an increasing of conflicts over water uses due to the lack of clear
regulation and allocation of water rights.
Poverty hits harder women rural producers, who are taking an increasing productive role in rural
areas, but remain constrained to unpaid work or low profitable sectors and activities in spite of a
reversed gender gap in education attainments. Gender gaps in income remain high; gender-based
violence is on the rise; and the state lacked till recently the institutional governance framework
needed to promote gender-smart policies, foster women s empowerment and agency and overcome
gender imbalances.
Combining investments for productive inclusion, sustainable agriculture, and efficient allocation of
natural resources, and secure land tenure, the Project will likely contribute to a reduction in poverty
and an increase in the adaptive capacity of poor small farms to deal with climate variability and
extreme climate events because it will promote livelihood diversification, enable the adoption of new
technologies and increase access to credit and financing lines, technical assistance for subsistence
family farmers. A priority focus on women s productive inclusion and rights may also contribute to
gender equity. Finally, the activities to be supported in the education and health sectors are targeted
to ensure that the primary beneficiaries are the poor.
Water scarcity and long drought periods are among the major hurdles for the Piaui State's population
welfare improvement. Piaui is located in the Brazilian Northeast region, known by se vere drought
periods. Rainfall in the State is complex, varying from 2,000 mm to less than 500 mm in some spots.
In most parts ofthe State, the annual precipitation is smaller than 1,000 mm, and potential
evaporation by far exceeds precipitation. The rainy season lasts four months, from February to May,
but has considerable year-to-year and decade-to-decade variability.
The Parnaiba Watershed, second largest in the NE region, drains most of the State. This watershed is
a         sub-divided, for administrative purposes, in twelve sub-basins, with distinct characteristics. The
drainages located in the central and east portion of the State are commonly intermittent, due to the
semi-arid climate and hydrogeology conditions. Some sub-basins, such as the Gurgu6ia, have more
water resources, attracting occupation and economic activities. The State has high potential aquifers
located in the Parnaiba Sedimentary Basin, with water resources estimated in 4.500hm3 . However,
underground water use is still limited.
Piaui has distinct physiographical characteristics. The southwest region has characteristics similar to
the Brazilian Central Plateau, with the Cerrado Biome occurrence. The south and central regions
have the semi-arid climate, and the Caatinga Biome. The coastal region, north, also has distinct
characteristics, with wet lands and coastal vegetation. Atlantic Forest vegetation also occurs in
localized spots.
The Cerrado, (the Brazilian savanna), is a strategic biome due economic and environmental reasons,
and, also, for food security. Notwithstanding its ecological and socio-economic importance, the
Cerrado has suffered a rapid alteration in the last three decades due to human occupation. There has
Page 5 of 16


﻿been growing pressure to open up new lands for increasing meat and grain production for exports.
Currently, the Cerrado is responsible for over one half of Brazil's soybean production. Estimates
indicate that deforestation in the Cerrado biome is proportionally more severe than that of the
Amazon biome. Between 2002 and 2008, Amazon deforestation represented 3.2 percent of the
O
U         biome, with 82 percent of the original forested area remaining. Over the same period, the Cerrado
biome lost 4.1 percent of its cover and only 52 percent of the area covered by native vegetation
remains. The Cerrado in Piaui, southeast region, is considered the Country last "agriculture frontier,"
and is facing serious threats. The rapid expansion of agriculture in the region has caused natural
vegetation to be converted to alternative land uses, especially large soybean plantations.
The other major Biome in Piaui is the Caatinga, one of the richest dry forests in the world. It
encompasses the drier part of northeastern Brazil, and has very complex transition zones with
Cerrado, Atlantic forest and Amazon, which have allowed a considerable biotic interchange among
these regions during the evolutionary time. The Caatinga is the dominant vegetation in Piaui, which
has several distinctive types of Caatinga vegetation. The Catinga covers most of the State south and
central areas, which have been occupied for centuries. A large portion of the Caatinga has been
altered for agriculture development, goat and cattle grazing. Intense erosion and desertification has
been identified in the State central portion.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (GSURR)
Ernesto Sanchez-Triana (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The Project was classified as Category B, given the nature
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                and scale of the investments. It encompasses an eligible
expenditure program focused on the health, education and
rural development sectors, involving technical assistance
and institutional strengthening of the State public
administration. The Project does not include any activity
with potential to generate significant environmental
impacts, and the expected environmental impacts are
limited in scope, localized, and temporary.
The environmental assessment concluded that the Project
is expected to have an overall positive impact on the
environment as it seeks to promote land tenure
regularization. Additionally, supported rural development
activities are limited to small scale and low impact
activities, promoting the dissemination of
environmentally sustainable practices. The project may
include small civil works to adapt, expand or build small
health clinics. The environmental impacts of these works
are also small and localized, and are expected to occur in
land currently owned and occupied by the health agencies,
inside urban areas.
The client prepared an Environmental and Social
Page 6 of 16


﻿Management Framework (ESMF), including an
environmental and social impacts assessment, a
resettlement policy framework, and a simplified pest
management plan, to provide guidance on potential issues
that could arise during Project implementation. The
ESMF scope was defined with the Bank Safeguards
specialists' support, and includes mitigation measures, to
avoid potential social conflict that could result from
project activities. The ESMF comprises an environmental
management plan for land regularization, income
generation activities and health clinics development, and
an analysis of economic or social impact that the project
activities might have on vulnerable groups, traditional
communities or poor rural communities. The ESMF also
includes guidance for the construction works, addressing
construction sites management criteria, waste disposal
measures, and overall supervision and oversight
measures. Additionally, the client prepared a health waste
management plan for the clinics future operation, and a
specific environmental management plan for the rural
productive chains, Progere II.
The ESMF Report was disclosed and distributed through
the SEPLAN-PI website, for consultation with key
stakeholders in June 2014. The referred ESMF report was
submitted to the Bank shortly after that. The ESMF was
updated in August 2015 to include provisions related to
two additional production chains to be supported by
Progere II, manioc farming and manioc flour production,
and backyard horticulture. The two new production chains
do not trigger additional environmental safeguards and do
not change the project category. The Updated Report was
disclosed for consultation and submitted to the Bank.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes          Overall, the Project may generate positive impacts on
4.04                                 natural habitats and protected areas. The land
regularization program will promote the preservation of
the permanent protection areas and legal reserves, as the
restoration of degraded areas in private properties. OP
4.04 was triggered and the ESMF included criteria and
management procedures to avoid potential impacts on
sensitive biodiversity areas and protected areas. The
ESMF also has specific procedures for the land
regularization program, aiming to improve the
preservation of natural corridors, fragile ecosystems and
areas with relevant biodiversity. Additionally, Progere II
Environmental Management Plan has specific guidelines,
looking to mitigate negative impacts on natural habitats.
Page 7 of 16


﻿Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes           The Project does not support any activity that may cause
negative impacts on the health and quality of forests.
Therefore, OP 4.36 - Forests - was triggered on a
precautious basis, considering the potential induced
impacts of the land regularization activities.Actually, the
Project will contribute to the conservation and restoration
of the Cerrado and Caatinga biomes, avoiding
deforestation of natural vegetation in parts of private rural
holdings (all land on steep slopes, along watercourses (up
to a given distance from the margin) or in the vicinity of
springs, protecting environmental services and values of
natural vegetation. The ESMF considers the requirements
of OP/BP 4.36 whenever restoration and plantation
activities are being planned. According to the new Forest
Code, landholders have to request previous authorization
from the State Environmental Agencies to use fire, where
this practice is a part of agroforestry and forestry
production system. Additionally, the Forest Code states
that indigenous people and traditional communities do not
have to request authorization to use fire as agriculture
practice. It also determines that Federal, State and
Municipal Governments need to prepare and keep updated
contingency plans to combat forest fires, whereas the
Federal Government needs to develop the National Fire
Management Policy, which includes the use of burning as
well as combat and prevention of forest fires. The
proposed Project will assist prevention activities,
promotes training and capacity buildings activities and
focus on wild fire prevention in the Cerrado biome on
private landholdings.
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes            The project will not support the purchase or increased use
of pesticides and other agricultural chemicals as defined
under this Policy, however, some of the agricultural
activities selected for project support may make use of
these substances. The ESMF adopted checklists for
screening sub-projects/activities and negative lists for
exclusion activities with potentially high negative
impacts. Additionally, the ESMF also included a
simplified Pest Management Plan addressing the specific
environmental impacts and health & safety aspects of the
production activities supported by PROGERE II,
specifically cashew plantation, manioc farming and
horticulture. The Plan provides guidance for reducing the
environmental impact of using pesticides according to the
principles of OP 4.09, and recommends the adoption of
integrated pest management and agro-ecological practices
where possible. The theme was, further, detailed in the
Page 8 of 16


﻿Progere II Environmental Management Plan.
Physical Cultural        Yes          The Project will not support land regularization or any
Resources OP/BP 4.11                  other type of activity in areas with known physical
cultural resources, but the Op 4.11 was triggered on a
precautious basis, due to the fact that Piaui has relevant
archeological sites, such as the National Park Serra da
Capivara and the National Park Serra da Confusdo. The
ESMF has checklists for screening sub-projects/activities
and negative lists for excluding activities and land
regularization, in areas with physical cultural resources
(mainly archeological sites) occurrence. Additionally, the
ESMF has procedures for screening any known cultural
property in the Project area and incorporate 'chance find'
procedures in the event that culturally significant
resources are discovered during the Project
implementation. The 'chance find' procedures were
defined in accordance with IPHAN and the Bank
requirements.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No            OP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples is not triggered for this
BP 4.10                               project. There are no indigenous peoples in the project
area. In the state of Piaui, there are three social groups
that are currently claiming recognition of their indigenous
identity, but they do not fulfill the four criteria set by OP
4.10 to identify indigenous peoples: (a) despite self-
identification as members of a distinct cultural group, they
have not been recognized by others as indigenous
peoples; (b) they hold no collective attachment to
geographically distinct habitats or ancestral territories in
the project area or to the natural resources in these
habitats and territories; (c) they do not hold customary
cultural, economic, social, or political institutions that are
separate from those of the dominant society and culture;
and (d) they do not keep an indigenous language different
from the official language of the country or region.
Although these three groups face high degrees of
vulnerability, they do not differ from other poor rural
communities in the state in accessing public programs and
do not require a distinct treatment for the purpose of
social inclusion.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes          OP 4.12 is triggered in a precautionary mode because
OP/BP 4.12                            activities supported by the project under Subcomponent
1.3 (Expanding land regularization for small farmers and
quilombola communities) and, particularly those
associated with regularization of Quilombola lands may
lead to adverse impacts related with the involuntary
resettlement of dwellers who do not identify themselves
Page 9 of 16


﻿as Quilombolas. Although these situations are expected to
be minor, the client has prepared an Involuntary
Resettlement Framework, aligned with both the relevant
State and Federal Legislation and the World Bank
Operational Policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP
4.12).
OP 4.12 does not apply to activities such as those
proposed under Sub-component 1.5 (Expanding the
registration and allocation of water resources), because it
"does not apply to regulations of natural resources on a
national or regional level to promote their sustainability,
such as watershed management, groundwater
management, fisheries management, etc" (OP 4.12,
footnote #8). This exemption holds, for example, when
the program imposes restrictions on the use of natural
resources, such as limitations on pumping from aquifers.
Although some activities under Sub-component 1.4
(Strengthening rural productive chains to increase income
of poor farmers) may require land acquisition, these areas
will be acquired through voluntary land donation and but
this type of transaction in itself also does not require the
triggering of the Policy. The ESMF and RPF define the
criteria for ensuring and documenting voluntary land
donations, including the evidences that the supported
activities could technically be implemented in another
location and the donators were aware they do not need to
donate the land and freely agreed to donate the land for
the community sub-project without compensation.
Finally, the land areas required for implementing and
making operational five specialized centers for chronic
diseases, under Sub-component 1.2 (Expanding access to
healthcare for patients with chronic diseases) have been
previously identified, assessed with regards to land tenure
rights and this screening exercise concluded that they (i)
are stately owned and (ii) free of occupants. The ESMF/
RPF bring the list of areas selected for building these
health facilities, their localization and land tenure status.
Safety of Dams OP/BP     No           This policy is not triggered since the project will not
4.37                                  finance any dams nor will it rely on the operations of
existing dams.
Projects on International  No          This policy is not triggered since the project will not
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   affect any international waterways as defined under the
policy.
Projects in Disputed     No            This policy is not triggered as the project will not work in
Areas OP/BP 7.60                       any disputed areas as defined under the policy.
Page 10 of 16


﻿II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
)           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The ESMF concluded that only subcomponents 1.2: Expanding access to healthcare for patients
O
with chronic diseases, .3: Expanding land regularization for small farmers and Quilombola
communities, and 1.4 Strengthening rural productive chains to increase income of poor might
*           generate environmental impacts. The project does not entail any potential large scale and/or
significant irreversible negative impacts, and the only identified potential negative environmental
impacts are due to the construction of small clinics, and the small-scale income generation
activities, such as cashew plantation and manioc farming. However, the environmental benefits of
the land tenure regularization, would greatly surpass such negative impacts.
The expected environmental benefits from land regularization are significant. The regularization
process takes into account diverse environmental requirements defined by the new Forest Code.
Legal reserves in Piaui encompass 30% for the properties in the Cerrado Biome and 20% in the
Caatinga Biome, and their definite location must take into consideration regional environmental
aspects. The land regularization environmental management framework includes procedures that
can generate cumulative positive impacts to preservation of natural corridors, fragile ecosystems
and areas with relevant biodiversity. Land titles are key for deforestation control, allowing the
demarcation of legal reserves and permanent protection areas, as enabling the identification of the
persons accountable for illegal deforestation activities.
The alternative to land regularization is a "no action" scenario, with continuity of the current
situation. At this time, protected areas within private properties are not recognized, neither
managed, properly, by land occupants. Additionally, the "no action scenario" favors the increasing
degradation of important Biomes, such as the Cerrado.
O
)           Eligible activities for the Sub-component 1.4 Strengthening rural productive chains to increase
income of poor farmers is limited to six production chains: cashew plantation, bee-keeping, goat
raising, fruit processing and small handicraft production, manioc farming and manioc flour
production, and backyard horticulture, all in small scale operations and with minimum
environmental impacts. The ESMF uses checklists for screening investment proposals and
negative lists for excluding activities with potentially high negative impacts. The GovPi prepared a
specific environmental management plan for this sub-component, which details the Progere II
environmental procedures.
Environmental impacts associated with the subcomponent 1.2: Expanding access to healthcare for
patients with chronic diseases are restricted to the construction and operation of five small clinics.
The clinics will be constructed in urban areas, with minimum or negligible marginal impacts due
construction. The Client prepared a Health Waste Management Plans (PGRSS) for the clinics,
addressing health waste handling and disposal, in accordance with the Brazilian Sanitary and
Environmental regulations.
The ESMF and the RPF also concluded that only Sub-Component 1.3: Expanding land
regularization for small farmers and quilombola communities might generate social impacts
related with involuntary physical displacement of populations. People living within Quilombola
Page 11 of 16


﻿territories may not identify themselves as Quilombolas and may not want their landholdings be
included in the collective land title conferred to the Quilombola community. As this situation
might represent a source of potential social conflict, Brazilian and state legislation on Quilombola
land regularization ensures that: (i) these people have full opportunity to assert their rights over the
O
lands they hold within the claimed Quilombola Territory; (ii) private property can be separated
from Quilombola communal land if agreed upon with the community; (iii) full compensation for
privately owned land and facilities when there is no such agreement with the community, with a
preference to land for land compensation in the situations involving small landholders
(Presidential Decree 4887, November 20, 2003, and Piaui State Law 5995, August 1st, 2006).
Additionally, potential social conflicts due to activities for Quilombola land regularization in this
Project are less plausible because the Project will only regularize the claims of Quilombola
communities settled in publicly owned areas.
Positive social impacts have been associated with the different Components and subcomponents.
Land regularization might (i) increase land tenure security for small landholders, traditional
communities and poor and socially vulnerable rural populations, (ii) reduce land conflicts due to
the superimposition of claims and fraudulent land titles, and (iii) expand the market opportunities
for their produce. Sustainable Production Practices might also contribute to strengthen family
farming and production chains by overcoming barriers to access to technical assistance and to
introduce new technologies, leading to income generation and contributing to poverty reduction.
These impacts on family farming might also contribute to gender equity because (a) land titles will
be issued in name of the family s male and female household heads, (b) most of the prioritized
production chains intensively engage women groups, and (c) women groups will be a priority
target of these interventions. Activities in the education sector might contribute to retain young
people (male and female) in secondary schools and to improve their skills and qualification for
accessing the formal job market. Given the strong association between low educational
attainments and poverty in Brazil, these activities focused on the public education system and on
municipalities with high poverty levels might also have a pro-poor impact. Positive social impacts
are also expected from activities envisaged on the health sector as they will mostly address the
neglected diseases which are deeply associated with poverty.
Eventually, the ESMF concluded that activities envisaged under Subcomponent 1.5 Expanding the
registration and allocation of water resources might not generate negative environmental and
a           social impacts insofar as water users register and better allocation of water resources will be
preceded by outreach, information and awareness raising campaigns engaging multiple
stakeholders. Additionally, these activities might have pro-poor effects because they might
contribute to reduce inefficient water use by large producers as well as to increase access to water
rights by subsistence and small producers leading to increases in their productivity, incomes and
coping capacity to deal with water scarcity.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The ESMF did not identify any potential indirect and/or long-term impacts due to anticipated
future activities in the project area.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The ESMF did not identify Project implementation alternatives that could avoid or minimize
negative impacts.
Page 12 of 16


﻿4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) - including a social impact
assessment - and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been prepared by the client in
compliance with the World Bank's Operational Policies triggered by this operation.
O
The State of Piaui has some experience with Bank Safeguards and has at its disposal the gamut of
state environmental agencies to analyze, monitor and supervise environmental safeguards. The
team assessed the Client's institutional capacity to implement the Safeguard policies, concluding
that institutional arrangements and technical assistance is necessary. The Project involves several
State Secretariats and agencies, but the ESMF implementation will be done, mainly, by three
entities: SEMAR, INTERPI and SDR, and do not require complex institutional provisions. The
RPF implementation will be done only by INTERPI, which has proven capacity to implement land
regularization of Quilombola Territories located in state owned areas. In the last years this
institution has regularized five Quilombola Territories (benefiting 534 families) and the Project
aims the regularization of six new areas.
SDR has a long experience with Rural Poverty Projects (PCPRs) funded by the Bank, and do not
need major adjustments to comply with Safeguards policies. The ESMF recommended hiring two
environmental experts, to support the existing staff.
During the Project preparation, the GovPi issued a Decree integrating the processes of INTERPI
and SEMAR, and establishing the State Geo-processing Laboratory (CGEO), with the goal of
offering high quality cartographic and land use information, to support the environmental and
land regularization programs. The technical assistance component will support the Client on staff
training, as the purchase of equipment, software and satellite images, for the CGEO
implementation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders include: principals, teachers and students of state public schools; health
workers and users of public health services; family and small-scale farmers, and rural labor
unions; Quilombola communities and statewide Quilombola organizations; municipal authorities
and staff of state and federal agencies.
Stakeholders have broadly supported the activities included in the Project. Some of them
expressed concerns about the ability of the state - due to weak institutional capacity - to
implement the activities and achieve the expected results on the Project s timeframe. The strong
and broad technical assistance component was devised to include the activities needed to
strengthen the state s institutional capacities. An Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) - including a social impact assessment - and a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) have been prepared by the client in compliance with the World Bank's
Operational Policies triggered by this operation. The ESMF and the RPF were available for public
consultation in the website of the Government of Piaui from June 13 to July 15, 2014.
A public consultation meeting was held in Teresina at June 24, 2014, focusing on the potential
environmental and social impacts and the mitigation measures identified and proposed for the
Project. The meeting was widely advertised and more than one hundred people and institutions
have received invitation letters. Forty people - representing state agencies, municipalities, civil
society organizations, scholars, producers groups and public servants - have taken part on this
Page 13 of 16


﻿meeting. Minutes and photographic registers of the meeting have been prepared.
Inputs provided through the website and in presence consultation processes have been
incorporated to the ESMF and the RPF as appropriate.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              22-Oct-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           03-Nov-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Brazil                                                   03-Nov-2015
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              22-Oct-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           23-Oct-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Brazil                                                   23-Oct-2015
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                              13-Jun-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           19-Jun-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Brazil                                                   19-Jun-2014
O
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
O
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes[  ] No[X]   NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
Page 14 of 16


﻿If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]   NA [  ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Is a separate PMP required?                             Yes[   ] No[X]       NA[    ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a     Yes [  ] No [    ]   NA [   ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?           Yes [  ] No [X]     TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [  ] No [X]  TBD [  ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
O
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [ X] No [  ]   NA [   ]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, Yes [ ] No [X] NA [ ]
does it include provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Page 15 of 16


﻿Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes[X]  No[     NA
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes[X]  No[   NA
o          in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]  No[       NA[
0          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[      NA[
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Michael Drabble
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)              Date: 05-Nov-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Reema Nayar (PMGR)                   Date: 05-Nov-2015
Manager:
Page 16 of 16


