                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC16955

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Chad                           Project ID:      P159189
                            Project Name:        Data Production and Capacity Building in Chad
                            Team Leader(s):      Kristen Himelein
                            Estimated Date       01-Jul-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GPV01                          Lending          Lending Instrument
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (20%), Public
                                                 administration- Education (20%), Public administration- Health (20%), Public
                                                 administration- Other social services (20%), Public administration- Water,
                                                 sanitation and flood protection (20%)
                            Theme(s):            Economic statistics, modeling and forecasting (5%), Poverty strategy, analysis
                                                 and monitoring (80%), Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction
                                                 (5%), Gender (5%), Climate change (5%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost: 4                              Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      2.5
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building                                                 1.5
                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The overall development objective of this project is to support the Government of Chad in improving
                           the availability and quality of poverty and other socioeconomic data to inform policy monitoring and
                           planning through the implementation of a new consumption-based household survey in 2017, and
                           associated capacity building activities.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project includes the following activities, all of which will be conducted by INSEED as part of
                           the survey implementation. These activities will take place in the context of the WAEMU project,
                           with harmonization across the countries. Substantial technical assistance from the World Bank will
                           be provided through a series of regional workshops for technical staff and meetings for the Directors
                           General. Though subject to finalization, the start date planned for the survey is February 2017.
                         Questionnaire Revision – Analysis of the 2011 Enquête sur la consommation et le secteur informel
                         au Tchad (ECOSIT) showed a number of short-comings in the instrument design. These issues will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         be addressed by moving to the best practice methodology developed as part of the WAEMU project.
                         As this will represent a substantial departure from the previous ECOSIT methodology, either survey-
                         to-survey imputation or other similar econometric technique will be necessary to have a comparable
                         national poverty series in addition to comparability between WAEMU countries. For the 2017
                         survey, the pilot questionnaire was developed as part of a regional workshop in Ouagadougou in
                         December 2015, which included participants from INSEED, and will be pilot tested in March or
                         April 2016. A week-long national questionnaire review workshop for major government
                         stakeholders took place from February 24 to 29, 2016. The main decision from that meeting was,
                         aside from small modifications to the wording and answer choices to match the Chadian context, no
                         major modifications are envisioned for the questionnaire. Supplementary topics that had been
                         proposed included climate change and insecurity, but though it is agreed that issues are important,
                         the current questionnaire is already long. To avoid overburdening respondents, these topics will be
                         covered by later data collection efforts.

                         Sample Selection – Sample design is particularly challenging as Chad currently has 25 level-1
                         administrative divisions, which would in most cases necessitate a sample of over 10,000 households.
                         An informed sample design will be based on variance and clustering information from household
                         consumption variable in the 2011 ECOSIT to produce the most efficient sample design possible at
                         the national level while still maintaining representative estimates at the regional level. Cluster size,
                         which was 21 in the previous round, will be substantially reduced, to the WAEMU guideline of
                         approximately 12 households per cluster, and cluster selection will use the current estimated cluster
                         sizes from the 2009 census. The sample design process will take place at a regional workshop in
                         Dakar with the WAEMU participants during the week of March 28, 2016.

                         Fieldwork – Fieldwork will be conducted over approximately a 2-month period during a period
                         similar to the other WAEMU countries. This is a longer period than the previous ECOSIT, which
Public Disclosure Copy




                         collected data in less than one month, necessitating large numbers of enumerators and supervisors.
                         The longer fieldwork calendar will allow for higher standards in hiring and a longer, more
                         centralized, training process.

                         Data Capture – Questionnaire administrative and data capture will be done simultaneously using
                         Computer Assisted Personal Interviewing (CAPI) with Survey Solutions software. CAPI
                         questionnaire administration integrates data checking into the interview process, allowing outlier
                         values to be confirmed while the interviewer is still within the household. This reduces the amount
                         of cleaning that will be necessary and speeds the pace at which results can be made available.

                         Weight Calculations – The weights will be calculated using the probabilities generated by the sample
                         design, cluster-level non-response, and post-stratification using the current estimated population
                         totals based on the 2009 census.

                         Production of a Statistical Abstract – The project, along with the companion World Bank technical
                         assistance project and in conjunction with the WAEMU countries, will ensure the timely production
                         of updated poverty numbers, and tables of major correlates of poverty.

                         Dissemination – In addition to printed copies of the statistical abstract, the data will be properly
                           archived and anonymized datasets will be released publicly within 12 months of the completion of
                           data collection through the INSEED website or other appropriate data sharing platform.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis (if known)


                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09            No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Projects on International          No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP   No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                              Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):           Name: Kristen Himelein
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:       Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                     Date: 07-Mar-2016
                           Practice Manager/         Name: Pablo Fajnzylber (PMGR)                      Date: 07-Mar-2016
                           Manager:
                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                         affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
