INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA13478
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Sep-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Sep-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Afghanistan                Project ID:  P145347
Project Name: Trans-Hindukush Road Connectivity Project (P145347)
Task Team       Andreas Schliessler,Luquan Tian
Leader(s):
Estimated       10-Sep-2015                Estimated    20-Oct-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIO6                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (85%), Telecommunications (10%),
Public administration- Transportation (5%)
Theme(s):       Regional integration (80%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:    255.00             Total Bank Financing:  250.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          5.00
IDA Grant                                                                 250.00
Total                                                                     255.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project development objective is improved road transport connectivity across the Hindukush
mountain range.
3. Project Description
The proposed project would achieve the Project Development Objective through the implementation
Page 1 of 10


﻿of the two project components described below. The total project cost is estimated at US$250
million.
Component 1: Road construction and rehabilitation (US$240 million). Component 1 will include (i)
civil works for the construction of the Baghlan to Bamiyan road and for the rehabilitation of the
Salang pass road, (ii) consulting services, for the supervision of works for the same roads and for
regular technical audits by an independent international auditor to verify that road works have been
executed in compliance with the technical specifications, and (iii) goods, which will include a small
number of equipment items which MPW may need to keep the two roads open during construction.
The MPW already commissioned and received detailed feasibility and design studies for the two
roads, which the World Bank team reviewed and which will be further refined during project
preparation. Design of the highway includes all the road safety features typically applied under
international good practice. The finalized technical design of the Baghlan to Bamiyan road will
include ducts for fiber optic cables. The new cable along this road will therefore also become part of
the "data highway" for Afghanistan and provide a backup loop for the existing trans-Hindukush cable
along the Salang highway. It is estimated that within the total cost of Component, about US$ 170
million will be spent on the Baghlan to Bamiyan road, US$ 55 million will be spent on the Salang
highway and tunnel, while the remainder of US$ 15 million will be spent on goods and services
benefitting both roads.
Component 2: Institutional support and project management (US$ 10 million). This component will
be comprised of several subcomponents:
a)      Road Safety. This will include a review of the existing design for the two roads with the
specific purpose of detecting and remedying any potential design deficiencies in terms of road safety.
This activity will be combined with practical training of engineers at the MPWH on road safety
issues.
b)     Definition of asset management arrangements for the trans-Hindukush roads. This
subcomponent will include activities to define the most appropriate arrangements for the effective
and efficient management, operation and maintenance of the newly upgraded roads, after their
completion. This will include a study on the feasibility of introducing tolling and outsourcing the
management of the roads to the private sector. The objective is to avoid a repetition of the cycle of
a        quick road deterioration observed in the past due to the lack of enforcement of axle load limits,
inadequate management and maintenance, the excessive use of snow chains, and the absence of
incentives for good management. The Bank team will work with IFC to develop an appropriate
solution involving the private sector. The setup for the management of the trans-Hindukush roads
will be also developed with the added objective of generating social benefits for the communities
living along the road, such as the use of small and medium-sized local firms whenever this is
possible and efficient.
c)     Information and communications campaign. This will include the design and execution of
MPW's information and communications campaign for the purpose of building public and
stakeholder support for upgrading of the two roads. This is especially important because the
construction works will occasionally cause disruptions of the normal traffic patterns. The
communications/outreach campaign is expected to include ICT-based citizen feedback mechanisms
(including a Grievance Redress Mechanism) and will also promote road safety awareness among
road users.
Page 2 of 10


﻿d)     Training and capacity building. This subcomponent will include resources to fund various
types of training and capacity building for staff of the MPW.
e)     Project management support, including the cost of the Project Management Unit (PMU)
U         operation.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
O
analysis (if known)
The project will undertake physical works on two separate roads:
- On the Salang highway (87 km length) which is located between Charikar and Pol-e-Khomri in the
northern region of Afghanistan. Civil works will be limited to repairs, rehabilitation and
maintenance, located entirely within the existing right-of-way of the road, with NO widening which
would affect slopes or would require land acquisition or resettlement.
- On the Baghlan to Bamiyan road (152 km), works will upgrade the existing road to paved standard.
The works will essentially take place within the existing right-of-way of the road, but widening will
be needed at many locations, requiring limited land acquisition and resettlement.
Both roads pass through heavily mountainous terrain typical for much of Northern Afghanistan. It is
characterized by steep slopes and undulating hills that are mostly unprotected as there is very little
vegetative cover on most of these slopes. During the winter months, the slopes are covered with
snow as the mean elevation is about 2500 m above sea level, with the highest point at 3,400 m.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Asta Olesen (GSURR)
James Orehmie Monday (GENDR)
Mohammad Yasin Noori (GSURR)
Obaidullah Hidayat (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental          Yes         The proposed project is classified as Category A. The
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               mountainous terrain through which the B2B corridor
0
passes will pose significant challenges due to soil erosion
and sediment transportation concerns, risks of slides from
potentially unstable slopes, storm water drainage
concerns, and management of significantly large volumes
of spoil. Additional risks include road safety concerns
and difficulty with managing offsite construction sites
such as borrow pits, aggregate crushing plants and
workers camps in difficult mountainous areas. These
concerns, if not properly addressed, would have
significant environmental impacts that could be
irreversible. Therefore, consistent with OP4.01, this
project has been assigned an EA Category A. However,
no protected areas or forest reserves are traversed by the
civil works planned under this project.
A thorough EIA was carried out in 2011 by USAID and
SIDA which found that potential adverse environmental
Page 3 of 10


﻿impacts on human populations or environmentally
important areas are very limited and site specific.
The MPW prepared an Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIA) for Segment 1 of the B2B road
upgrading the 2011 EIA with relevant new project
information. The ESIA for Segment 1 includes a
corresponding site specific Environmental and Social
Management Plan (ESMP).
Additionally, the MPW has also prepared an
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) to guide preparation of the required documents
for the remaining segments of B2B and for the Salang
Highway.
Appropriate measures to ensure occupational health and
safety to workers and safety of the general public will be
included in all contracts for civil works.
Consultations were held during the preparation of the
ESIA for Segment 1 and for the ESMF. The said ESIA
was disclosed locally on June 7, 2015 and the ESMF was
also disclosed locally on June 1, 2015.
The updated ESIA and ESMF has been translated into
Pashtun and Dari are now being locally disclosed in the
project area.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          No known natural habitats in project area.
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          No forests in project area.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          Not applicable due to type of project.
Physical Cultural       Yes         OP 4.11 is triggered. The ESIA identifies that there is a
Resources OP/BP 4.11                structure presumed to be from Buddhist times that has
been observed at KM 134, in the area of the B2B road
segment #6. This is the only observed cultural site within
the vicinity of the road. The structure is approximately at
50 meters distance from the road. Guidance for the proper
handling of chance finds is provided in the ESMF. The
site-specific ESMP for the sixth segment of B2B will
include appropriate mitigation measures to prevent any
interference during project works.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          No recognized indigenous people present in project area.
BP 4.10
Page 4 of 10


﻿Involuntary Resettlement Yes        The Bank OP on Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) is
OP/BP 4.12                          triggered in view of the fact that the rehabilitation and
upgrading works under component 1 (on the Baghlan to
Bamiyan (B2B) road) is expected to require some land
acquisition for securing the right-of-way. In order to
assess alternatives to avoid acquisition and the financial
implications of it, an exhaustive Social Impact
Assessment (SIA) has been undertaken. This includes
development of the project socio economic baseline
study, which was commissioned by the USAID in 2009.
A follow up survey was conducted during September-
October 2014 to establish the validity and reliability and
update of the data in the current context. As per the
current assessment estimates, as many as 650-700
affected families will lose a part of their residential,
commercial or agricultural properties along the B2B road
corridor. A detailed 100 % household census was carried
out by the client agency, and RAP for B2B road segment
1 prepared and cleared by WB and locally disclosed on
May 17, 2015. A stand-alone Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) to guide preparation of RAPs of the
remaining segments has also been prepared and locally
disclosed on June 7, 2015. Government will be
responsible for implementing the RAPs prior to
commencement of civil works in the vicinity of the
affected areas/PAPs.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No          Not applicable, since no dams are be built under the
4.37                                project.
O
)         Projects on International  No       Not applicable.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No          Not applicable.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The environmental impacts of the project are mainly associated with Component 1 which
undertakes the rehabilitation and upgrading of two different roads, which are the Bamiyan to
Baghlan road (B2B) and the Salang Highway. Component 2 will mainly involve institutional/
capacity development and project management related tasks which will not have any potential
impact.
Upgrading of the B2B road may have significant impacts mostly related to the construction
activities in the first instance, and then during the operations and maintenance stages when the
road is in use. For example, surface hydrology along the alignment may be affected due to the
Page 5 of 10


﻿management and disposal of large volumes of cut material, cleared vegetation and other debris as
B2B road has extensive cut and fill requirements. Also, the excavation of borrow pits within
parcels of agriculture land alongside the road may cause drainage issues and other impacts on
these parcels of land. Technical studies have also indicated the presence of unstable slopes which
O
will pose a high risk of landslides and are similarly a cause for further concern during the
construction and operation phases of the road. Blasting of the road side hills for widening of the
road at some segments will also add to the negative impact of the project activities. The project
activities may also create disruption in the day to day life of the residents of villages along the
road stretch and construction activities will also generate noise and air pollution.
The rehabilitation of the Salang highway will only have minimal adverse impacts and these will be
mostly associated with noise, air pollution and traffic disruption during the rehabilitation works.
Additional impacts are foreseen in case of lack of adequate occupational health and safety
measures during the rehabilitation works as Salang road involves activities that include sealing of
cracks and leakages in the ceiling of the tunnel, snow avalanche protection, cracks leakage of
galleries, back filling and structures repair.
Based on the above, the proposed project triggers the Bank's Operational Policies on
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) and Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11) and consistent
with the requirements of OP 4.01 the project has been assigned an EA category A. In compliance
with this policy the Government has prepared a full Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
(ESIA) and corresponding Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for segment 1 of
the B2B road, for which the detailed engineering design has been finalized. For the remaining five
segments of the B2B and also for the Salang Pass road, detailed and finalized engineering designs
are not yet available and therefore the Government has prepared an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) to guide the preparation of the required documents for those
road segments.
The client has undertaken an exhaustive Social Impact Assessment (SIA). This includes
development of the project socio economic baseline study, which was commissioned by the
USAID in 2009. A follow up survey was conducted during September-October 2014 to establish
the validity and reliability and to update of the data in the current context. The revised SIA's re-
assess any risks to affected communities and consider alternatives to minimize land acquisition
impacts. The revised EIA/SIA for the first section of the B2B road has been completed and
disclosed. The EIA/SIA revision for the remaining 5 sections will be done after the detailed
design for those sections has been updated. There will be a detailed 100% household census of all
affected households undertaken to update the Social Management Plan (SMP) prepared by MPW
in 2012 and to formulate development strategies in the form of a comprehensive Resettlement
Action Plan (RAP) in order to assist in determining project impacts on the social, economic,
cultural, and livelihood activities of the affected communities.
A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the first section of the B2B road has also been prepared and
disclosed. Once the detailed designs for the other five specific road sections are finalized and if
resettlement/land acquisition is foreseen, RAP's for these other sections will be prepared by the
client, submitted to the Bank for clearance, and disclosed. The Implementing partner (MPW) and
relevant governmental agencies (i.e. ARAZI) will be responsible for implementing the RAP(s)
prior to commencement of civil works in the area of the affected people.
A Grievance Redress Mechanism has been developed by MPW to address the project-related
Page 6 of 10


﻿concerns of affected persons and the general public. This system will be put in place immediately
after the project is approved by the WB Board of Executive Directors. In the meantime, an
intermediate system of GRM has been put in place. Grievance redress committees have been
constituted in area of the first segment of the B2B road, along with the Grievance Redress
O
Committees at project level and MPW HQ level.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
O
in the project area:
The existing Baghlan to Bamiyan road is an unpaved 2-lane road. The planned civil works in the
proposed project consist mostly of the construction of a new asphalt concrete pavement along the
entire length of the road. Works will also include the improvement of the drainage system,
retaining walls, bridges, culverts, etc. The present width of the road is between 8 and 12 meters,
with a few pinch points as narrow as 5 meters. The width of the rehabilitated road is expected to
10 m (with two 3.5m lanes with 1. 5m road shoulder on either side). The widening of the road at
some points will require some land acquisition and limited resettlement.
In terms of environmental impact, the widening of the Baghlan to Bamiyan road at some locations
will require significant cutting of slopes and filling of valley areas, albeit mostly within the
existing road corridor and alignment. Due to these unprotected slopes, significant erosion and
therefore sediment transportation and deposition are expected and need to be mitigated. The
landscape is otherwise unremarkable as there are no forests and no known significant natural
habitats.
However, long term impacts could include the emergence of spontaneous settlements along the
alignment of both corridors is likely, as the improved quality of the road will increase traffic
volumes which will present opportunities for commercial activities. These would need to be
managed ensure adequate road safety and compliance with local planning requirements.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Broadly, there are no project alternatives considered due to the nature of the project. However, the
detailed design of the Bahglan to Bamiyan Road is being revised to reduce the need for land
acquisition and resettlement as much as possible, and to the extent possible to minimize excessive
cutting of slope to reduce likelihood of land slides.
o         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The client is the Ministry of Public Works, and over the past several years the Bank and other
donors have implemented several road projects with MPW throughout the country. Additionally,
the environmental and social officers in this ministry have benefited from several training events
organized by the Bank office in Kabul. Therefore, the ministry staff is familiar with World Bank
safeguards policies and has experience with implementing Bank-supported projects. Their capacity
over the years has progressively increased but they will still need significant support going
forward and the Task Team will continue to provide this support to ensure the safeguards aspects
of the proposed project are managed adequately. The client capacity to implement land acquisition
and resettlement is good and reliable, since MPW is responsible for implementation of the ongoing
WB supported NERAP and ARAP projects. The client's safeguards team will be responsible for
the day to day implementation of social safeguards.
The following safeguards documents have been prepared by MPW for the project:
Page 7 of 10


﻿*      Environment and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for B2B road Segment 1 - English
version cleared by World Bank and locally disclosed on June 7, 2015.
*      Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for B2B road Segment 1 - English version cleared by
World Bank and locally disclosed on May 17, May 2015.
O
* Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the whole Project -
English version cleared by World Bank and locally disclosed on June 1, 2015.
* Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for the whole Project - English version cleared by
World Bank and locally disclosed on June 7, 2015.
*      Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for B2B Segment 1 - English
version cleared by the Bank on August 18, 2015.
*      Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for B2B Segments 2-6 - will be
prepared concurrently with the Detailed Engineering Designs for these Segments.
*      Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for Salang Highway - will be
prepared by the Civil Works contractor.
A RAP for the Salang Pass will not be necessary since no land acquisition or resettlement is
expected. The translation of key Safeguards Documents into local languages (Dari and Pashtun)
has been completed on September 1, 2015 and the local disclosure of the translated documents is
underway.
The MPW Project Management Office (PMO) will establish an Environmental and Social
Safeguard Management Unit (ESMU) which will have overall responsibility for coordinating,
implementing and compliance monitoring of the Environmental and Social safeguards
commitments and requirements of the Project. The ESMU so far has one qualified and
experienced environmental specialist who participated in the mission. A social safeguards
specialist will be hired as soon as possible. MPW will also delegate some of its civil service staff
to the ESMU so that they work alongside the two experienced specialists and acquire the
necessary skills and capacity for such positions. At least one of the staff of the ESMU shall be
female to facilitate the consultations and interactions with female project-affected persons. The
ESMU will place some of its staff to at the regional office of MPW closest to the site of civil
works under the project.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
MPW has conducted a series of consultation meetings with affected families within the first
segment of the B2B road. Similarly, there were consultations conducted with stakeholder agencies
and local communities to share findings of the ESIA for the first segment. The client will use the
same processes for the remaining five road segments. MPW is also advised to conduct a separate
consultation with each affected family, including separate consultations with women. For
consultations with women, the client is advised to use female staff. MPW confirmed that it will
use the services of a third party monitoring agent to conduct monitoring of RAP implementation
after such implementation is essentially completed.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              07-Jun-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           09-Jun-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  02-Sep-2015
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Page 8 of 10


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Afghanistan                                              01-Jun-2015
Comments: The ESMF was disclosed locally on June 1. The Environment and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIA) for B2B road Segment 1 - English version was locally disclosed
on June 7, 2015. The Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for B2B road Segment 1 -
English version was locally disclosed on May 17, May 2015. Translation of
documents in local languages (Pashtun and Dari) has been completed on September
1 and local disclosure is underway.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              07-Jun-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           08-Jun-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Afghanistan                                              17-May-2015
Comments: The ESMF was disclosed locally on June 1. The Environment and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIA) for B2B road Segment 1 - English version was locally disclosed
on June 7, 2015. The Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for B2B road Segment 1 -
English version was locally disclosed on May 17, May 2015. Translation of
documents in local languages (Pashtun and Dari) has been completed on September
1 and local disclosure is underway.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
0          report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
a          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?          Yes [  ]  No [   ]   NA [   ]
Page 9 of 10


﻿Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Andreas Schliessler,Luquan Tian
Approved By
O
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)             Date: 04-Sep-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Karla Gonzalez Carvajal (PMGR)       Date: 04-Sep-2015
Manager:
Page 10 of 10


