                                  The World Bank
                                  Community Engagement and Social Accountability Project




                                                    Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                  Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                               Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Feb-2018 | Report No: ISDSC23774




                         Feb 01, 2018                                                                                            Page 1 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Community Engagement and Social Accountability Project



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                     Project Name                  Environmental Category       Country
                                                          Community Engagement
                           P166327                        and Social Accountability     C - Not Required             Kyrgyz Republic
                                                          Project
                           Team Leader(s)                 Estimated Date of Approval    Managing Unit                Financing Instrument
                           Janelle Plummer, Holly                                                                    Investment Project
                                                                                        GSU03
                           Welborn Benner                                                                            Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Financing (in USD Million)

                           SUMMARY             -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                   0.00
                           Total Financing                                                                                                      0.00
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                        0.00


                           DETAILS  -NewFin2




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To support youth engagement and social accountability for better services and infrastructure in selected areas of the
                           Kyrgyz Republic.

                           C. Project Description
                           12. Drawing on lessons from World Bank CDD programming that promotes social cohesion and addresses
                           conflict risks,[1] the Project will support a range of activities to promote youth-focused community
                           mobilization and social accountability activities. The aim is to ensure that: (i) communities, particularly youth
                           and marginalized groups, are actively engaged in selecting poverty-focused project interventions; (ii)
                           investments in social and economic infrastructure (including electricity) are those that have been most highly
                           prioritized by communities; and (iii) all members of the target communities are provided with the
                           information, facilitation and capacity building necessary to make decisions that are needs-based, and
                           inclusive of women, vulnerable, and poor households. The focus on poverty-alleviating investments is part of
                           the Bank’s twin goals, and inclusion will form an explicit aspect of the community mobilization process. A



                         Feb 01, 2018                                                                                                     Page 2 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Community Engagement and Social Accountability Project




                           gender target that 50 percent of the beneficiaries should be women/girls will also be rigorously implemented
                           and checked.

                           13. The Youth Needs Assessment and the Conflict Study conducted during project preparation drew
                           attention to the following issues in the target communities: (i) the disempowerment of youth, particularly
                           the low levels of employment among them; (ii) cultural norms that make young people, especially young
                           women, voiceless; (iii) the growing impact on children left by parents who have migrated for employment;
                           (iv) minority exclusion and inter-ethnic relations; (v) gender-based violence; and (vi) the limited capacity of
                           local institutions to manage and mitigate risks and provide services. To address these interconnected issues,
                           the project will develop and implement a youth-focused community mobilization process that is designed to
                           engage and empower young women and men to facilitate community engagement and deepen participatory
                           processes.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           14. Project activities are also focused on promoting youth-focused social accountability to advance effective
                           feedback mechanisms regarding social and economic infrastructure investments. This includes activities to
                           empower youth and communities through knowledge sharing and implementation of social accountability
                           tools such as community scorecards and social audits.

                           Component 1: Support for community mobilization and capacity building (CASA1000 MDTF US$300,000)

                           15. Component 1 will support community mobilization activities needed to ensure that investments in social
                           and economic infrastructure are decided by communities and responsive to the needs of all community
                           members. The objective of this component is to support youth leadership and build local institutional
                           capacity for subproject needs assessment, planning, implementation, management, and monitoring. This is
                           expected to help activate communities and help ensure that target communities are engaged in decision
                           making over local investments.

                           16. An innovative process of engaging youth as leaders of the community-led processes will drive this
                           component. From the outset, the project will fund youth mobilization events to select and build the capacity
                           of approximately 150 youth as youth facilitators (two men and two women from each target village), who
                           will take a leadership role in community mobilization and represent youth interests in project processes.[2]
                           To represent each target community at the AA level, a legal entity, known as the Corridor Village Investment
                           Association (C-VIA), will be established and legally registered. The C-VIAs will represent and be accountable
                           to the communities they represent. The head of the AO will be an active member of the C-VIA in his/her
                           respective AA, along with nominated representatives (two men, two women, 50 percent youth) from each
                           corridor village. The C-VIAs will carry out a number of representation, coordination, financial management,
                           and procurement functions. The C-VIAs will be held to account through community monitoring and social
                           audit processes (see Component 2).

                           17. The community mobilization process will engage local stakeholders to help ensure that the community
                           mobilization and social accountability process is understood by local leaders and officials, especially in the
                           AOs and Aiyl Kenesh. To this end, representatives from these bodies will be included in capacity building
                           sessions and be appointed to pre-defined roles. The community needs identification and prioritization

                         Feb 01, 2018                                                                                              Page 3 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Community Engagement and Social Accountability Project




                           process will serve as an input to LDSs to inform the long-term development of local areas. The C-VIAs will
                           also ensure that activities prioritized through the community mobilization process form part of LDSs. In
                           addition, in order to ensure that prioritized sub-grants[3] include not only social infrastructure, but also
                           livelihoods and youth development, support will be provided to pilot in the LDSs the inclusion of Youth
                           Development Plans (YDPs) that specifically address the needs and challenges of young people, and identify
                           youth-specific opportunities and strategies to enhance the voice and agency of young people, improve access
                           to services, cultivate employable skills, and generate opportunities for local employment and income.

                           18. The component will support the full range of youth-led community mobilization activities, with
                           complementary capacity building support, in the first year. This cycle of activities will establish a system to
                           engage communities, build the capacity of youth to play community facilitation roles, and encourage women
                           to participate actively and equally. The outcome will be gender-sensitive, poverty-focused and community-
                           owned decisions regarding the village sub-grants to be funded by the CSP. Capacity building will cover
Public Disclosure Copy




                           participatory methodologies, community governance and accountability systems, conflict resolution
                           mechanisms, organizational development, sustainability, and equitable use. This component will cover the
                           costs of a direct contract with ARIS for the rapid launch of community mobilization efforts.

                           19. The component will also support the ongoing community mobilization activities being carried out by AKF
                           in Years 2-4. This will include: (i) technical advisory support to the project on community engagement; (ii)
                           youth development; and (iii) leading and handing over innovative mechanisms for community mobilization.
                           To this end AKF will draw on global experience in youth programming and community driven development in
                           support of project activities, and lead AKF training events, exchanges, and workshops to support youth
                           facilitators, C-VIAs, AOs, members of the Aiyl Kenesh, youth and other community stakeholders.

                           Component 2: Support for youth engagement in awareness building and social accountability (CASA1000
                           MDTF US$450,000)

                           20. In order to build knowledgeable, cohesive and sustainable communities, and address the
                           disempowerment of youth in target areas, in Years 1-4, Component 2 aims to build the voice and agency of
                           young women and men by supporting: (i) awareness-building activities; and (ii) social accountability activities
                           to be carried out by young women and men within target communities. The activities will be focused on
                           building communities that are armed with knowledge on development-related issues and the ingredients of
                           good local governance (including performance, transparency, and accountability). Component 2 activities will
                           also provide skills for broader youth engagement in local civic affairs.

                           21. Awareness building and access to information. The project will build the capacity of youth to lead
                           awareness-building activities on livelihoods and services that create more informed and active communities.
                           As a means to empower youth, build their confidence, and develop trust within their communities, the
                           project will adopt this innovative approach to awareness building, enabling youth to learn about, become
                           expert in, and then function as community focal points, disseminating information on a range of community
                           development topics. Youth facilitators will mobilize informal groups to take part in trainings and workshops
                           and then undertake outreach roles in their communities. Knowledge transfer is likely to include:


                         Feb 01, 2018                                                                                             Page 4 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Community Engagement and Social Accountability Project




                           22. Promoting efficient energy. To complement village electricity improvements, community awareness-
                           building initiatives will focus on energy efficiency and alternative energy sources (e.g. insulation, lighting
                           options, heating stoves, solar street lighting, etc.). The project will support the training of youth to access
                           information and develop knowledge in these areas, for example, by facilitating visits by entrepreneurs to
                           villages (e.g. on heating stoves or insulation) and supporting youth to organize community awareness events.
                           This approach will then be extended, or broadened to address particular interests, needs, or concerns within
                           target communities.

                           23. Enhancing local services and livelihoods. Awareness-building activities might include topics that build
                           the capacity of communities to make informed decisions, better utilize existing community infrastructure and
                           services, promote accountability and improve performance. For instance, safety and security (associated
                           with street lighting improvements), quality of child care (associated with kindergartens), hygiene and
                           sanitation in schools/village cleaning (associated with school rehabilitation works and first aid points (FAPs)),
Public Disclosure Copy




                           value chain development (associated with livelihoods), e-services and e-business (associated with access to
                           the internet). Awareness building could also focus on designing infrastructure investments that would
                           promote community-level resilience to disaster and climate risk. Youth facilitators will consult with
                           communities and work with project staff to identify locally relevant topics. Youth will also be trained in
                           innovative methods, such as community theater,[4] to raise community awareness and generate local
                           solutions to local problems. Community theater uses role playing, short skits, music, singing,
                           dance/movement, and improvisation techniques to highlight a development challenge in the community. It
                           engages community members as the actors and utilizes participatory techniques to brainstorm solutions. For
                           example, using this technique, youth could raise awareness in their communities of the challenges faced by
                           the elderly, by children left with grandparents, and by minority groups, as well as facilitate the development
                           of community-driven solutions to address these problems.

                           24. Youth-focused awareness-building activities undertaken in communities will thus include:

                                   selecting key topics for youth awareness-building activities based on village-level interests and
                                    priorities;
                                   training youth in selected topics through access to specialized information, mentorships, and
                                    mobilization of technical expertise;
                                   youth convened information sessions, community events, trainings, and workshops on chosen topics
                                    to build community awareness and increase legitimacy of youth leadership; and
                                   youth-driven innovative approaches to generate ideas to address village level problems through
                                    locally-tailored solutions.

                           25. Social accountability. A second set of activities will enable a group of (different) young women and men
                           in the target villages to play a role in the social accountability mechanisms developed for the project, and to
                           identify areas where social accountability would help address community issues. This component will provide
                           support for young community members to check and ensure that sub-grants are implemented according to
                           the agreed procedures and community preferences. This will include support for hands-on training of a group
                           of 150 “community reporters” to measure and monitor, ensure transparency and disclosure, and instigate

                         Feb 01, 2018                                                                                              Page 5 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Community Engagement and Social Accountability Project




                           structured social accountability mechanisms that contribute to regular project monitoring. Specifically, this
                           will include:

                           26. Community reporting. The community reporters will generate and share project information—tracking
                           the CSP community decision-making and implementation process (decisions over subprojects, YDP-related
                           activities, the participation of communities and of women, procurement, construction, and financial
                           management). Results will be posted on information boards, social media, and reported in local
                           newspapers. Community reporters will also document best practices and lessons learned. The project will
                           recognize, through awards and certification, community reporters’ efforts to promote transparency, ensure
                           effective delivery of sub-grants or other local services, and raise other relevant issues.

                           27. Participatory monitoring through community scorecards. The community reporters will introduce and
                           work with communities to perform an annual community scorecard process. The community scorecard will
Public Disclosure Copy




                           enable communities to assess and provide feedback on project processes, enable service providers to carry
                           out a self-assessment, and promote dialogue between communities and project implementers that results in
                           concrete action plans. This will include community feedback on the CASA1000 and the CSP as a benefit-
                           sharing mechanism. From Year 2, the scorecard will enable feedback and responsive action on infrastructure
                           and services supported by the CASA1000 CSP (electricity improvements, kindergartens, schools, FAPs,
                           livelihoods facilities, etc.) as well as other services selected by communities. This area of action will be linked
                           to the ARIS Beneficiary Feedback Mechanism, and will, over the life of CASA1000 CSP, introduce technology-
                           based tools for the collection of information.

                           28. Social audits. A key aspect of the accountability established in the project will be the transparency,
                           disclosure, and community oversight achieved by social audit meetings at the AA level. This mechanism will
                           act as a check—that community decisions are not captured or changed, that communities are aware of the
                           work being undertaken by C-VIAs and ARIS on their behalf, of the community scorecard processes carried out
                           at the village level, and that all project finances (budgets and expenditures, contracts and payments) are
                           available for target community scrutiny. While C-VIA staff will be responsible for invitations to the social
                           audit meetings, producing information, and posting it on village noticeboards, community reporters will
                           mobilize community members, and write up and disseminate the results back to communities and for
                           inclusion in project reports.

                           29. Starting in Year 3, the project will support the capacity building of youth to apply these governance skills
                           to other sectors, with the aim of enhancing the role of young women and men in broader local civic and
                           community affairs. While this provides a ready-made opportunity to improve the efficiency of the
                           investments (e.g. kindergarten teacher performance, feedback on FAPs/power outages), initiatives will be
                           selected through participatory processes by the youth themselves. In later years, this component will look for
                           opportunities to support efforts to link to government e-services, as the Taza Koom (a national project that
                           aims to connect every village to the internet via fiber optic cable by the year 2020) is rolled out across the
                           South, introducing civic technologies identified by youth.

                           Table 1: Summary – CSP Youth Engagement


                         Feb 01, 2018                                                                                                 Page 6 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Community Engagement and Social Accountability Project




                                                                                                                         Target
                               Function     Youth Role                             Description
                                                                                                                        numbers
                                                               Young women and men (ages 18-28) from target
                                                                villages
                                                               50 percent women; 2 women and 2 men in each
                                                                target village
                                                               Serve voluntarily as community mobilizers; facilitate
                                                                YDPs/youth initiative groups; lead community
                                                                awareness-building initiatives (trained in technical
                                                                                                                        150
                                            Youth               aspects of relevant CSP social/economic
                                            Facilitators        infrastructure)
                                                               Capacity building and technical support provided by
                                                                community development support officers
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               ARIS facilitator certification following training and
                                                                quantified/qualified work experience
                           Community
                           Mobilization                        Selected youth facilitators will serve in C-VIAs
                           and
                           Awareness
                           Building                            Young women and men (ages 18-28) in target villages
                                                               50 percent women
                                                               Must have graduated from basic bookkeeping
                                                                course(s) and have skills to support accounting
                                                                functions of the C-VIAs
                                                               Paid from C-VIA operating budget                       21+
                                            Youth              Will enable youth to obtain practical experience, and,
                                            Accountants         where necessary, to work alongside qualified financial (each
                                                                management officers as a basis for future employment CVIA)
                                                                opportunities
                                                               Youth will obtain certification after an agreed period
                                                                of experience


                           Social         Community            50 percent women; 2 women and 2 men in each            150
                           Accountability Reporters             target village
                           and                                 Young women and men with writing skills
                           Monitoring                          Serve voluntarily to track the CSP community decision-
                                                                making and implementation process and promote
                                                                social accountability mechanisms
                                                               Support implementation of an annual community
                                                                scorecard process and social audits


                         Feb 01, 2018                                                                                             Page 7 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Community Engagement and Social Accountability Project




                                                               Utilize technology-based tools for information
                                                                collection and dissemination
                                                               ARIS social accountability certification following
                                                                training and quantified/qualified work experience



                           Component 3: Support for project management, M&E and communications (CASA1000 MDTF
                           US$250,000)

                           30. Component 3 of this grant will be allocated to support project management, M&E and communications.
                           This will include project management costs for AKF and the start-up activities for project management and
                           coordination by ARIS for community mobilization activities (through a direct contract with ARIS).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           31. Project management. This will include coordination and supervision of implementation, financial
                           management, annual audits, and monitoring and evaluation. AKF will be responsible for preparing work plans
                           and operational manuals, managing the budget, managing relations with local authorities and communities,
                           and developing terms of reference for the necessary consultancies. This component will include costs for
                           project staff, including a project manager, three field facilitators, finance specialist, M&E specialist, technical
                           advisers, management support, and drivers. This component will support the recruitment of project-specific
                           consultants, operational support mechanisms, financial management at the national, oblast and district
                           levels, travel, telecommunications, printing and other office expenses, as well as managerial oversight, and
                           internal and external audits. Also, this component will fund equipment and supplies, including computers
                           and printers, office equipment and supplies, and fuel and car rental costs. The direct contract with ARIS will
                           finance initial start-up activities for project management of community mobilization, M&E, and
                           communications activities including a dedicated project management team, support for the initiation of
                           relationships with communities, development of the C-VIAs and youth facilitators, and engagement with the
                           AOs.

                           32. Monitoring and evaluation. AKF will be responsible for tracking the progress of the activities specific to
                           this project, carrying out semi-annual assessments of outcomes and results, communicating and reporting
                           regularly on the progress of the project to agreed stakeholders, and disclosing project documentation as
                           agreed. In the first year, this component will also finance the internal- and community-level monitoring, and
                           will fund a baseline survey focused on all results indicators of the CSP project included in the POM.

                           33. Communications. With support from the World Bank, a Communications Action Plan (CSP-CAP) will be
                           developed prior to effectiveness of this grant, with the specific aim of: (i) improving community
                           understanding of the CASA1000 family of projects (the transmission line project and the CSP); and (ii)
                           establishing trust in the CSP and managing expectations by transparently communicating CSP scale, scope,
                           and eligibility. As with other aspects of the project, this component will include all parts of the community,
                           including youth, in messaging. ARIS will facilitate the dissemination of CASA1000 materials[5] and messaging,
                           ensure ongoing information sharing and two-way communication, monitor impact of communications


                         Feb 01, 2018                                                                                                Page 8 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Community Engagement and Social Accountability Project




                           efforts, and train communications staff and youth to take part in communications activities. ARIS will work
                           closely with a communications firm (hired separately) to ensure that messages and materials meet the needs
                           on the ground in target villages. The direct contract with ARIS will also include support for the
                           implementation of this CSP-CAP aligned with the first stages of construction of the CASA1000 transmission
                           line.

                           [1] The process will build on, but further elaborate the VIP3 (P146970) process and incorporate lessons from
                           the Social Cohesion and CDD project (P132577) experience in promoting social cohesion through CDD, as well
                           as the Pasture Livestock and Management Improvement Project (P145162), while responding to the
                           background studies (Conflict Study and the Youth Needs Assessment) that highlighted the risks associated
                           with youth in the target areas.

                           [2] These activities will draw on the relevant local youth structures to bring youth together: youth
Public Disclosure Copy




                           committees and informal work or sports groups will serve as project entry points.

                           [3] Note: sub-grants will be administered under the CASA1000 Community Support Project.

                           [4] Community theater was piloted in the Social Cohesion through Community-Based Approaches Project in
                           the Kyrgyz Republic as well as in other CDD processes globally.

                           [5] A survey will be conducted by an external communications firm to develop tailored CASA1000 messages,
                           design and produce communications materials, and train relevant implementing partners. These materials
                           will be supported directly from the MDTF.




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          Osh, Jalal-Abad and Batken Oblasts. Project involves only capacity building activities - no social or
                          environmental safeguards are triggered.



                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          Not applicable.



                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team



                         Feb 01, 2018                                                                                             Page 9 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Community Engagement and Social Accountability Project



                          Rustam Arstanov, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
                          Rebecca Emilie Anne Lacroix, Social Safeguards Specialist


                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project               Triggered?              Explanation (Optional)
                                                                                                  Project involves only capacity building
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                 No                  activities - no social or environmental
                                                                                                  safeguards are triggered.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                         No
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                  No
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                             No
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11              No
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                       No
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                 No
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                           No
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50      No
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60               No


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? Yes
                           SafeguardAppraisalStage
                           a) Tentative target date for disclosing the appraisal stage ISDS
                           26-Jan-2018
                           b) Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                           Not applicable.


                           APPROVALS

                           Team Leader(s):                            Janelle Plummer

                           Approved By

                           Safeguards Advisor:                        Nina Chee                           25-Jan-2018

                           Practice Manager/Manager:                  Nina Bhatt                          26-Jan-2018



                         Feb 01, 2018                                                                                                 Page 10 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Community Engagement and Social Accountability Project



                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Feb 01, 2018                                                                                                                            Page 11 of 11
