                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                                            Report No.:ISDSA20318
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated:                  24-Apr-2017
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed                25-Apr-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                           Mali                          Project ID:              P151909
    Project Name:                      Mali - Economic & Environmental Rehabilitation of the Niger River
                                       (P151909)
    Task Team Leader(s):               Hocine Chalal,Cheick Omar Tidiane Diallo
    Estimated Appraisal                10-Apr-2017                   Estimated Board          02-Jun-2017
    Date:                                                            Date:
    Managing Unit:                     GEN07                         Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                                                                         Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00(Rapid No
    Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                               Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           50.00                           Total Bank Financing: 50.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                         Amount
    International Development Association (IDA)                                                                    50.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00
    Total                                                                                                          50.00
    Environmental Category:            A - Full Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?        No

    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The project objective is to improve navigation and port services, demonstrate environmental restoration, and
    increase access to improved livelihood activities at targeted sites in the Niger Inner Delta and, in the event of an
    Eligible Crisis or Emergency, to provide immediate and effective response to said Eligible Crisis or Emergency.
    3. Project Description
    Component 1: Strengthening the Strategic Management of the Niger River Resources (US$13.0 million)
    Improving navigability and socioeconomic viability of activities in the NID will depend not only on carrying out
    works to improve the physical conditions of the river but also the more efficient management of activities,
    resources, and stakeholders over time and effective monitoring of the ecological functioning of the river. This
    component will strengthen the monitoring of the ecological functions of the river, particularly in the biodiversity
    rich area of the NID, through the establishment of an observatory, as well as through a review of the institutional

                                                     Page 1 of 11
and regulatory framework for the strategic management and sustainability of the river.

Subcomponent 1.1: Strengthening the environmental monitoring of the Niger River (US$7.0 million)
This subcomponent will develop a comprehensive system for knowledge management and a monitoring system
for the acquisition and use of information related to the dynamics of the aquatic ecosystems of the Niger River.
The creation of the observatory will consolidate and extend the operational environmental services already
offered and increase their scope, particularly through the provision of hydrological, climate, and environmental
data in Mali. Through this observatory, the Niger River Basin Authority (NBA), in close collaboration with
other relevant institutions and entities (DNH and Wetlands International in particular) will be able to generate
and use data for ecosystem monitoring and decision-making.

Also under this component, two sets of activities will be carried out: the first one will aim at designing a
functional hydrological model for the NID and the second one will be a study of potential infrastructure for the
improvement of the economic and ecological functions of the NID. This second study will identify
infrastructure options that would have medium- to long-term positive impacts on navigability in the NID portion
of the river, in particular, as well as on the overall socioeconomic conditions of the population and the
biodiversity of the NID. The study will be based on knowledge and assumptions about the future impacts of
climate change as well as anthropogenic pressures upstream and downstream of the river. The scenarios will
also take into account climate change implications over the next 10 to 15 years.

This process will be accompanied by a robust communication and public participation plan and citizen
engagement program to ensure that relevant stakeholders understand and support the objectives of the
observatory and the overarching goal of protecting the Niger River from further degradation.

Subcomponent 1.2: Supporting the strategic management of infrastructure, resources, and stakeholders in the
NID (US$6.0 million)
In line with the Navigation Code that is pending enactment by Parliament, this subcomponent will support
activities to improve the security and financial viability of port infrastructure and the organization of
stakeholders using this infrastructure. This will also include a focus on improving the links between sectors and
national and subnational entities, such as communes, with regard to the management of river resources.

Under this subcomponent, the following studies and activities will be prepared and carried out:
• Study to review the institutional and regulatory framework and identify measures to improve it by removing
sources of inefficiencies, such as overlapping mandates and lack of sustainable revenue streams
• Technical assistance aimed at formalizing the economic role of pinasses operators
• Technical assistance aimed at bringing new boat construction techniques to improve safety and operation of
the traditional boats navigating the river (pinasses and pirogues)
• Technical assistance aimed at improving the capacity of entities engaged in dredging activities to improve their
efficiency and environmental performance
• Technical assistance to communes to better manage their port infrastructure
• Design and implementation of a public communication and participation program around the issue of the
economic role of the Niger River (particularly with regard to transportation and livelihood activities)
• Feasibility and environmental and social studies and assessments carried out during project preparation (under
project advance financing) and accounted in this subcomponent

Component 2: Enhancing the Viability of Socioeconomic Activities Contributing to Climate Change Resilience
(US$29.0 million)
The Niger River is the lifeline of socioeconomic activity in the NID. Improving the socioeconomic conditions of
the population living in the targeted communes and villages will include investments that are mutually
reinforcing: improving navigability and thus the flow of goods and people and improving access to markets in a


                                                Page 2 of 11
way that is environmentally sustainable and socially responsible.

Subcomponent 2.1: Improving river transportation in the NID through targeted dredging and maintenance of
navigation channels (US$16.0 million)
The NID is increasingly difficult to navigate, a situation that is worsened by the lack of maintenance of the
navigable channels. The consequences are a high frequency of boat stranding, a continuous reduction of the
navigation period, and an increase in operating costs. To improve the NID’s navigability, this subcomponent
will focus on physical works, notably dredging and installing channel markers. The most cost-effective
interventions will be identified through the feasibility studies (to be carried out before project effectiveness) and
will constitute a priority dredging program to ensure navigation for up to eight months in the project area.
Installing approximately 27 channel markers between Ke-Macina and Akka is a critical part of avoiding boat
stranding and accidents. The channel markers are complementary to dredging. Maintenance of the dredged areas
as well as the channel markers are equally important to maintaining the channel’s navigability but are not
factored into this subcomponent’s cost. However, the project financing agreement will include a legal covenant
addressing this issue. The specific activities to be financed by the project will include (a) bathymetric
measurement campaigns, (b) civil works for the dredging and channel markings activities, (c) supervision of
civil works, (d) third-party technical audits (if required by the security conditions).

Subcomponent 2.2: Enhancing the reliability of river transportation through construction/rehabilitation and
maintenance of river docking piers infrastructure (US$6.0 million)
The new or rehabilitated port facilities will be designed to ensure better exchanges involving regular and quick
trips between areas of production and consumption by facilitating the multimodal integrated transport system
(road-river). Three ports have been identified as priority ports for rehabilitation: Macina, Mopti, and Diafarabé,
as these are serviced by COMANAV and serve important population centers. The construction of three
additional ports to accommodate pinasses and pirogues in Kouakourou, Diondori, Youwarou is seen as an
opportunity to provide greater access to more isolated areas. There are anticipated annual maintenance costs for
each site that will have to be considered as part of the long-term sustainability. The technical feasibility studies
will provide the basis for planning maintenance work and the project will likely finance maintenance
requirements during the life of the project.

Subcomponent 2.3: Improving socioeconomic opportunities and ecosystem functions of the NID (US$1.0
million)
The proposed socioeconomic activities are consistent with the PDSEC of 20 targeted municipalities that will
benefit directly from the Economic and Environmental Rehabilitation of the Niger River Project (Projet de
réhabilitation économique et environnementale du fleuve Niger, PREEFN) as well as with the Ségou and Mopti
Regional Development Plans. This operation will finance a pilot phase, focusing on capacity building and
citizen engagement, in areas selected based on a security assessment. Preliminary studies for a possible scale-up
under a future financing, if security allows, are described in annex 2.

Subcomponent 2.4: Protection and rehabilitation of riverbanks and restoration of channels (US$6.0 million)
The subcomponent includes activities considered important for the improvement of the ecological functions of
the river by preventing siltation as well as improving navigability, and the activities go hand-in-hand with the
socioeconomic activities in Subcomponent 2.3. This operation will finance a pilot phase, that is, the opening
(4,500 m) and rehabilitation (2,600 m) of lateral channels that will benefit five to six communes through
improved access to water for a longer period throughout the year. Preliminary studies for a possible scale-up
under future financing, if security allows, are described in annex 2.

Component 3: Project Management (US$8.0 million)
This component will ensure effective operational planning, monitoring, and implementation of the project. It
will finance the operational costs related to the implementation of the different components of the project,


                                                 Page 3 of 11
including third-party monitoring and/or execution if required by. The component costs also include the
refinancing of the project preparation advance (PPA) and the costs associated with additional security provisions
on site. Security arrangements involving third-party monitoring and implementation, among others, significantly
increased the costs for project management.

Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response (US$0)
This component, known as the Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC), will be available should
the need arise to redirect resources freed up by a future restructuring of the project or other Bank projects in the
Mali portfolio. Such resources would be made available to finance emergency response activities and to address
crisis and emergency needs. An Immediate Response Mechanism Coordinating Agency and expenditure
management procedures will be defined in an Immediate Response Mechanism Operational Manual (IRM/OM),
to be prepared separately and approved by the Bank, in line with guidance provided under OP 10.00, paragraph
11. In case this component is utilized, the project will be restructured to allocate financing, revise the PDO and
indicators, and detail implementation arrangements.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The Inner Delta, located roughly between the Markala dam (near Segou) and Timbuktu, provides numerous
ecological and economic benefits. It forms a 20,000 to 30,000 km2 flood plain where many agricultural
practices depend heavily upon the amount of water that reaches the area, namely rice, cattle herding and fishing.
A significant amount (depending on the author this amount can be as high as two-thirds or as low as one-third)
of the water is lost by evaporation and infiltration when passing though the Inner Delta. The Inner Delta is an
intricate web of channels that provide as many ways to transport people as well as access to markets for the
goods produced locally, thus contributing to the economic well-being of a local population of about 1.5 million
(according to the 2009 census and compared to 1 million in 1976). The tourism potential of this area is very
important but it has been stunted by the civil strife of the past few years.

In terms of its ecological value, the Inner Delta is a unique ecosystem. It has been a RAMSAR site since 2004
hosting a large population of one hundred and twelve species of migratory and non-migratory birds as well as
endangered mammals such as hippopotamus and manatee. The great variability in rainfall and runoff creates an
extensive range of water flow. In the 1970s and 19780s the region suffered from an extremely severe dry period
but a significant rebound in the rainfall patterns happened by the mid-1990s, although without reverting fully to
the earlier levels. The models used by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) provide
inconsistent insight and do not yield a clear view of future trends although only the most optimistic models
predict increased rainfall. Among the various threats the most severe and immediate, however, might be those
posed by the anthropic ones, mainly due to pressures from demography and infrastructures (dams and
irrigation). The importance of the Inner Delta cannot be overstated considering for example its importance as a
grazing area for forty percent of the livestock from the northern parts of the country as well as from neighboring
countries during the dry season, according to Wetlands International.

With carefully targeted investments in selective dredging and river ports, and an improved institutional
framework, IWT could become a dominant transport mode for the Inner Delta. That is because it provides cost-
effective mobility to people and goods during the high water season when road transportation is virtually
impossible. More specifically, for up to six months out of the year, IWT is the only transport mode to access
most villages in the Inner Delta.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna( GEN07 )
 Lucienne M. M'Baipor( GSU01 )


                                                 Page 4 of 11
6. Safeguard Policies That Might Apply
Safeguard Policies                       Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01      Yes          This policy is triggered for this project due to both
                                                      the environmental and social sensitivity of the NID
                                                      as well as the potential impacts from some of the
                                                      proposed activities such as dredging, fluvial ports
                                                      and channel openings.

                                                      An Environmental and Social Management
                                                      Framework (ESMF) that identifies the main
                                                      environmental and social safeguards risks as well as
                                                      the main mitigating, monitoring and capacity
                                                      building measures to embed in the project design
                                                      has been prepared. The ESMF is an appropriate
                                                      instrument in this case because although the
                                                      typology of activities is known and, to some extent,
                                                      the locations and some the details regarding the
                                                      different components of the projects. However, the
                                                      activities related to the dredging interventions and
                                                      river ports/quays are fairly well known and the pre-
                                                      feasibility and feasibility studies carried out before
                                                      appraisal have provided enough basis for the
                                                      preparation of environmental assessment.
                                                      Environmental and Social Impact Assessments
                                                      (ESIA) for the dredging activities and for new
                                                      docking piers financed by the project have been
                                                      prepared and consulted upon. Environmental and
                                                      Social Managements Plans (ESMP) were being
                                                      prepared at the time of appraisal and will be
                                                      finalized and disclosed before Board. The same
                                                      goes for the ESMPs to be prepared for the channel
                                                      opening pilots. For the other activities the screening
                                                      process described in the ESMF will ensure that the
                                                      type of assessment is identified in advance and
                                                      carried out before the corresponding activities are
                                                      implemented on the ground. Additionally early
                                                      during project implementation and before any work
                                                      is initiated, Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) will
                                                      be finalized for the docking piers activities.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              Yes          This policy is triggered due the sensitive
                                                      ecosystems in the area of the project. In particular a
                                                      large area in the NID is classified as a RAMSAR
                                                      site due to its unique ecological features. The
                                                      ESMF and the specific ESIAs do address the
                                                      impact of the project on natural habitats and
                                                      biodiversity in the project area and propose
                                                      mitigation measures for any potential negative
                                                      impacts.


                                          Page 5 of 11
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No          There are no forests in the project areas that will be
                                                     directly affected.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  Yes         Although the current project will not finance
                                                     pesticides procurement or pest management
                                                     measures in general. The scope of the activities
                                                     under sub-component 2.3 was reduced and will not
                                                     justify the preparation of a stand-alone pest
                                                     management plan. Sensitization and awareness
                                                     campaigns to the benefit of farmers who might
                                                     benefit from a follow-up project will be prepared.
                                                     The ESMF includes an annex that presents the
                                                     principles and approach accordingly.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes         The cultural richness of the area justifies the
                                                     inclusion in the project of specific measures in case
                                                     of discovery of cultural and archeological artifacts
                                                     and were included in the ESMF and will also be
                                                     included in all specific the ESIAs. A chance find
                                                     procedure will be included in the call for tenders.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No          There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes         The following documents have been prepared: A
                                                     Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for the
                                                     infrastructure component of the project. This RPF
                                                     was prepared and disclosed before appraisal of the
                                                     project. Early during implementation and definitely
                                                     before the works areauthorized to start Resettlement
                                                     Actions Plans (RAPs) will be prepared for the
                                                     activities that will require it such as the river
                                                     docking piers construction/rehabilitation because of
                                                     possible physical or economic displacement of
                                                     people that could be temporary or definitive. The
                                                     completion of the RAPs (consultant in charge of the
                                                     RAPs have already been contracted) during early
                                                     implementation phase is due to the fact the detailed
                                                     feasibility studies will only be completed then and
                                                     it would not be pertinent nor effective to prepare
                                                     RAPs earlier.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                Yes         Although no dams are in the direct proximity of the
                                                     project area (the closest would be the Markala dam
                                                     about 80 km upstream) however as a precautionary
                                                     principle the project will maintain an awareness
                                                     about the basin wide context and the upstream
                                                     situation. However it is not necessary to establish a
                                                     dam safety panel at this stage considering that other
                                                     on-going project are explicitly following up with
                                                     periodic dam auscultation and technical oversight.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP Yes        The notification requirement will be handled
7.50                                                 through the Niger Basin Authority which is has the
                                                     mandate to play that role in conformity with the

                                          Page 6 of 11
                                                                 Water Charter of the Niger River linking all nine
                                                                 riparian countries. A notification procedure has
                                                                 been launched with a deadline set for May 20th
                                                                 2017 and therefore will be completed before Board
                                                                 submission.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60         No             The project is not being implemented in a disputed
                                                                 area.
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
    any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    The PREEFN will be implemented in the general context of a sensitive and unique ecosystem exposed to the
    vagaries of climate change. Some of these works (e.g. dredging, construction of river piers, river banks
    strengthening) might have large and irreversible impacts hence the environmental category “A” for this project.
    The key environmental and social issues associated with the project implementation as identified in the ESMF
    and specific ESIAs include:
    • Insecurity in the project area remains the key risk and challenge;
    • Protection of RAMSAR site ( IND) ;
    • Sustainable management and conservation of water resources to supply the multiple uses to the benefit of the
    largest number;
    • Control of erosion and sediment transport in waterways;
    • Protection and conservation of fish habitat;
    • Free movement of fish to their spawning, feeding and rearing grounds;
    • Protection of the IND biodiversity;
    • Preservation and development of the productivity of environment, cultures and fisheries;
    • Conservation and development of environmental productivity, crops and fisheries;
    • Food safety;
    • Conciliation of multiple land and water uses for agriculture, fisheries and navigation;
    • Free movement and access to waterways for navigation;
    • Conditions for river navigation safety;
    • Volume and frequency of commerce and exchanges between communities;
    • Health and Safety of workers and communities.

    The following potential large scale and significant negative impacts were identified:
    • Modify the stream bed structure in addition to destroy and alter fish habitat in some locations due to dredging
    of sand bars between Ké-Macina and Akka and over-deepening of the access channel to Lake Debo;
    • Destroy, alter ecologically sensitive areas and reduce species richness and productivity due to dredging works
    and over-deepening of navigation channel;
    • Modify landscape due the navigation beacons set up in the navigation channels;
    • Increase erosion and sediment transport in some areas of waterways;
    • Limit free movements of fish to their spawning, feeding and rearing grounds due to set-up of thresholds and
    locks;
    • Increased soil erosion and sediment transport towards waterways;
    • Reduce biodiversity in cleared shoreline or terrestrial areas;
    • Introduce invasive plant species;
    • Land expropriation and displacement;
    • Change to landscape.


                                                    Page 7 of 11
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
The following potential indirect and /or long term impacts were among other identified:
• Increased risks of waterborne diseases (schistosomiasis, cholera, Guinea worm, malaria);
• Increased risks of conflicts between farmers, breeders and fishermen;
• Depending on its relative importance, the set-up of a tax or royalty on River Transport, may contribute to limit
commerce and exchanges between communities;
• In some areas, it may limit access to water for some downstream uses and contribute to water losses;
• At the level of the dredged sand bars, there may be some difficulties to access shoreline for different uses
because of the disposal of dredged material.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
N/A except for the no project alternative
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Safeguard instruments. Both a framework and specific safeguards instruments approaches were applied.
Therefore, a combined (i) Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and (ii) Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF) were prepared and described the procedures and processes that would be followed in
preparing and disclosing site specific safeguard instruments where required as soon as the exact locations and
scope of sub-project activities are known. In addition a specific ESIAs for the docking piers at Kouakourou,
Diondiori were prepared, disclosed in the country and through the World Bank website before appraisal.

The ESIA for the docking pier of Youwarou was received at the Bank for review on April 19, 2017.

Due to the fact that some sections of the project area are currently subject to insecurity and the access to several
sites remain difficult, it was agreed that a preliminary ESIA would be prepared for the sites for which enough
information is available and that it would be also disclosed readily. As soon as the relevant information on the
remaining sites is known the ESIA would be finalized and re-disclosed in country and in the World Bank
website. The works will be scheduled in a way that is consistent with the phasing of the ESIA.

The Government of Mali notified the Niger Basin Authority on April, 20, 2017 with a deadline for comments on
May 20th, 2017. The notification clearly indicated the potential volume of water that will be used annually 10
million cubic meters, which represents 0.05% and 0.01% respectively for the dry and wet years.

Institutional Arrangement for safeguards management: It was agreed that the PIU within the Ministry of
Transport will be fully responsible for the project safeguards compliance while ABFN will responsible for
safeguards management for the whole project. ABFN has already an Environmental and Social Unit with a high
skilled environmental Specialist who was involved in the whole safeguards preparation process. This Unit will
be reinforced by a Social Development Specialist. A relevant Environmental and Social capacity strengthening
plan will be prepared and implemented.

All bidding documents will include relevant contractors environmental and social prescriptions. ABFN and
UCPMT will be working closely with the relevant line ministries including the Ministry of Environment,
Sanitation and Sustainable Development; Ministry of Housing, Land and Urbanism; Ministry of Solidarity and
Humanitarian Action, Ministry of Health and Public Hygiene), COMANAV; and other existing relevant bodies
in charge to manage Niger River and Civil Society Organizations.

Maintenance of RAMSAR site integrity: the authorities agreed to take all relevant actions that will maintain the
integrity of RAMSAR site. The activities that were proposed are expected to increase the level of biodiversity

                                                 Page 8 of 11
   within specific sites in the IND.

   Interaction between feasibility study and ESIA consultants. The consultant completing the feasibility studies
   worked closely with the consultants working on the Environmental and Social Impacts (ESIAs) studies for the
   main infrastructures.

   Implementation cost of safeguard instruments. The frameworks and specific instruments that were prepared as
   indicated above assessed the safeguards implementation costs. The costs of the implementation of the
   environmental mitigation measures under the ESMPs will be almost entirely included in the contractor contract,
   while the costs of the Resettlement Action Plans will be directly borne by the Government.

   Niger river Observatory: The project includes also an activity aiming at informing the institutional and
   regulatory framework applicable to the management of the river. In addition Niger river Observatory will be set
   up to provide monitoring capabilities within the Ministry of Environment in coordination with other parties such
   as the Ministry of Water and the regional Niger Basin authority based in Niamey.
   5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
   safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
   The key stakeholders are the communities living in the IND, Traditional rulers, local authorities and Civil
   society organizations.
   An extensive public consultation process has taken place during the preparation of the pre-feasibility studies and
   the safeguards framework and specific instruments in Youwarou, Mopti, Ténenkou, Djenné et Macina Circles
   from July 2016 to March 2017. During project implementation ample provision has been made for pursuing this
   consultation and participatory process. At the institutional level all relevant sectors are associated and will be
   represented in the project Steering Committee.
   .




B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                             16-Oct-2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                                          11-Apr-2017
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




   Mali                                                                           18-Apr-2017
 Comments:
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                     16-Oct-2016
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                  14-Apr-2017
 "In country" Disclosure
PHRESCTRY




 Mali                                                                     18-Apr-2017
 Comments:
 Pest Management Plan
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  A
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of submission to InfoShop
 "In country" Disclosure
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.

                                                   Page 9 of 11
    If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)           Yes [X]   No []        NA     []
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice          Yes [X]   No []        NA     []
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP                   Yes [X]   No []        NA     []
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or           Yes []    No [X]       NA     []
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or            Yes []    No [X]       NA     []
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
 project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
PHCompliance




 OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management                  Yes [X]   No []        NA     []
 issues?
 Is a separate PMP required?                                         Yes []    No [X]       NA     []
 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                 Yes [X]   No []        NA     []
 safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements
 included in project design?If yes, does the project team
 include a Pest Management Specialist?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural           Yes [X]   No []        NA     []
 property?
 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the         Yes [X]   No []        NA     []
 potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                     Yes [X]   No []        NA     []
 framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
 prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards       Yes [X]   No []        NA     []
 or Practice Manager review the plan?
 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                       Yes []    No [X]       TBD    []
 Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access        Yes [X]   No []        TBD    []
 to assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means
 of livelihoods)

          200 Provide estimated number of people to be affected
PHCompliance




          OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                       Yes []    No []        NA     [X]
          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent   Yes []    No []        NA     [X]
          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
          Bank?
          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared     Yes []    No []        NA     [X]

                                                     Page 10 of 11
          and arrangements been made for public awareness and
          training?
PHCompliance




          OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?        Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the       Yes []      No [X]       NA   []
          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
          Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and
          sent?
          Has the RVP approved such an exception?
PHCompliance
                                                                        Yes []      No []        NA   [X]
          The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the   Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
          World Bank's Infoshop?
          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a        Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
          public place in a form and language that are understandable
          and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




          All Safeguard Policies
          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional    Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
          measures related to safeguard policies?
          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been          Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
          included in the project cost?
          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
          related to safeguard policies?
          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
          the project legal documents?


         III. Approval
         Task Team Leader(s):                 Name:Hocine Chalal,Cheick Omar Tidiane Diallo
         Approved By:
         Safeguards Advisor:                  Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)          Date: 24-Apr-2017
         Practice Manager/Manager:            Name: Benoit Bosquet (PMGR)         Date: 25-Apr-2017




                                                       Page 11 of 11
