                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSR18593
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Jun-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Jul-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Lesotho                                      Project ID:           P119432
                            Project Name:      Lesotho Smallholder Agriculture Development Project (P119432)
                            Task Team          Ijeoma Emenanjo,Pedro Arlindo
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          06-Jun-2011              Estimated     10-Nov-2011
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GFA13                     Lending       Specific Investment Loan
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                       No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        24.46           Total Bank Financing:      10.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                                Financing Source                                                  Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                    3.48
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                          10.00
                              International Fund for Agriculture Development                                                       10.00
                              Local Farmer Organizations                                                                            0.98
                              Total                                                                                                24.46
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase marketed output among project
                           beneficiaries in Lesotho#s smallholder agriculture sector.
                           Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)



                                                                                 Page 1 of 7
                         The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase marketed output among project
                         beneficiaries in Lesotho#s smallholder agriculture sector.
                          3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project consists of three components implemented over six years: (a) Increasing Agricultural
                         Market Opportunities; (b) Increasing Market-oriented Smallholder Production; and (c) Project
                         Management. All activities are ongoing. Due to Lesotho➢❨ s high exposure to natural disasters, the
                         Restructuring will include a CERC (Component 4) which will enable the Government to reallocate
                         funds to El Nino related drought response and recovery. The CERC will be used for the procurement
                         of goods, works and services in response to the urgent needs. An Emergency Response Operations
                         Manual will be prepared for this component, detailing financial management, procurement,
                         safeguards and any other necessary implementation arrangements.

                         This ISDS is being issued in conjunction with the restructuring of the project which has no
                         implication on the safeguards category or safeguards arrangements of the project. All safeguards
                         requirement put in place, will remain in force until the closing
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is operating in four districts: Leribe, Botha-Bothe, Berea and Mafeteng. For competitive
                         grants, Maseru-based market operators who are active in the districts may be considered. For
                         interventions under Component 2, the project area is suggested to include those parts of the four
                         districts that offer the more potential for market-oriented production by small-scale farmers.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Kisa Mfalila (GEN01)
                         Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (GFA13)
                         Majbritt Fiil-Flynn (GEDDR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                          4.04
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
                          Pest Management OP 4.09     Yes
                          Physical Cultural           No
                          Resources OP/BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                          BP 4.10
                          Involuntary Resettlement    Yes
                          OP/BP 4.12
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                          4.37
                          Projects on International   Yes
                          Waterways OP/BP 7.50



                                                                     Page 2 of 7
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                Component 1 of the project will provide support to successful applicants through a Competitive
                              Grants Program designed to increase competitiveness, improve mark
                              et access, add value, and improve service provision. Activities to be undertaken under both
                              categories of grants are expected to have negative impacts on the bio-physical environment. For
                              example, under the agriculture-oriented business category, processing of fruits and vegetables and
                              production of pickles and juices involve wet processes that require liquid waste water treatment to
                              meet acceptable standards; operation of slaughter houses and manufacturing of meat products
                              produce solid wastes that require proper solid waste and effluent management systems (which are
                              likely to require substantial volumes of water for maintaining acceptable hygiene standards); and
                              operation of starch mills (corn and sorghum) creates noise and emits fuel fumes. Component 1
                              therefore triggers OP/BP 4.01 for Environmental Assessment. Activities to be undertaken under
                              both categories of grants also are expected to contribute to increased use by farmers of fertilizers
                              and chemicals, such as pesticides and herbicides. Component 1 therefore also triggers OP/BP 4.09
                              for Pest Management.

                             Component 2 will support small-scale farmers in their efforts to increase production of marketable
                             commodities and respond more readily to market requirements, to help motivated semi-
                             subsistence producers to improve the productivity of their agricultural activities and become more
                             market-oriented, and to address related natural resource management concerns. The component
                             will include three main activities: (a) preparation and implementation of Agricultural Investment
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Plans (AIPs); (b) strengthening the capacity of local agricultural services to support the
                             preparation and implementation of the AIPs; and (c) developing partnerships with locally-based
                             NGOs and other service providers to demonstrate innovative technology packages within the
                             context of the AIPs. The component will deliver the following outputs: (i) AIPs prepared and
                             interventions identified, (ii) investments in imp roved production systems implemented, (ii)
                             sustainable management of priority natural resources by users strengthened, and (iii) innovative
                             technologies demonstrated.

                             Activities to be undertaken under this component are expected to have negative impacts on the
                             bio-physical environment. For example, under investments in improved production systems and
                             innovative technology packages, farmers will engage in land clearing and preparation, as well as
                             introduction of mechanized farming. Component 2 therefore also triggers OP/BP 4.01 for
                             Environmental Assessment.

                             Component 3 will support project management and sector coordination. At national level, there
                             will be a project management committee and a project management u nit for day-to-day
                             management and coordination of project activities, monitoring and evaluation, financial
                             management, procurement, and technical specialists responsible for component activities. At
                             district level, there will be district management committees and one project field officer per
                             district. Activities under this component are not expected to have adverse environmental and


                                                                         Page 3 of 7
                          social impacts.

                          OP/BP 4.01: Environmental Assessment. Since the exact nature and location of project
Public Disclosure Copy




                          interventions cannot be determined at this stage, the Borrower has prepared an Environmental and
                          Social Management Framework (ESMF) spelling out the procedures that will be followed to
                          mitigate any adverse environmental and social impacts of project investments. The ESMF
                          formulates standard methods and procedures, along with institutional arrangements for screening,
                          reviewing, implementing and monitoring specific project activities and, if needed, Environment
                          Management Plans (EMPs). The implementation manuals for the project activities will also assure
                          that activities are conducted within the guidelines provided by the ESMF.

                           OP/BP 4.09: Pest Management. The project aims to promote more sustainable agricultural
                          production methods and does not foresee any direct investment in pesticides. However, it cannot
                          be ruled out that project activities might indirectly promote the increased use of fertilizers and
                          purchase of pesticides. Therefore, pest and pesticide management issues relevant to the project are
                          discussed in the Pest Management Plan (PMP) prepared for the project to cover potential increased
                          purchase and use of fertilizers and other agricultural chemicals pesticide during project
                          implementation. The Borrowers will abide by the WHO negative list as one measure to mitigate
                          risks associated with pesticide application.

                          OP/BP 4.11: Physical Cultural Resources. The policy is not directly triggered by the project, but
                          in some of the districts in which the project will be implemented, such as Leribe and Botha Bothe,
                          artifacts from historical cultural resources have been found at some places. The project will
                          establish a Physical Cultural Resources Chance Find Procedure to put in place procedures for
                          handling chance finds that might occur during the implementation of the project.

                           OP/BP 4.12: Involuntary Resettlement. It is not anticipated that there will be any land
                          acquisitions as a direct result of the project. However, some people in the project area might have
                          to be resettled as a result of the recently passed Land Act or might be affected by activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                          supported under sub-component 2.1. The policy is triggered as a precautionary measure in case
                          project beneficiaries are affected by the new legislation or in the unlikely event that project-
                          supported activities might require involuntary resettlement, which could occur, for example, if a
                          farmers group chooses to establish a processing center and establishment of the center requires
                          land acquisition.

                           OP 7.50: Projects on International Waterways. Small-scale irrigation activities could be financed
                          under sub-component 2.1. Since the project will use a demand-driven planning process, it is not
                          known how many such schemes might be financed and in which locations investments might take
                          place. Since Lesotho is part of the Orange-Senqu river basin, Lesotho has to notify the other
                          riparians to this basin, namely, South Africa, Namibia and Botswana.

                            It is the assessment of Bank staff that the proposed activities will not cause appreciable harm to
                           the other riparian s, and that the proposed activities will not be appreciably harmed by the other
                           riparians# possible water use.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             n/a



                                                                     Page 4 of 7
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            n/a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            While capacity differs between institutions, at the overall country level, environmental oversight
                           capacity is adequate. All of the institutions that will be involved in the implementation of the
                           project have previously implemented Bank-funded projects or are currently involved in the
                           implementation of Bank-funded projects or programs. As such, they are familiar with the Bank#s
                           safeguards policies and have gained experience in the implementation and oversight of Bank-
                           funded projects.

                           To ensure that the project remains in compliance with the government#s regulatory framework, as
                           well as Bank safeguard policies, funds have been earmarked in Component 3 to provide hands-on
                           training and capacity building to national- and district-level staff/stakeholders tasked with
                           oversight and application of the project's safeguards instruments. Particular emphasis will be
                           placed on training core staff assigned with oversight of the project's safeguard policies during
                           project preparation and the first year of implementation.

                           A local environmental specialist will be hired and made available to the PMU to backstop
                           environmental and social safeguard issues of the grant and investment activities.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The draft safeguards documents (ESMF and RPF) have been extensively discussed with various
                           groups of stakeholders at district and national level, including rele
                           vant government agencies, national and international NGOs, and farmer associations.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The safeguard documents (ESMF and RPF) were reviewed in Lesotho by the National
                           Environmental Secretariat prior to being submitted to the Bank.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        03-May-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     11-Jun-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        30-May-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     11-Jun-2011
                         "In country" Disclosure

                          Comments:

                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         03-May-2011
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      11-Jun-2011
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]


                                                                      Page 6 of 7
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ijeoma Emenanjo,Pedro Arlindo
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Chakib Jenane (PMGR)                          Date: 14-Jul-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
