                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC5380

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Jun-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Jun-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Ghana                             Project ID:       P145316
                            Project Name:       Dedicated Grant Mechanism for Local Communities (P145316)
                            Task Team           Nyaneba E. Nkrumah
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           13-Jun-2016                       Estimated         26-Aug-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GEN01                             Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Forestry (60%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%)
                            Theme(s):         Other social development (30%), Climate change (70%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          5.50               Total Bank Financing:            0.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              Borrower                                                                         0.00
                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                     5.50
                              Total                                                                            5.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The PDO is to strengthen local communities➢❨ capacity to understand climate change/REDD+ and
                           their role in local and global solutions, leading to strengthened engagement in local initiatives related
                           to REDD+, and in the Climate Change Agenda.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project will finance the demand-driven provision of grants to community
                           organizations. The grants will directly complement GOGs efforts to reduce deforestation and
                         degradation, specifically Ghana?s Forest Investment Plan and in so doing create a simultaneous
                         community-led and state-led effort to reduce deforestation and degradation. This approach
                         complements, and contributes to, GoG?s ongoing efforts to engage non-state actors, in particular
Public Disclosure Copy




                         local communities in sustainable natural resource management.

                         The proposed project is part of a global program ? the Dedicated Grant Mechanism for Indigenous
                         Peoples and Local Communities (DGM) ? which has allocated $5.5 million in grant resources to
                         Ghana. The DGM was designed specifically to promote the inclusion of communities reliant on
                         forests in policy formulation and initiatives that seek to reduce deforestation and degradation.
                         Indeed, the creation of the DGM is an acknowledgment of the critical role that natural resources play
                         in the lives of rural communities, their livelihoods, culture, and opportunities for economic
                         development. Ghana?s participation in the DGM is relevant given the rapid deterioration of forest
                         resources and the high dependency on natural resources. The DGM-Ghana will fully complement
                         the FIP by involving local communities in the REDD agenda in ways that recognize the role that they
                         play, as users and stewards of the forests and as owners and users of land.

                         The DGM global design is a product of a collaborative effort between the SCF and indigenous
                         peoples and local community representatives from various countries. Ghana has been ably
                         represented in this process, with rigorous engagement from self-selected representatives. Indeed, the
                         global program design and the operational guidelines have been the subject of numerous
                         consultations since 2009. Initial consultations in 2009 and a presentation to the ninth session of the
                         UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues in April 2010 were followed by regional meetings in
                         Accra, Vientiane, Lima, and Sydney (from November 2010 ? February 2011) and global meetings in
                         Bangkok and Washington DC in May 2011. These meetings resulted in the completion and approval
                         of a global program design in October 2011. In November 2012 operational guidelines for the
                         program were provisionally approved.

                         Country-level projects are in the nascent stages of preparation. In line with the agreed-upon design
                         framework laid out in the global design document and the operational guidelines, the proposed
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project will fund activities geared towards strengthening community capacity to: engage on policy;
                         participate in land use planning, production practices, and organization; and to develop as
                         entrepreneurs and businesses. The DGM project area will directly overlap with that of the FIP?the
                         Western and Brong-Ahafo Regions?however, national level activities such as capacity building and
                         knowledge sharing could be considered.

                         The proposed project components are as follows:

                         Component 1 ? Community Grants (approximately $4.1 million): This component will finance
                         grants to community based organizations. Grants will be financed for activities that fall under pre-
                         determined themes. Possible windows include capacity building (which could include financing
                         delivery of training to communities to expand their knowledge through workshops, seminars, and
                         other methods of training); knowledge exchange (which could finance activities that involve hands-
                         on, practical transfer of knowledge nationally, regionally, and internationally through, for example,
                         study tours, virtual discussions, development of community/farmer demonstration plots, community
                         level internships, etc.); pilot activities (such as providing matching or seed grants to communities to
                         engage in new livelihood activities); and information dissemination. The list of windows and
                         potential activities is deliberately vague because the community level consultations have yet to be
                         conducted and because the FIP (IBRD and IFC) activities have yet to be defined making any
                         crystallization of DGM grant windows at this point, premature. The final list will be developed in
                         consultation with relevant stakeholders to ensure that synergies are maximized and that overlaps are
                         eliminated. Also to be decided during project preparation is the size of grants and potential the
                         process for targeting beneficiaries (with close attention to the FIP projects).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2 - Information and Communication (approximately $0.5 million): This component will
                         finance activities aimed at sharing information on the DGM at the national and regional levels. This
                         may include media coverage (radio, newspaper, social media) and, as necessary, workshops with
                         relevant stakeholders.

                         Component 3: Project Management (approximately $0.9 million): This component will finance the
                         costs of the National Executing Agency (NEA) which will implement the project. The NEA will be
                         selected through a competitive process (see also section on Implementation Agency Assessment).
                         The NEA will be charged with tasks including developing review and risk assessment criteria,
                         disbursing funds to grant projects, ensuring appropriate use of DGM funds, maintaining
                         documentation of country projects, and reporting to the WB on use of DGM funds. In addition,
                         under this component the NEA will undertake monitoring and evaluation activities of the various pil
                         ot activities.

                         The DGM-Ghana will be designed and implemented with the following principles: (a) ownership
                         and joint decision-making by local communities; (b) transparency and accountability in selection of
                         implementing partners, members of governing bodies and beneficiaries; (c) flexibility, efficiency and
                         administrative simplicity to enable easy and streamlined access of grants by local communities; and,
                         (d) Social inclusion and equity by reaching out and ensuring the participation and the protection of
                         women, children, elders, and others vulnerable to exclusion. Particular attention will be given to
                         activities addressing gender-specific livelihoods, health, and cultural issues, and activities promoting
                         the engagement of youth. This may include communication efforts targeted at women and youth,
                         designing grant windows focused on women and youth activities, etc. In addition, the preparation
                         process will pay particular attention to vulnerability.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The DGM will be overseen by a National Steering Committee (NSC) which will be supported by a
                         National Executing Agency (NEA). The NSC?s main function will be to select proposals to award
                         grants and monitor progress of the projects. In addition it will, among other things, ensure that DGM
                         lessons are transmitted to ongoing national processes. NSC members will be selected during project
                         preparation with the assistance of relevant stakeholders. The NSC will reflect a balance along gender
                         and regional lines. The inclusion of youth will be encouraged. The NSC will include decision
                         making members who represent local communities; active observers which would include
                         representatives from government, MDBs etc.; and a Secretary who will coordinate and support the
                         meetings. The NSC will be supported by a National Executing Agency which will implement the
                         project. The NEA will be a nongovernmental organization, with the requisite capacity to prepare and
                         implement the proposed project according to Bank operational policies (fiduciary, procurement,
                         safeguards, etc.). The entity will be responsible for a number of activities during implementation
                         including for example, preparation of procedures and guidelines for oversight mechanisms, country-
                         level risk assessment criteria, management of grant making process and monitoring compliance with
                         World Bank?s safeguards, procurement, and financial management requirements. A financing
                         agreement will be signed between the NEA and the Bank and subsequent grant agreements will be
                         signed between the NEA and individual grantees. The NEA will be selected during project
                         preparation and will start operation after project approval.
                           ?
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will focus on the High Forest Zone in the Western and Brong Ahafo Regions although
                           there may be scope for some national level activities. Land use in the HFZ includes cocoa farms,
                           subsistence crops and fallow lands. Biodiversity in the HFZ is high and the HFZ falls within the
                           West African Biodiversity Hotspot. The focus on these two regions mirrors the focus of the Ghana
                           Forest Investment Plan which the DGM directly complements.

                           The Brong Ahafo region covers an area of approximately 39,558 km2 and an estimated population of
                           2.2 million (GSS, 2010) with a population density of 58 persons/km2.

                           The predominant vegetation zones are the moist semi-deciduous forest, transitional and the Guinea
                           Savanna woodland roughly representing the southern, middle and northern parts of the region
                           respectively. The forest belt is mainly found to the south and south-western parts of the Region
                           while the savanna wood land predominates in the eastern half of the northern third of the region. The
                           region has access to economic trees estimated at 29 million m3 ? (17% of national stock).
                           The Western Region covers an area of approximately 239,221 km2 and an estimated population of
                           1,924,577 .

                           About 75 percent of its vegetation is within the High Forest Zone and lies in the equatorial climate
                           zone. The rich tropical forest makes it one of the largest producers of raw and sawn timbers as well
                           as processed wood products. The region is home to the Ankasa Conservation Area (approximately
                           500km2, which is comprised of Nini-Snhie National Park and the Ankasa Resource Reserve.

                           Western region is the largest producer of cocoa and timber and the second highest producer of gold
                           (both large scale, small scale, and artisanal mining). In addition, the region has commercial
Public Disclosure Copy




                           plantations of rubber and palm oil and is now producing oil.
                           Within the HFZ cocoa farms, subsistence crops and fallow lands are dominant land use times. Both
                           regions have diverse populations including various ethnic, sub-ethnic and linguistic groups.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The project will be implemented by a National Executing Agency (NEA) which will be selected
                           using Bank guidelines. The NEA will be required to have the capacity to implement the proposed
                           project according to Bank operational policies including safeguards policies and as such it will be
                           necessary for the NEA to have relevant competencies in its staffing. Nevertheless, the Bank team
                           will provide additional capacity support to the NEA on safeguards policies early in project
                           preparation and on an ongoing and as needed basis during the implementation period. The
                           implementation of the project will be overseen by a National Steering Committee (NSC) whose main
                           function will be to select proposals to award grants and monitor progress of the project. Given this
                           oversight function, capacity building activities for the NSC will also be required.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Dora Nsuwa Cudjoe (GEN06)
                           Michael Gboyega Ilesanmi (GSU01)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                         Safeguard Policies            Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment      Yes        A Program level ESMF has been prepared for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.01                               whole DGM program and is intended to provide
                                                                  general guidance for country level applicable
                                                                  safeguards instruments. However, this project is an
                                                                  integral part of the Forestry Investment Program and
                                                                  since the two projects operate in the same area, the
                                                                  FIP safeguards documents will be used as the
                                                                  country level ESMF. In the case of the Ghana DGM
                                                                  project the country level ESMF will be consistent
                                                                  with but more specific and detailed than the Program
                                                                  ESMF. In particular it will cover the requirements of
                                                                  the specific environmental policies triggered in this
                                                                  operation, namely the Natural Habitats Policy and
                                                                  Forest Policy.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes        The project will operate in the high forest belt of
                                                                  Ghana and although there will be a focus on off-
                                                                  reserve areas that are more degraded, these areas still
                                                                  constitute natural habitat for many species such as
                                                                  birds, antelope sp, etc. The project focuses on
                                                                  enriching the natural habitat in these areas. Screening
                                                                  will occur to ensure that project activities enhance,
                                                                  rather than degrade the natural habitat.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes        The project will finance subproject activities on farm
                                                                  lands, community lands and possibly degraded forest
                                                                  areas. Activities, which are demand driven, will be
                                                                  those that enhance the natural environment.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                  Potential subprojects include those that increase
                                                                  biomass such as agroforestry, plantation stands (in
                                                                  non forested areas) for biomass and carbon, tree
                                                                  nurseries, and so on. The forests will not be
                                                                  negatively impacted but because the activities are
                                                                  near or in forested areas, all subproject activities will
                                                                  be screened for any negative impact.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No         No procurement/use of pesticides or other agro-
                                                                  chemicals is envisaged under this project.However,
                                                                  screening of sites for pilot activities will include
                                                                  specific screening under the ESMF to avoid
                                                                  adversely affecting physical cultural heritage, such as
                                                                  sacred groves.
                         Physical Cultural Resources   No         No PCR should be affected through the
                         OP/BP 4.11                               implementation of this project.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      No         There are no indigenous peoples as per OP 4.10.
                         4.10                                     Reviews of the applicability of 4.10 in Ghana have
                                                                  determined that characteristics outlined under
                                                                  paragraph 4 are not present, and the policy is not
                                                                                                                        applicable. The Global Mechanism refers to Local
                                                                                                                        Communities and Indigenous Peoples, the project in
                                                                                                                        Ghana refers to local communities as beneficiaries,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        reflecting the specific identification in that country
                                                                                                                        context.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                Yes                        As the project will include restriction of access to
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                parks and protected areas and will include activities
                                                                                                                        in such areas, a Process Framework will be prepared
                                                                                                                        and disclosed prior to appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         Not applicable.

                                 Projects on International      No                                                      Not applicable.
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      Not applicable.
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 18-May-2016
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      This project is an integral part of the Forestry Investment Program and since the two projects
                                      operate in the same area, the FIP safeguards documents will be used as the country level ESMF.
                                      The FIP project is approximately a year ahead of the preparation schedule for the DGM and
                                      therefore the safeguard documents will be completed and disclosed prior to the finalization of the
                                      appraisal stage ISDS (May, 2016).
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Nyaneba E. Nkrumah
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)                                                                                                    Date: 22-Jun-2016
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Magda Lovei (PMGR)                                                                                                     Date: 24-Jun-2016
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
