                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC16748

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Mar-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 31-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Pakistan                         Project ID:      P154987
                            Project Name:      National Transmission Modernization I Project (P154987)
                            Task Team          Anh Nguyet Pham,Anjum Ahmad
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          10-Oct-2016                      Estimated        15-Mar-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEE06                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
                            Theme(s):          Infrastructure services for private sector development (90%), Other public sector
                                               governance (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    493.00                     Total Bank Financing:        425.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      68.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        425.00
                              Total                                                                        493.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase the availability, reliability and
                           efficiency of selected segments of the national transmission system in Pakistan.
                           C. Project Description
                           1. The proposed project would invest in high-priority transmission infrastructure, information
                           communication technology (ICT) and technical assistance (TA). Infrastructure investments would be
                         either transmission lines, transmission substations or a combination of the two. The project will
                         create new assets or rehabilitate existing parts of the system. The subprojects would be selected
                         based on system planning conducted by NTDC that identifies the highest priority improvements. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ICT investment would support better corporate and operations management, while the TA would
                         enable NTDC to implement the project. The project is envisaged to consist of three components as
                         described below.

                         -        Component A: Upgrading and Expanding of the Transmission Network (estimated cost $448
                         million, of which $380 million IBRD loan and $68 million NTDC counterpart funds). The
                         component would include (a) upgrading, expanding and rehabilitating of selected existing 500 and
                         220 kV power substations and associated lines; and (b) constructing of new 500 and 220 kV
                         substations and transmission lines. If NTDC decides to start operating at 765kV, currently under
                         consideration, subprojects at that voltage will also be eligible.
                         -        Component B: Deployment of Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) for NTDC (estimated
                         cost $25 million, all IBRD loan). The component includes implementation of the information and
                         communication (ICT) infrastructure modernization phase for NTDC, followed by development and
                         deployment of an ERP system aimed at strengthening the company’s management capabilities
                         through the use of an integrated ICT system to facilitate its financial, human resources management,
                         inventory and asset management, and metering data management. The component includes the
                         procurement of software licenses, hardware and consulting services for implementation support,
                         change management and ICT capacity building and strategic sourcing to ensure the sustainability of
                         the ERP system.
                         -        Component C: Project Management, Technical Assistance, and Capacity Building (estimated
                         cost $20 million, all IBRD loan). The component includes (a) a project implementation support
                         consultant; and (b) capacity building program for NTDC to plan, invest and operate the upgraded
                         national transmission grid.

                         2. Detailed cost estimates for each component and financing arrangement will be finalized during
                         project preparation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Component A is based on a framework approach to allow flexibility. The proposed subprojects
                         will be prepared and implemented in two groups. Group I includes all the subprojects that are given
                         highest priority, have completed feasibility studies and required safeguards documentation.
                         Subprojects in Group I will be appraised during preparation and the bidding documents for goods
                         and works will be ready by the time of negotiations. Group II consists of the remaining potential
                         subprojects the need of which are identified in the NTDC Least Cost Development Plan (LCDP) but
                         not the exact locations and details. Each proposal for a subproject brought forward for financing
                         includes the feasibility study, economic analysis, safeguards plans, prepared in accordance with the
                         Project’s safeguards frameworks. Financing for each subproject will be made available when the
                         proposal complies with the eligibility criteria, on first come first approved basis until all funds
                         allocated to the component has been committed. This will ensure flexibility, allowing the use of cost
                         savings or shifting of funds between subprojects and creating incentive for timely implementation.

                         4. Subprojects under Group II are preliminarily identified with NTDC but subject to change and
                         require more precise identification and definition. Changing priorities mean that some subprojects
                         may be dropped and others substituted. Precise siting or alignments are not likely to be finalized
                         during preparation. Subprojects in Group II would be selected based on key parameters or eligibility
                         criteria. A resettlement policy framework (RPF), and an environment and social management
                         framework (ESMF) providing guidance for preparation of safeguards plans for subprojects in Group
                         II will be prepared satisfactory to the Bank, consulted upon with interested stakeholders and
                         disclosed before appraisal. A sample of Eligibility Criteria for subprojects is provided below; this
                         would be discussed and finalized during preparation:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         -        Sub-project is consistent with the LCDP;
                         -        Sub-project will contribute to the PDO;
                         -        Technical design of the sub-projects meet Pakistan Technical Standards and feasibility
                         requirements;
                         -        Subproject has at least EIRR of 12%, calculated using a methodology acceptable to the
                         Bank;
                         -        Subproject safeguard instruments (such as environmental and social impact assessment
                         (ESIA) and resettlement action plan (RAP)) prepared in accordance with ESMF and RPF satisfactory
                         to the Bank, consulted upon with stakeholders and disclosed;
                         -        All necessary clearances/approvals for implementing the sub-project, including
                         environmental licenses have been given by the relevant Pakistani authorities;
                         -        Procurement and implementation plans, satisfactory to the Bank have been prepared and
                         approved.

                         5. Component B will also be sequenced. The first phase will establish a robust ICT infrastructure
                         across NTDC and a pilot implementation of the ERP system. This will include implementing a robust
                         corporate data center, a disaster recovery center, Wide Area Network (WAN) and Local Area
                         Networks (LAN) linking all NTDC corporate facilities and staff nationwide. Phase I will be
                         appraised by the Bank and has the bidding documents for goods and works ready by the time of
                         negotiations. The second phase, which focuses on the expansion and rollout of the ERP nationwide
                         in NTDC, will be prepared during implementation and approved for financing on the basis of
                         eligibility criteria to be discussed and finalized during the project preparation.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         6. The provisional list of subprojects under Component A suggests that subprojects are scattered in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         various urban, peri- urban and rural areas in Pakistan. Most of subprojects are located in Punjab
                         Province, while a few subprojects are located in the provinces ofSindh, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP),
                         Balochistan and in the Islamabad Capital Territory. The majority of the sub stations will be located
                         near the load centers, which are urban and peri- urban areas. Component B and C are technical
                         assistance activities which will be carried out within the existing premises of NTDC and can be
                         considered to have no safeguards impacts.

                         7. In capacity upgrading (augmentation) of existing substations, the key activity is to install
                         additional new 500/220kV or 220/132 kV power transformers, reactors and associated equipment. In
                         rehabilitation of existing substations, existing 500 kV or 220 kV transformers and associated
                         equipment will be replaced with new ones of higher capacity. Rehabilitation also includes conversion
                         of existing substations with open air insulated switchyard (AIS) to more compact and indoor gas
                         insulated substations (GIS). This activity does not require land acquisition and will be implemented
                         within the premises of these substations. Some substations commissioned before 1970s, may contain
                         polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). Safe disposal of replaced equipment will require adequate
                         mitigation measures to ensure environmental protection and avoiding contamination of natural
                         resources like water and air. Health, safety and construction related environmental impacts need to be
                         identified in the EMP and adequately implemented. While most of upgrading subprojects do not
                         require land acquisition, some subprojects in Group II may require limited additional pieces of land,
                         which is normally adjacent to the existing substations.
                         8. New 500 kV and 220 kV substations typically have two to four power transformers and associated
                         equipment at 500, 220 and 130 kV, a control room and ancillary equipment.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The key components in 500 and 220 kV power substation are; (i) switchyard bay, (ii) control
                         building, (iii) residential houses for staff with water supply and sanitation facilities (iv) fencing and
                         landscaping, and (v) short access road. Typically a new substation requires short transmission lines
                         connecting it to the existing transmission network. A new substation requires an enclosed, leveled
                         site free of any vegetation or human habitation (except for substation operators), typically 50-60
                         acres for a 500 kV substation and 30-40 acres for a 220 kV substation. 750/500/220 kV Islamabad
                         West Substation requires about 150 acres. New substations may also require additional permanent
                         and temporary land acquisition for 500 or 220 kV transmission connections or upgrading or new
                         existing access roads. New subproject sites can be, and normally are, selected flexibly within a
                         certain area to minimize the scale of such structures and impacts on environment or land acquisition.
                         ESIA for each subproject will ensure that adequate environmental management programs are
                         developed and implemented.

                         9. Site visits and screening undertaken by the task team for Group I subprojects has determined that
                         no natural, or critical habitats, including forests, will be impacted. However, as NTDC can update,
                         replace or propose new subprojects in the second group, these subprojects may be located in areas
                         that have impacts on natural habitats or forest. During preparation, these potentials will be identified
                         and sufficient mitigation measures will be included in the ESMF. Most project activities will take
                         place at the existing sites of the substations or in the vicinity of the existing substations. There is
                         flexibility in the location of new substations and lines. Therefore, impacts on Cultural Resources can
                         be avoided or minimized in design. The ESMF will provide a process for screening out projects with
                         significant impacts, or incorporating a PCR management plan into the EMP or ESIA for minor
                         impacts. All EMPs will contain a chance find procedure.

                         10. No ne of potential subprojects of Group I are located in areas where indigenous communities
                         live. However, new subprojects in the second group may pass through or be located in the areas
Public Disclosure Copy




                         home to indigenous people (IP). The preparation will clarify potential impacts on IP and an
                         Indigenous Policy Framework will be prepared if the policy is triggered.

                         10. Each subproject in Group II will be evaluated against the project safeguard checklist in the
                         ESMF. No subproject will be approved for funding, if any of the following could occur:
                         •       significant degradation or conversion of natural habitats and/or forests in protected areas,
                         proposed protected areas or areas that are considered of special ecological significance.
                         •       temporary or permanent relocation or any other type of impact on physical cultural resources
                         known to be of local, regional or national significance based on national or Provincial lists, proposed
                         national or Provincial lists and/or identified during public consultation with local affected groups.
                         •       any physical cultural resources considered especially important or sensitive particularly to
                         local groups (e.g. gravesites) are located on the site.
                         •       temporary or permanent reduction or degradation to the ecosystem function of, or resources
                         within, a production, conservation or multiple use forest.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         11. NTDC will be the implementing agency for the Project. Currently, NTDC is working with the
                         Bank under the on-going CASA-1000 project and the transmission line to evacuate Dasu HPP, for
                         which a project management unit (PMU) was established and is functioning with support of
                         international consultants. Experience of NTDC investment projects with ADB and JICA in recent
                           years shows evidences of weak institutional capacity, procurement and financial management
                           challenges and delay in project completion.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           12. A dedicated PMU headed by a Project Director will be established. It will be responsible for
                           project preparation and implementation. The PMU would be built on the existing PMU for the
                           transmission connection for Dasu HPP as a single PMU for all WB loans to NTDC. It would be
                           provided with adequate technical, procurement, financial management, environmental and social
                           staff. The PMU would coordinate with various departments of NTDC but would work independently
                           in design and implementation of the project.

                           13, NTDC has a designated Environment and Social Impact Cell (E&SIC) which is responsible for
                           environmental and social assessment and monitoring on behalf of the organization. The E&SIC
                           oversees preparation of environmental assessments, land acquisition plans, liaises with the relevant
                           EPA’s and manages NTDC’s E&S legal compliance.

                           14. Project Implementation Support consultant with adequate experience in environment and social
                           safeguards is being recruited to support NTDC during construction and to prepare subprojects for
                           Group II.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Javaid Afzal (GENDR)
                           Salma Omar (GSU06)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         Yes            The proposed project will help in augmenting/
                           OP/BP 4.01                                      rehabilitating select transmission lines throughout the
                                                                           country and upgrade/construct new substations
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           through NTDC’s prioritized investments. These
                                                                           activities may have temporary, reversible and short
                                                                           to medium term environmental impacts and can be
                                                                           adequately mitigated through a well-planned
                                                                           environmental management and mitigation plans.
                                                                           Based on the proposed activities and likely
                                                                           environmental impacts, which are generally
                                                                           construction related, the project has been rated as
                                                                           category B.
                                                                           For appraisal, ESIA and EMP will be prepared for
                                                                           known sites and an ESMF will be prepared to guide
                                                                           Group II subprojects during project implementation.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04      TBD            No subproject under Group I impacts or passes
                                                                           through any natural or critical habitat. Some of the
                                                                           new transmission lines in Group II may pass through
                                                                           natural or critical habitat. This will be screened
                                                                           during preparation and if there is a potential for
                                                                           natural habitats to be affected, then the policy will be
                                                                           triggered and the ESMF will include screening
                                                                                                                        checklists and suitable mitigation methods. Projects
                                                                                                                        with significant potential impacts can be screened
                                                                                                                        out.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                          TBD                        No subproject under Group I impacts or passes
                                                                                                                        through forests. Some of the new transmission lines
                                                                                                                        in Group II may pass through forests. This will be
                                                                                                                        screened during preparation and if there is a potential
                                                                                                                        that forests will be adversely impacted, then the
                                                                                                                        policy will be triggered and the ESMF will include
                                                                                                                        screening checklists and suitable mitigation methods.
                                                                                                                        Projects with significant potential impacts can be
                                                                                                                        screened out.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                     No                         NNTDC does not use chemicals or pesticides for
                                                                                                                        vegetation removal or land clearing under the
                                                                                                                        transmission lines.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources                                 Yes                        Because project activities will take place at the
                                 OP/BP 4.11                                                                             existing sites of the substations, there will be no
                                                                                                                        impacts on Physical Cultural Resources from Group
                                                                                                                        I subprojects. There is flexibility in the location of
                                                                                                                        new substations and lines. Therefore, impacts on
                                                                                                                        Cultural Resources can be avoided or minimised in
                                                                                                                        design for new subprojects under Group II. The
                                                                                                                        ESMF will provide a process for screening out
                                                                                                                        projects with significant impacts, or incorporating a
                                                                                                                        PCR management plan into the EMP or ESIA for
                                                                                                                        minor impacts. All EMP will contain a chance find
                                                                                                                        procedure.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    TBD                        No subprojects in Group I are located in areas where
                                 4.10                                                                                   IP live. Screening of subprojects of Group II will
                                                                                                                        confirm the likely impacts on IP. If there is the
                                                                                                                        potential that IP could be adversely affected the
                                                                                                                        policy will be triggered and an Indigenous People’s
                                                                                                                        Framework will be prepared for appraisal.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                Yes                        Subprojects involving new substations will have low-
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                intensity impacts involving some temporary or
                                                                                                                        permanent loss of land to substations, transmission
                                                                                                                        tower foundations, and line stringing.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         The project does not involve any works in, on, or
                                                                                                                        around any dam so this policy is not triggered.
                                 Projects on International                                   No                         The project does not involve any works on any of the
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   river/international waterways as defined in the Bank
                                                                                                                        policy.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The project is not located in disputed areas as
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                defined in the Bank’s policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 17-Jun-2016
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and Environment Management Plans for Group I
                             subprojects: March --April 2016
                             Environment and Social Management Framework: March-April 2016
                             Resettlement Planning Framework: March-April 2016
                             Indigenous People’s Framework (if required): March-April 2016
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader(s): Name: Anh Nguyet Pham,Anjum Ahmad
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                      Date: 23-Mar-2016
                           Practice Manager/    Name: Julia Bucknall (PMGR)                        Date: 31-Mar-2016
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
