INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC12083
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Angola                     Project ID:   P154447
Project Name:    Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project
(P154447)
Task Team        Aniceto Timoteo Bila
Leader(s):
Estimated        1-         1Jan-2016       Estimated      15-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFAO7                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%), Public administration-
Agriculture, fishing and forestry (14%), Irrigation a nd drainage (9%),
Agricultural extension and research (9%), Gen  er, sanitation and flood
protection sector (8%)
Theme(s):        Rural services and infrastructure (45%), Rural markets (45%), Rural policies
and institutions (10%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      95.00             Total Bank Financing:    70.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
IFinancing Source Amount
Borrower                                                         20.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development            70.00
LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                               5.00
Total                                                            95.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives


﻿The Project Development Objective is to increase smallholder agricultural production and marketing
in the project areas.
C. Project Description
O
1 .The Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project (SADCP, also known as
MOSAP II in Angola) intends to scale-up activities being implemented under the ongoing Market
Oriented Smallholder Agriculture Project (MOSAP) and will also finance critical new activities, as
per government's medium and long-term agriculture programs. The implementation of the new
project is expected to start on April 1, 2016
2.     The project area is expected to cover 80 communes, which are part of 26 municipalities in
three Provinces of Bi6, Huambo and Malanje. The project is expected to benefit 175,000 smallholder
farmers as direct beneficiaries. The key outcome indicators, that will be used to measure the
performance at the end of the five year project period, are: (i) increased average crop yields; (ii)
increased crop production; and (iii) increased proportion of crop production that is marketed. The
details for the results and performance indicators are provided in Annex 1 and the detailed project
description is provided in Annex 2.
3.     The project strategy is to enable smallholders in the project areas to increase agriculture
productivity and competitiveness to benefit from increased commercialization and market access.
Producing for expanding food markets in the urban areas as well as supplying raw material to the
emerging supply chains and agro-based business enterprises will facilitate the integration of the rural
economy in the overall economy of Angola. This will also facilitate reduction in rural poverty that is
about 58 percent at present as compared to 37 percent overall. The proposed project is designed to
address two critical constraints to agricultural development in Angola. First, it is designed to increase
agriculture and institutional capacity through training programs, both nationally and in the project
areas. Second, it is designed to increase critical investment in irrigation, production and value chain
since the agricultural sector was destroyed and significantly de-capitalized during the civil war.
4.     The project will be implemented over a period of five years from April 2016 through June
30, 2021. The total project cost is estimated to be US$ 95 million, of which US$20 million will be
the in-kind and cash contributions by the Government of Angola and US$5 million equivalent will be
in-kind and/or cash contributions by the project beneficiaries. A $70 million IBRD loan will
a       constitute the remainder of the total project cost.
5.     The target beneficiaries (175,000) are smallholder farmers cultivating, on average, 1-2
hectares of cropland. About 25,000 beneficiaries of the target group (about 14 percent) are expected
to have received initial training from MOSAP and will be targeted under this project to further
improve their organization structures. In addition, they will benefit from targeted interventions to
further improve their specific technical skills and production investments to increase productivity,
production and markets links, through contract farming or out-growers schemes. The remaining
about 150,000 smallholders, will be new beneficiaries that are currently producing at subsistence
level with high level of poverty and food insecurity, but with a potential for increasing productivity,
production and marketing.
6.     The proposed project has been designed to be climate smart, gender and jobs responsive and
nutrition sensitive. Climate smart, refers to a set of agricultural technologies and practices that will
be promoted by the Project to reduce the vulnerability of farming systems to climate change (e.g.
increasing temperatures, more erratic rainfall) while at the same time reducing greenhouse gas


﻿emissions from agriculture. Most of the technologies and practices involved have been around for a
long time, e.g. irrigation, soil conservation and organic matter enhancement, measures to improve
water infiltration, use of environmentally-friendly agro-chemicals and faster-maturing, drought-
resistant crop varieties. Related to gender, first, the project will increase women farmers' production
O
capacity and market access through FFS training, where the aim is that at least 33 % of participants
are women. Training will include issues that are of particular relevance to women such as literacy
training and training in nutrition education Second, the value chain analysis will include assessment
of the roles of women and men in different parts of the value chain to be able to design actions that
benefit both women and men equally. Third, agriculture investment as well as research component
will include investments and crops prioritized by women. The project will also have a positive
impact on employment and job creation in the rural areas by contributing to increased agricultural
production, marketing, agri-business and value addition as well as increased demand for agricultural
inputs and services. Finally, since the project will promote the production of food crops, beans and
vegetables, it is likely to have a positive impact on the food security as well as human nutrition of
rural households.
7.     The project is consistent with the agriculture development programs in the country, as
described in the Medium-Term Agricultural Development Plan of Angola 2013-17. While broadly
similar to the original MOSAP project, the new project differs in the following important aspects.
First, it is larger in scope in terms of absolute funding and number of beneficiaries. Second, it
includes a sub-component to support the development of small-scale irrigated agriculture. Third, in
addition to food crops (maize, cassava, beans and Irish potatoes), it will emphasize the production of
high value crops, particularly vegetable crops. Fourth, it will further strengthen commercialization of
agriculture, including market linkages and contract farming. . The proposed project has three
components: Component 1- Capacity Building and Institutional Development; Component 2-
Support for Increased Production and Commercialization; and Component 3- Project Management,
Monitoring and Evaluation.
Component 1. Capacity Building and Institutional Development (US$ 23 million IBRD and US$20
million equivalent Government)
8.     The objective of this component is to strengthen the technical, institutional, managerial and
marketing skills of 150,000 beneficiaries; of which 25,000 qualified beneficiaries are expected to
a       receive investment support under Component 2 after graduation. All farmers seeking support under
this project must first organize themselves into farmer organizations (groups, associations or
cooperatives). As part of this process, the capacity will also be strengthened for government
agricultural extension specialists, agricultural research institutions, private agricultural service
providers and NGOs related to different aspects of agriculture, including value chain. The expected
results are: (i) smallholder farmer organizations established and strengthened; (ii) technical and
managerial competence of smallholder farmers improved; and (iii) government capacity to support
smallholder agricultural production and commercialization in the project area enhanced. This
component entails the following three sub-components.
28.    This component would focus on strengthening national, provincial and municipal
institutions, develop technical capacity and introduce participatory processes to accelerate the
decentralized agricultural development. This component will also aim to strengthen the technical
and managerial skills of participants and institutions involved in agricultural production and
marketing in the project areas. This component entails the following four sub-components:


﻿a.     Formation and strengthening of Farmers' associations, which would include organizational
and managerial capacities, and technical skills related to modem agricultural technologies and
agronomic practices, agricultural production, marketing, investment and entrepreneurship. Training
of vulnerable groups (e.g. female-headed households) will be given special attention. This will also
O
include training of farmers through farmers' field schools (FFSs), as is being done under MOSAP.
b.     Institutional strengthening of local, provincial and national units of the Ministry of
agriculture (MINAG) to ensure that these institutions can better play their respective roles in the
sector. This sub-component would include support for strengthening institutional capacity in
agricultural extension services (including linkage with research), agricultural research service, small
scale irrigation, agricultural marketing and agricultural statistics. In addition, the capacity of MINAG
staff will be enhanced to prepare and implement appropriate agricultural programs and policies.
There will also be support for strengthening market information systems, linked to farmers' and
traders associations. Finally, the project will also support linkages with research programs relevant to
agriculture that are being undertaken by the Ministry of Science and Technology.
c.     To strengthen agricultural research capacity and global knowledge about the latest
technologies related to selected crops relevant to Angola, support to specific agricultural research
will also be provided. Possible collaboration with both the International Institute for Tropical
Agriculture (IITA) and the Brazilian Corporation of Agricultural Research (EMBRAPA) will be
developed/further strengthened to address agricultural research and disease management issues that
are critical for existing (cassava, maize and beans) and emerging crops (soybean) in Angola. As part
of the CGIAR, IITA is responsible for carrying out research related to cassava, maize and beans in
Africa. EMBRAPA has been working closely with Angola in building agricultural research capacity,
including breeding for disease and pest resistance, in the context of integrated disease and pest
management.
Component 2. Support for Increased Production and Commercialization (US$37 million IBRD and
US$ 5 million equivalent Beneficiaries)
o
9.     The objective of this component is to provide demand based matching investment grants to
smallholder organizations to improve productivity, production and market access for 50,000 eligible
beneficiaries. The beneficiaries for investment support will be selected from the beneficiaries who
a       have been trained through FFS under MOSAP, SADCP or any other appropriate training program.
This component would support three kinds of investments, including: (i) support for the
rehabilitation and/or development of small scale irrigation schemes; (ii) support for agricultural
production and productivity improvements; and (iii) support for investment in value addition,
including storage, processing and marketing facilities.
10.    This component would provide demand-based investment support to farmer organizations in
need to rehabilitate/develop irrigation schemes, increase agricultural productivity and production or
engage in agricultural value chain activities. This support would be provided by an experienced and
competent Service Provider to be hired by the project. Eligibility criteria for investment support may
vary according to the type of support required, as described in Annex 2 of the Project Appraisal
Document, but eligibility for each subsequent investment would be contingent on satisfactory
performance in the previous investment support phase, if any.
11.    The support for value chain will finance complementary set of investments that will target
more mature farmer organizations to promote greater commercialization. Eligible beneficiaries for


﻿the value chain support will include smallholder farmer organizations that have proven capacities for
market-oriented production and/or value chain activities. Therefore, the investment component will,
in the first year, consider proposals from farmer organizations that received training under MOSAP
or from other similar capacity strengthening efforts.
12.    The smallholder farmer beneficiaries will be required to make a small contribution (in-kind
or in-cash) to the matching grants funded by the project. To stimulate ownership of the sub-project
grants by farmer organizations and to ensure their commitment, the cost-sharing requirement will be
set between 10-30 percent depending of the type of investment. The approval process for the sub-
project proposals seeking investment support will be as follows:
(i)    Project Implementation Support Committee (PISC) will approve sub-projects between US
$50,000 and US$100,000. The first five proposals in each category will require prior review and
clearance by the Bank; and
(ii)   Provincial Project Implementation Support Committee (PPISC) will approve sub-projects up
to US$50,000, with the first two proposals in each category to be cleared by the Bank.
13.    The PISC and PPISC will have representatives of NGOs/CBOs and the private sector in
order to ensure that there is full transparency in the selection process for the sub-project proposals
Sub-project proposals from farmer organizations will be evaluated by a special Project Committee
against competitive selection criteria, as outlined in Annex 2. A full set of criteria and procedures
will also be outlined in the Project Operations Manual. Farmer organization with poor performance
record under MOSAP will not be eligible for any new investment support under SADCP. However,
every effort will be made to reach a diverse and large number of qualified farmer organizations under
SADCP. In other words, selection of farmer organization for investment support will focus on both
equity and efficiency criteria. This component will be divided into two sub-components: Sub-
component 2.1 will deal with providing technical support whereas sub-component 2.2 will deal with
providing investment support to potential qualified farmer organizations and enterprises.
o
Provision of Technical Support (US$7 million IBRD).
O
14.    The implementation modalities for providing technical support includes contracting of an
a       experienced and competent Service Provider to undertake initial feasibility work for investment
support, to undertake pre-identification and community mobilization (including the establishment of
water user associations) work, to prepare designs for the small scale irrigation schemes, to help
prepare all the sub-project proposals for investment support, to ensure the environmental and social
sustainability for the proposed sub-project proposals (in accordance with the World Bank's safeguard
policies), and to monitor the performance and supervise implementation of all the sub-projects under
investment support. The service provider will also ensure that improved technologies and skills are
available to smallholder farmer organizations and their members such that the sub-project proposals
are economically, financially, socially and environmentally viable and sustainable.
15.    The Service Provider will also strengthen the capacity of NGOs and local agricultural service
providers in three areas: (i) the capacity of selected NGOs will be strengthened to help farmer
organizations to prepare sub-project proposals for seeking competitive funding under Component 2;
(ii) the capacity of private agricultural service providers will be strengthened in developing systems
to supply critical agricultural inputs and services to smallholder farmers; and (iii) the capacity of
private enterprises will be strengthened in agricultural marketing, post-harvest management, specific


﻿value chains and processing so that smallholder organizations have an easy access to markets for
selling their surplus produce.
16.    Specific capacity development activities in each of the three provinces will include: (a)
O
training for NGOs in how to prepare investment proposals for sub-projects for funding under the
project as well as support for managerial and business capacities of new and existing agri-business
entrepreneurs; (b) information awareness raising sessions with input suppliers and agricultural
production service providers; and (c) support to service providers on how to undertake market
assessments and studies or business plan development. Linking farmer organization with potential
buyers of vegetables and other crops will be extremely important to facilitate market linkages and
marketing by the smallholder farmers. In this context, farmers and farmer organizations need to
know the quality, packaging standards and requirements as well as the critical market timings of
potential buyers (e.g. sale of vegetables to super markets through a contract farming arrangement) so
that they are able to access this potential market.
17.    In coordination with PIU, PPIU and ADI, the Service Provider will organize at least three
seminars per province per year, to cover the following target audiences: NGOs, private sector service
providers, and private sector value chain actors. These seminars would raise awareness, provide
training for the NGOs and CBOs interested in helping farmers' organizations to prepare investment
proposals, and for small, medium and micro agri-business enterprises to strengthen their managerial
and business capacities. As far as the eligibility and selection of NGOs and private agricultural
services providers for training are concerned, preference will be given to those who have the relevant
experience, skills, and mandate to work with local communities and smallholder farmers and farmer
organizations.
Provision of Investment Support (US$30 million IBRD and US$5 million equivalent by
Beneficiaries).
18.    The investment support will be provided for those innovative sub-projects that have been
selected competitively and deal with irrigation, production or value chain individually or in a clear
and fully justified package of investments for irrigation, production or value chain. Further details,
eligibility criteria and eligible expenditures in each of the category are provided in Annex 2 of the
Project Appraisal Document. While the menu of investment options will be flexible, the eligibility
a       criteria will be strictly followed. Investment will be [provided for Irrigation system and support
infrastructure, Investments in agricultural production and investment in agricultural storage,
processing, marketing infrastructure and value Chain.
(a) Investment in Irrigation System and Support Infrastructure
30.    This sub-component will deal with the rehabilitation of existing and the development of new
small scale irrigation systems. The Central Highlands, particularly comprising large parts of the
provinces of Malanje, Huambo and Bie, have excellent conditions and water resources for
development of small scale irrigated agriculture. Productive soils and water resources are abundant.
Topographical conditions make it possible to develop irrigation by gravity. Gravity irrigation is
particularly favorable for the development of small scale irrigated agriculture for smallholders. Some
smallholder communities have already created and managed gravity irrigation schemes. With their
own resources (mainly labor and local materials) they derive water from small streams by
(temporary) weirs to a network of unlined earthen canals for irrigation. The management and
operation of these systems requires limited financial resources (the scarcest resources of


﻿smallholders). However, the efficiency and productivity of these systems will be improved by simple
and cost-effective measures such as the construction of permanent weirs, the tubing and lining of
canal stretches with infiltration losses, construction of culverts to cross roads and (natural) drainage
streams etc.
o
(b) Investment in Agricultural Production
31.    This sub-component will support investments in farm assets. In order to access matching
grants for investment sub-projects, farmer associations have to submit project proposals. This sub-
component will assist eligible participants in the preparation of detailed proposals that will allow an
informed decision about their feasibility from technical, economic, financial, social and
environmental perspectives. The potential funding proposals (list will be finalized during
preparation) will consider dealing with any activity that will increase crop productivity and
production. Few examples are draft animals, simple tools and agricultural equipment, soil fertility/
quality improvement, soil conservation, seeds of improved crop varieties, fertilizers and integrated
pest and disease management. In addition, matching grants will also be provided to individual
enterprises in the rural areas that will provide critical agricultural services to smallholders in the
project areas.
32.    A review and evaluation of existing schemes will be carried out as part of the project
preparation to help determine what kind of support might be needed and appropriate. This
assessment will also include on-going experiences and scope for the provision of rural financial
services in Angola that are currently being provided by local and international NGOs. The main goal
of this component is sustainable increase in agricultural production for the smallholders.
(c) Support for Value Addition and Marketing Infrastructure
33.    This sub-component will support investments related to market linkages and
commercialization, including value addition, post-harvest management and marketing activities for
key crops and horticulture. The critical issues that need to be addressed are packaging, storage,
small-scale processing, and marketing infrastructure and even contract farming. The main focus will
be on value addition, reduction of post-harvest losses and market linkages. All sub-projects
requesting financing under this sub-component will prepare a project proposal and a business plan
a       that will go through a complete appraisal process to determine the economic feasibility and
sustainability. Specific list of sub-projects that will be supported under this sub-component will be
identified during preparation of the proposed project.
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$10 million)
35.    This component deals with coordination and monitoring and implementation of the project
and consists of two sub-components:
a.     Project Management:
The purpose of this sub-component is to ensure that the project is implemented correctly, on time and
in accordance with the Loan Agreement. This would be the responsibility of a Project Coordinator
and a small team of experts located at the national, and provincial or municipal levels. The final
arrangements for project management will incorporate the lessons learned under MOSAP.
b.     Project Monitoring and Evaluation:


﻿The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system will be established that will be responsible for
collecting and processing appropriate information to verify the output, effect and eventually the
impact of project activities over time. Baseline information will also be collected at the beginning of
O
U       the project.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
O
analysis (if known)
The Capacity Building Component (component 1) will have a national coverage in some aspects, but
the investment component (Component 2) will be implemented in three Provinces of Bi6, Huambo
and Malanje, covering an area of 80 communes in 26 municipalities.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Though the client has gained some good experience in implementing the ongoing MOSAP the
institutional capacity on operational environmental and social safeguards policies as well as national
environmental regulations is still weak, especially at the local level. Substantial training and capacity
building will be required. Under the ongoing, MOSAP (P093699) there was no dedicated
Environmental and Social Safeguards Focal Point (ESFP). The training was provided for all
monitoring and evaluation specialists, and provincial project coordinators. Regular supervision was
also provided by consultants and Bank staff based in Maputo and South Africa Country Offices.
Bulk of the work consisted in screening sub-project proposals under component 2 before they were
considered for funding including monitoring during implementation. This was based on check list
prepared the project safeguard consultant for the project that was cleared by the Bank. The
Environmental and social safeguards under MOSAP is rated Satisfactory. During the implementation
of the proposed operation, further steps are already being considered to strengthen the Government's
capacity, particularly through the hiring of four ESFP, one at national level with an overall
safeguards coordination role and three for each of the provinces covered by SADCP. The
aforementioned ESFP will ensure compliance of the proposed project activities with relevant Angola
environmental laws and regulations and the World Bank Safeguards Policies triggered. They will be
responsible for the screening, monitoring and reporting on safeguards requirements including
providing needful and timely support for the preparation of ESIA/ESMP as required. This initiative
will be coupled with a series of regional training workshops to be organized for all actors involved,
such as project coordination team at all levels, beneficiary groups, contractors and other relevant
project partners in the implementation of social and environmental safeguards policy upon project
effectiveness. The WBG Environmental and Social Safeguards specialists will train the team at
national and provincial/municipal level in close issues related to protected areas, forestry.
Additionally, relevant authorities such as the Ministry of Environment and its affiliates and will be
systematically involved throughout the project implementation process.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSUO1)
Nuno Maria Brilha Vilela (GENDR)
Paulo Jorge Temba Sithoe (GENO 1)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         Under Component 1 of the project there will be some
OP/BP 4.01                              civil works (construction of buildings), and under


﻿Component 2 agricultural production and post-
harvesting sub-projects, rehabilitation of irrigation
schemes, storage facilities and land delimitation.
Some of the diverse impacts could include soil
erosion and water logging, alteration of water flows
due to irrigation schemes, including risks to the
human health by those handling pesticides. Details
and precise location of these activities will not be
known until project implementation. Social impacts
could include loss of land during delimitation,
resource use such as water and health and safety
during construction. Consequently the OB/BP4.01 is
triggered to set forth the basic principles and
prerogatives to be followed to comply with the
safeguard requirements. Detailed description of the
activities with their footprints will be known by the
Recipient during implementation. The Recipient will
prepare an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) that will guide preparation of
ESIA and EMPs as and when needed. The ESMF
will include an environmental and social screening
form (ESSF) for sub-projects to determine and will
guide the preparation of ESIAs and ESMP as and
when needed. The ESMF will also include a model
ESMP and a set of Environmental and Social Clauses
(ESC) for project implementers that can be adjusted
to the specifics of subproject activities. The ESMF
will be consulted and disclosed in-country and at the
InfoShop prior to appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No           The project will not open new areas as it is largely
aimed at intensification of agriculture on already
cultivated areas to increase production and
productivity. As far as irrigation is concerned,
activities will be limited to rehabilitation of small
scale gravity infrastructure. The project has also
developed a negative list and activities adversely
affecting protected areas are included on this list.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No           The Project is not expected to have any direct or
indirect impacts on health and quality of forests. The
project will not finance any change in management,
protection or utilization of forests. The ESMF will
incorporate screening tools for risks and impacts on
forests and provisions to exclude activities that
would have adverse impacts on forest and protected
areas from financing through a negative list.
Pest Management OP 4.09      Yes         Provision of improved inputs under Component 2
may include the use of pesticides (though expected


﻿only at a low scale) and the Recipient will prepare
an Integrated Pest Management Framework (IPMF)
which will be disclosed in-country and at the Bank
InfoShop prior to appraisal. The framework will be
used to prepare Integrated Pest Management Plans
(IPMPs) for sub-projects as needed and include
provisions to monitor and mitigate possible negative
impact of any increase in the use of agrochemicals,
particularly chemical pesticides by promoting
ecological and biological control of pest
management. The IPMF will also be vital in the
support to the establishment of national data banks,
monitoring system of pesticides poisoning.
Physical Cultural Resources  No          The policy is not triggered as no major civil works or
OP/BP 4.11                               large movements of earth are expected to be
supported by the Project. Nevertheless, the ESMF
will include a Chance Finds mechanism to
adequately mitigate any potential risks.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No           The SADCP Project is a scale up of MOSAP
4.10                                     activities however it will be developed on the same
footprints of its predecessor of which did not trigger
the policy. There are no Indigenous Peoples expected
to be present in the project area.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        The project will finance activities that could possibly
BP 4.12                                  necessitate land acquisition resulting in involuntary
resettlement of people and/or loss of (or access to)
assets, means of livelihoods or resources. .Details of
activities will not be known until project
implementation and the Government will prepare a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to and guide
preparation of site specific Resettlement Action
Plans (RAP) as needed. The RPF will be reviewed,
consulted upon and disclosed in-country and at the
InfoShop prior to Appraisal.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No           The project will neither invest in dam construction
nor fund small productive rural infrastructure dams.
Although some work will involve rehabilitation of
dikes and drainage systems, small water storage and
water canals, the project will not involve in any new
investments in any major water storage or water
control. The irrigation systems that will be
rehabilitated will be very small gravity systems.
Most of those are currently earth canals with some
losses of water due to infiltration and other losses.
The project aims at rehabilitating about 1,000 ha in
the three beneficiary provinces, covering about 32


﻿systems; i.e. on average 31 ha each. These are natural
water springs that the communities (farmers) are
already using and the project will make
improvements to water flow and to the main canals
to reduce infiltration. There are no dams and no dams
will be required. Some earth movements may be
required in some cases to improve water flow, but
not dams. The idea is not to increase the size of the
system rather is to strengthen them to turn the system
more reliable and sustainable.
Projects on International    No           Project activities will rehabilitate existing small scale
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      gravity irrigation systems on pilot scale. The project
will not affect international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         There are no disputed areas in the targeted project
BP 7.60                                   area.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 04-Dec-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The ESMF, RPF and IPMF will be prepared, reviewed by the Social and Environmental
Safeguards specialists, and submitted to the regional safeguards adviser to grant the WBG green
light prior to their public disclosure, both in-country and at the InfoShop prior to Appraisal.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Aniceto Timoteo Bila
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                  Date: 10-Jan-2016
Practice Manager/      Name: Severin L. Kodderitzsch (PMGR)            Date: 11-Jan-2016
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


