                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA15334
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Mar-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Ethiopia                           Project ID:   P151819
                            Project Name:      Ethiopia: Transport Systems Improvement Project (TRANSIP) (P151819)
                            Task Team          Josphat O. Sasia,Haileyesus Adamtei
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          25-Feb-2016                        Estimated   26-May-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTI01                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Urban Transport (60%), Wastewater Collection and Transportation (10%),
                                              Public administration- Transportation (30%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (50%), Urban planning and
                                              housing policy (35%), Urban Economic Development (15%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     300.00           Total Bank Financing:                 300.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                300.00
                              Total                                                                                      300.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve mobility and safety along
                           selected corridors in Addis Ababa and effectiveness and efficiency of vehicle and drivers’ license
                           system throughout Ethiopia.



                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                         3. Project Description
                         1. The project will also support in addressing the mounting social and economic pressures on the
                         major urban centers and lay the foundation for developing an efficient urban public and other
Public Disclosure Copy




                         transport systems in the country that will benefit the poor echelon of the society in Addis Ababa and
                         through establishing transport data bases on vehicle registration and drivers’ license systems will
                         improve on road safety. The project will also generate both mitigation and adaptation impacts on
                         climate change as it will improve efficiency and resilience of the urban transport system, promoting
                         the use of public transport, increasing drainage capacity along selected road corridors, preparing a
                         drainage masterplan for the City, strengthening planning of both land-use and transport facilities to
                         better guide development in a manner to reduce, over the longer term, both vulnerability and the need
                         for vehicle travel in Addis Ababa.

                         2. Thus with the foregoing background, the proposed project will comprise the following
                         components.

                         Component A: Improve Traffic and Safety Management in the city of Addis Ababa (preliminary cost
                         estimates US$187.60 million). This component will involve:

                         Sub-component 1: Improve the Traffic Signal System, Road and Pedestrian Safety, Parking
                         Management, Traffic Enforcement and Institutional Strengthening of the New Traffic Management
                         Agency (TMA) and Addis Ababa Traffic Police. This component will involve support to TMA and
                         Addis Ababa Traffic Police to improvement management of traffic and road safety (cost estimates
                         US$82.50 million of which US$62.50 million toward TMA and US$20.0 million for Addis Ababa
                         Traffic Police) and will involve:
                         (a)      Preparing an Intelligent Transport System (ITS) for the city of Addis Ababa, expansion of
                         the existing traffic signal system, central control of this system including a Traffic Operations Center,
                         red light enforcement and associated penalty management system, and associated civil works
                         improvements at intersections to improve traffic flow and enhance pedestrian safety; and designing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         comprehensive traffic management improvements to selected complete streets to improve traffic
                         flow and pedestrian safety;
                         (b)      Development of a city-wide parking strategy and implementation of a targeted paid on-street
                         and off-street parking program to better manage current poor parking conditions;
                         (c)      Undertaking traffic management studies to improve traffic conditions as conditions evolve;
                         and carrying out traffic studies and provision of technical assistance and advisory services;
                         (d)      Building the capacity of the proposed TMA to carry out its assigned responsibilities,
                         especially in designing and implementing appropriate traffic management measures and training;
                         (e)      Carrying out traffic studies and provision of technical assistance and advisory services; and
                         (f)      Enhancing traffic enforcement and traffic safety through provision of appropriate equipment
                         and traffic enforcement training.
                         Sub-component 2: Improve Conditions of Road Infrastructure and Pedestrians Facilities and
                         Institutional Strengthening of Addis Ababa City Roads Authority (AACRA) (cost estimate US$65.80
                         million). This sub-component will involve:
                         (a)      Implementing comprehensive improvements to selected complete streets using context-
                         sensitive design approaches to enhance traffic conditions and pedestrian amenities and safety. This
                         will be done through a range of measures including, inter-alia, pavement improvements, drainage
                         improvements, traffic management measures, sidewalk provision or upgrading, street lighting,
                         provision of bus stops and bus bays, and parking management measures within the Right of Way
                         (RoW);


                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         (b)      Developing and implementing a pedestrian safety and community connectivity at selected
                         locations. Locations and specific interventions will be selected through detailed study. Overpasses
                         may be considered where at-grade pedestrian crossings are not appropriate;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (c)      Developi ng a citywide drainage master plan; and
                         (d)      Institutional strengthening through a range of measures including advisory assistance on the
                         following: (i) implementing improved asset management and pavement management systems, (ii)
                         developing an improved maintenance strategy and improved maintenance funding, (iii) restructuring
                         of AACRA and providing capacity building activities, (iv) developing an improved road design
                         manual and creating a road maintenance manual, (v) improving contract management and design;
                         and (vi) training.

                         Sub-component 3: Improve Traffic Oversight, and Public Transport Services and Systems and
                         Institutional Strengthening of the New Public and Freight Transport Authority (PFTA) and Anbessa.
                         This component will involving supporting PTFA and Anbessa City Bus to improve public transport
                         (cost estimate US$30.00 million of which US$25.50 million toward Anbessa City Bus and US$4.50
                         million for PFTA). This sub-component will consist of:
                         (a)      Support for public transport planning and management as well as advisory assistance in
                         establishing the proposed PFTA;
                         (b)      Building the capacity of PFTA in public transport planning, management, regulation, and
                         service contract management through advisory assistance and training;
                         (c)      Assistance in planning and establishing an integrated public transport system including
                         implementing regulatory reforms to rationalize the provision of public transport services, strengthen
                         the management of public transport operations and support in streamlining the operations of minibus-
                         taxi sector;
                         (d)      Assistance in modernizing Anbessa Bus operations through support in improving
                         management, business and operational information systems for enhancing the operation efficiency
                         and management including designing and implementing an ITS and management systems for
                         electronic fare collection, automatic vehicle location, depot, crew and bus scheduling, inventory and
                         spares and bus network systems;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (e)      Support in rehabilitating and improving operational conditions of Anbessa’s vehicle
                         maintenance workshops and depots and control center to all the systems; and
                         (f)      Institutional strengthening, capacity building and training for Anbessa.

                         Sub-component 4: Support to AARTB and Transport Programs Management Office to Improve
                         Planning (TPMO, cost estimate US$9.3 million).
                         (a)      Building the capacity of AARTB and TPMO to plan and oversee the implementation of
                         urban transport reforms through training and provision of goods, services and technical assistance;
                         (b)      Strengthening the capacity of TPMO staff to carry out its responsibilities, including
                         monitoring and evaluation of the Project, and steering the preparation of future development
                         initiatives; and
                         (c)      Providing technical assistance in building project management capability.

                         Component B: Improve Integrated Urban Planning and Transport; and Institutional strengthening
                         (cost estimate US$1.8 million). This component will involve supporting the Addis Ababa Land
                         Development and Management Bureau (AALDMB) to develop Land Use and Transport Plans, and
                         will include:

                         (a)      Carrying out studies on Transit-Oriented Developments (TOD) and preparing detailed plans
                         for selected strategic TOD(s) as well as formulating the operation and management strategies and

                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                         implementation plan for these TOD(s);
                         (b)     Provision of advisory and technical assistance in enhancing the capacity in Metro area
                         master planning including preparing selected Local Development Plans for strategic TOD areas
Public Disclosure Copy




                         consistent with the new Structural Plan; and
                         (c)     Building the capacity of AALDMB in carrying out its functions including enhancing actual
                         implementation and enforcement through provision advisory services, goods and training.

                         Component C: Develop an Integrated Driver Licensing and Vehicle Registration Systems and
                         Institutional Strengthening of FTA (preliminary cost estimate US$110.60 million of which US
                         $108.60 million to support the Federal Transport Authority (FTA) and US$2.00 million for Ministry
                         of Transport (MoT). This component will include the following activities:

                         (a)      Setting up a system for re-registration of current drivers with ten fingerprints and
                         replacement of existing driver’s licenses with modern security enhanced driver’s license documents;
                         (b)      Setting up a system for re-registration of vehicles with vehicle chassis numbers and
                         replacement of the existing vehicle registry documents by secure unified vehicle registration
                         documents;
                         (c)      Improving the quality driver training and testing;
                         (d)      Design and installation of a driving school management solution;
                         (e)      Development and installation of vehicle inspection management solution;
                         (f)      Development and installation of driver’s penalty management system;
                         (g)      Installation of police mobile solutions for driver and vehicle verification as well as penalty
                         management and deployment of smartphone or mobile applications for verification of vehicles and
                         managing penalties;
                         (h)      Establishment of central help desk support solution;
                         (i)      Power interruption solution;
                         (j)      Institutional strengthening, capacity building and training of FTA; and
                         (k)      Support the Federal Ministry of Transport in: (i) development of a long-term program to
                         improve skills for urban transport management through engaging with local universities in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         developing the corresponding curriculum, and supporting students in these programs on a pilot basis;
                         (ii) developing an urban transport policy and investment program; and (iii) support in the
                         implementation of institutional and policy reform in the provision of public transport.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         3. The physical infrastructure components under components A of the project will mainly cover
                         Addis Ababa. The activities under Component C will not involve any civil works and will be
                         implemented at regional level. The major activity that will involve civil works are improvement of
                         selected intersections and five corridors in the Addis Ababa have been proposed. It is anticipated that
                         the improvement works will be confined largely within the right way of the existing infrastructure
                         minor disruption to the surrounding environment and no resettlement of people for which a RPF and
                         ESMF have been prepared and will be disclosed before appraisal. The corresponding RAP and ESIA
                         will be prepared once the detail design for the intersections and corridors are complete.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Asferachew Abate Abebe (GEN01)
                         Chukwudi H. Okafor (GSU07)




                                                                      Page 4 of 9
                            6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental                Yes
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP       No
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36           No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No

                            Physical Cultural        Yes
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/   No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes                This OP/BP is triggered on the assumption that
                            OP/BP 4.12                                  implementation of project interventions may potentially
                                                                        involve acquisition of land and/or restriction of access.
                                                                        Alongside the ESMF, a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                        (RPF) has been formulated.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP         No             No new construction and/or rehabilitation of large dams is
                            4.37                                        anticipated to be financed under the proposed project.
                            Projects on International    No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed         No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              4. Overall, this is classified as Category B as subproject activities are not expected to lead to any
                              large scale, significant, or irreversible environmental or social impacts.

                              Social impacts
                              5. The project will generate significant social and environmental benefits and also negative
                              impacts requiring mitigation. The social benefits will accrue from opportunities for short-term
                              employment during construction, but there will also be long-term benefits from increases in road
                              safety and time saved. The travel time along selected streets contained in the project is expected to
                              fall and vehicle operating costs are expected to be reduced with the proposed improvements; and
                              the provision of road-side amenities, including pedestrian walkways and crossings, and
                              improvement of junctions and traffic signalling system will enhance road safety and benefit
                              mainly the poor echelon of the society. Meanwhile the time for processing and issuance of driver
                              licences and registration of vehicles will reduced drastically.

                              6. The construction of sidewalk ways, drainages, foot crossings, streetlights and other
                              development activities may negatively affect the health and safety of the community unless

                                                                          Page 5 of 9
                           appropriate mitigation measures are taken to address the problem. In some of the corridors street
                           vendors (Informal Traders) using the existing side walkways to sell brewed coffee, tea, readymade
                           clothes and other consumable goods as a means of earning their livelihood particularly on (Umer
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Semeter street and Arat Killo-Pizza- Abune Petors street) are likely to be affected. In some
                           instances, a few of the road corridors are used as open markets in the late afternoon with a large
                           number of people coming to buy and sell items. Thus the upgrading of side walkways and other
                           physical construction in such areas will affect these people’s livelihood activities. Finally, some
                           shops and vendors along the road corridors may be impacted during the construction of proposed
                           activities. Hence appropriate precaution will be taken under the project to minimize non-land
                           based Economic displacement of the people working along the road corridors

                           7. Road safety issues are a major problem with high death rates recorded on the Ethiopian roads.
                           Nearly 3,000 lives are lost annually. This project will support the efforts by the FTA in addressing
                           these challenges by increasing awareness of road safety through information provision and
                           education. Selected existing streets in Addis Ababa will be widened in critical places to allow for
                           pedestrian sidewalks to enhance safety.

                           8. The project’s anticipated environmental impacts have triggered Bank Operational Policy OP
                           4.01 (Environmental Assessment), as well as OPs 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) and 4.11
                           (Physical Cultural Resources). The proposed activities, which for the most part involve
                           rehabilitation/expansion of existing roads within the right of way, will have moderate and
                           reversible impacts.

                           9. Potential environmental impacts may include soil erosion and disturbance of water flows, water
                           pollution, traffic disruption, noise, gaseous and dust pollution and temporary disturbance of flora
                           (mainly during the construction phase). In the case of the improvement of selected streets some
                           mature trees (though not indigenous species) will be lost as a result of widening pedestrians
                           walkways. The magnitude of tree cutting in these urban areas is not sufficient to necessitate the
                           preparation of a Forest Management Plan, or to trigger the Bank’s Operational Policy on Forests,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           OP 4.36. Nevertheless, it is important to undertake replacement tree planting liaising with the
                           department of city administration with responsibility for maintaining roadside verges and
                           vegetation.

                           Environment impacts

                           10. The construction and improvements of intersections, corridors, sidewalk ways, drainages, foot
                           bridges, streetlights and other development activities may negatively affect the health and safety of
                           the community unless appropriate mitigation measures are taken to address the problem. In some
                           of the corridors, street vendors (Informal Traders) using the existing side walkways to sell brewed
                           coffee, tea, readymade cloths and other consumable goods as a means of earning their livelihood
                           are likely to be affected. In some instances, a few of the road corridors are used as open markets in
                           the late afternoon with a large number of people coming to buy and sell items. Thus, the upgrading
                           of side walkways and other physical construction in such areas will affect these people’s
                           livelihood activities. Finally, some shops and vendors along the road corridors may be impacted
                           during the construction of proposed activities. Hence appropriate precaution will be taken under
                           the project to minimize non-land based economic displacement on the people working along the
                           road corridors.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities


                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                           in the project area:
                           11. The travel time along selected streets contained in the project is expected to fall and vehicle
                           operating costs are expected to be reduced with the proposed improvements; and the provision of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           road-side amenities, including pedestrian walkways and crossings, and improvement of junctions
                           and traffic signaling system will improve road safety.

                           12. The reduction in traffic congestion along the selected streets will reduce the current practice of
                           motorists taking shortcuts. Smooth traffic flow also has strong greenhouse gas reduction benefits
                           and reduces local air pollution.

                           13. However, activities envisaged to be implemented under the project requires mobilization of
                           various actors, particularly large number of young construction workers and heavy duty
                           machineries. As a result, it is expected that during implementation there might be influx of young
                           men in particular, seeking job opportunities, and with disposal income, their sexual activities
                           outside work place might result in spread of HIV/AIDs, the project may also lead to the use of new
                           technologies such as parking meters which could substitute manual labor. Gentrification (outward
                           migration) might result in the long term since enhancing the quality of the respective
                           neighborhood might increase the property value, which might make it expensive for low income
                           workers to stay in the neighborhood, contributing to the social/income segregation of the city. The
                           potential short- term impact includes land acquisition for construction purpose (storage, site office)
                           and change in accessibility to properties that are otherwise blocked by the on-going construction.
                           Land could also be temporarily acquired (which is later reclaimed) to create access to temporarily
                           blocked properties and facilitate the construction process.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Not relevant.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           14. In managing potential and social risks and impacts arising from the project’s investments,
                           Bank Operational Policy (OP) 4.12 is triggered. Accordingly, the Borrower has prepared a
                           Resettlement Policy Framework (RFP) and conducted a Social Impact Assessment (SIA) to
                           explore any potential social consequences. The findings of the SIA have been incorporated in the
                           design of this Project.

                           15. During and after the implementation of the Project, a social monitoring and evaluation survey
                           will be conducted to evaluate the impact on vulnerable groups among women. The surveys will
                           use gender-disaggregated data to determine and verify citizen’s perceptions of the project’s
                           activities and will serve as a tool to define gender or social issues. The recommendations will be
                           used to deepen improvements in the transport sector.

                           16. A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) will be established to provide an opportunity for
                           reporting any complaints or concerns during the execution of the project.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           17. The key stakeholders of the project will include: businesses, pedestrians, motorists, passengers,
                           mini bus taxi and bus operators and local communities in the project area as well as drivers, and
                           vehicle owners. Pedestrians will be among the key direct beneficiaries with available statistics


                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                           from Addis Ababa Road and Transport Bureau (AARTB) indicating that most people in Addis
                           Ababa walk to their places of work constituting about 54 percent of all trips.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           18. Stakeholder consultations were conducted for the project affected persons as well as local
                           businesses, farms, and public institutions (schools, care homes, etc) along the corridor while
                           preparing the Social Impact Assessment (SIA). Dates of consultations are provided in SIA. Key
                           concerns were: dust pollution from construction; construction waste disposal; loss of custom due
                           to limited accessibility to shops, petrol stations, and hotels during construction; road safety during
                           construction; and adequate compensation for land acquisition. Monitoring will be undertaken to
                           ensure proper environmental impact mitigation measures are in place (frequent watering of roads;
                           disposal of waste away from residential and market areas; adequate safety signs and safe crossing
                           points; provision of access points to businesses, institutions. Compensation issues will be
                           addressed through the implementation of the RAPs consistent with Bank policy and standards.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      12-Feb-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   23-Feb-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ethiopia                                                         24-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      02-Feb-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   23-Feb-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ethiopia                                                         24-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [        ]   No [    ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice     Yes [        ]   No [    ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [        ]   No [    ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources


                                                                       Page 8 of 9
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Josphat O. Sasia,Haileyesus Adamtei
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                          Date: 18-Mar-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Richard Martin Humphreys (PMGR)                  Date: 18-Mar-2016
                            Manager:


                                                                         Page 9 of 9
