                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC17947

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Aug-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Lesotho                         Project ID:      P160090
                            Project Name:        Lesotho Basic Education Improvement Project
                            Team Leader(s):      Harisoa Danielle Rasolonjatovo Andriamihamina
                            Estimated Date       19-Dec-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GED01                           Lending          IPF
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 2                              Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              EFA-FTI Education Program Development Fund                                                      2
                            Environment       C - Not Required
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to improve basic education service delivery
                           and student retention in targeted schools.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project would build upon the foundations laid by the previous GPE-funded FTI-III
                           project (2010-2015) and would address the same issues of equity and quality of education as the
                           IDA-funded LEQEP. In order to take advantage of economies of scale, the project will finance
                           activities similar to the LEQEP activities but expand the scope to approximately 25 additional low-
                           performing primary schools, and the pre-primary and junior secondary schools in the catchment
                           area. Linking the proposed project to the LEQEP would allow the majority of the grant amount to be
                           directed towards increasing the number of project schools as key activities such as the calculations of
                           baselines, hiring of project management staff, and consultants to support critical project activities
                           will be taken care of under the LEQEP.

                           Project Components:
                           Component 1: Improving the Teaching and Learning Environment in Targeted Primary Schools and
                           Associated Pre-Primary and Junior Secondary Schools (US$1.2 million). The objective of this
                           component is to raise the quality of classroom service delivery at the pre-primary, primary, and
                         junior secondary school levels to help create a youth population with strong foundations in literacy,
                         numeracy, and reasoning skills.
                         (a) Strengthening Primary and Pre-Primary School Teaching and Learning: This subcomponent will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         address the low levels of early grade numeracy and literacy and limited teacher content knowledge
                         and pedagogical skills in targeted schools through the provision of training to pre-primary teachers/
                         care givers, Grades 1➢❨ 4 teachers, and DRTs/other support staff, and the provision of associated
                         student learning resources.
                         (b) Demonstrating the Progressive Mathematics Initiative (PMI) and Progressive Science Initiative
                         (PSI) at Junior Secondary School Level: This subcomponent will improve the quality of math and
                         science in targeted junior secondary schools through the provision of training to math and science
                         teachers and subject advisors in a new approach and the provision of related learning resources. The
                         MoET will demonstrate the PMI and PSI approaches developed by the New Jersey Center for
                         Teaching and Learning (NJCTL) in about 5-8 targeted junior secondary schools using handouts from
                         2017 to 2020.

                         Component 2: Strengthening School Accountability for Student Learning and Retention in Targeted
                         Schools (US$0.5 million). This component aims to empower key actors at the school level➢❨ school
                         boards➢❨ to collectively deliberate on and carry out actions that contribute to retaining students and
                         enabling them to learn. To this end, the appropriate tools and capacity building to use them
                         effectively will be provided to the school boards comprising the local chief, local council member,
                         the school principal, and representatives of the school proprietor, teachers, and parents.
                         (a) School Improvement Planning: Each school, guided by a detailed Operations Manual to be
                         developed at the start of project implementation and with the support of a facilitator, will develop a
                         SIP aimed at increasing school performance with regard to quality, retention, and equity of access.
                         (b) Provision of School Grants: Upon submission of the SIP and its approval by the Inspectorate, the
                         school receives 50 percent of a grant of about US$3,500➢❨ US$4,500 to finance eligible activities.
                         These activities, to be carried out over three years, include among others, short-term training for
                         principals in school management (human resources and financial management in particular), minor
Public Disclosure Copy




                         repairs to physical assets of the school, and purchase of materials to enrich student learning.
                         (c) Strengthening the Capacity for Reporting, Monitoring of Results, and Oversight Mechanisms:
                         Support will be provided to schools for the development of a reporting tool➢❨ a school report
                         card➢❨ that promotes transparency, timely collection of information, and the use of information to
                         facilitate both participatory school management as well as enhanced oversight by district education
                         officers, DRTs, and inspectors. Upon submission and public disclosure of the first school report card
                         following the first year of SIP implementation, the remaining 50 percent of the school grant will be
                         provided to school.

                         Component 3: Strengthening Institutional Capacity and Project Management (US$0.3 million). This
                         component will focus on strengthening and developing the capacity of the MoET to deliver its
                         agenda, support project implementation activities (the project will use the same implementation
                         arrangements as the LEQEP), and for project management. This component will finance: (a)
                         consulting services for a review of the ECCD curriculum and a review of the curriculum and
                         assessment policy for primary and secondary; (b) equipment and materials to strengthen the regional
                         inspectors; (c) technical assistance to develop a management course/program for school principals;
                         (d) technical assistance to develop an induction and mentorship policy for new teachers; (e) a
                         baseline study on management competencies of principals; (f) operational and supervision costs
                         related to project activities and management including for monitoring and evaluation activities such
                           as internal and external audits; evaluations; communication; staff capacity building; recruitment of
                           consultants; and provision of materials.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis (if known)
                           The proposed project will target low-performing primary schools and the pre-primary and junior
                           secondary schools in their catchment areas. The beneficiary schools are located in mainly rural and
                           mountainous areas, and primarily serve impoverished children ➢❨ two chief factors that determine
                           school achievement. This deliberate targeting is expected to increase equity in the distribution of
                           educational quality.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Kisa Mfalila (GEN01)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No              The proposed project, which will finance
                           BP 4.01                                              activities similar to those funded by the LEQEP,
                                                                                is expected to be classified as Category C due to
                                                                                the absence of construction or rehabilitation
                                                                                work.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No
                           Projects on International            No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP     No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                              Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):            Name: Harisoa Danielle Rasolonjatovo Andriamihamina
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:        Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (SA)                       Date: 18-Aug-2016
                         Practice Manager/                Name: Sajitha Bashir (PMGR)                                        Date: 18-Aug-2016
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                         InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                         affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
