INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
6                                              Report No.: JSDSC12O36
,2   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Sep-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Sep-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Uzbekistan                 Project ID:   P149610
Project Name:    Ferghana Valley Water Resources Management - Phase II (P1496 10)
Task Team        IJsbrand Harko de Jong
Leader(s):
Estimated        05-Feb-2016                Estimated     05-Jul-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWAO3                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Irrigation and drainage (75%), General water, sanitation and flood protection
sector (25%)
Theme(s):        Water resource management (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     211.00             Total Bank Financing:   211.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
U
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                          0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development           211.00
U         Total                                                           211.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to improve water productivity in the project area.
C. Project Description
The project will contain the following components:
Component A: Irrigation Modernization. This component aims at addressing the problems of water


﻿shortage in the project areas by financing the following five main activities: (a) Rehabilitation of
Surface Irrigation System; (b) Modernization of Pump Stations; (c) Rehabilitation and Construction
of Groundwater Boreholes; (d) Enhancing Storage Capacity; and (e) Flood Control and Bank
Protection. To enhance the accountability of irrigation management to water users and improve the
quality of irrigation service delivery, the project will pilot volumetric O&M charges, expand the
existing SCADA system in the project area, and promote managed aquifer recharge.
Component B: Agricultural Modernization. To take full advantage of the improvements in irrigation
modernization, this component will support the GOU's efforts to modernize agriculture, promote
agricultural diversification and intensification, invest in cotton harvest mechanization and conduct
outreach and information dissemination. All training under this component will be conducted in an
iterative manner, including needs assessment, implementation and feedback/evaluation.
Subcomponents include (i) strengthening capacities of local water management institutions and
WCAs, (ii) crop intensification and diversification through capacity strengthening, demonstrations,
and Farmer Field School (FFS), (iii) assistance to farmers to access lines of credit (including
assistance in the preparation of business plans), and (iv) provision of modem tools and maintenance
equipment to WCAs to undertake on-farm maintenance activities. Cotton harvest mechanization will
be financed as part of the GOU contribution.
Component C: Project Management, Audit, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Technical Assistance.
This component would (i) support the operation of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU), and
finance overall project management, as well as technical assistance in such areas as detailed design,
contract administration and construction supervision, procurement, financial management, and
capacity strengthening; (ii) establish a Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system and arrange for
data collection and reporting on key performance output and impact indicators through baseline
surveys, participatory assessments and mid-term review and final evaluation; (iii) finance services of
independent auditors for auditing of project accounts and overall project management; and (iv)
prepare a feasibility study and bidding documents for a follow-on investment operation.
Cotton Harvesting and Child and/or Forced Labor. Cotton is harvested during the months of
September and October. It is sensitive to weather conditions, and must be harvested as quickly as
possible. Although mechanized harvesting was used more extensively during the Soviet times, the
subsequent farm restructuring and institutional changes in the state cotton system during the
a       transition led to the deterioration of the large mechanical cotton harvester combines, which were not
replaced. Additionally, the size, layout and sowing practices reflected the changes in the farming and,
as such, had impact on labor practices. A large workforce is needed when cotton is harvested by
hand. Women are largely involved in manual cotton picking. High peak labor demand during the
cotton harvest period, in combination with labor shortages due to outmigration to the urban areas and
abroad and below market value cotton picking fees resulting from the state procurement system -
created conditions where government sponsors mobilization of labor (adult and previously child) for
cotton picking, participation in which is often involuntary. While reportedly the use of child labor
(children under 18) has declined significantly, the need for labor to pick cotton remains and has
resulted in greater state-organized mobilization of adult labor during the cotton harvest. The 2013
ILO observation mission concluded that there is no systematic use of child labor in cotton harvesting
in Uzbekistan.
The government of Uzbekistan is a signatory of several International Labor Organization (ILO)
conventions related to child and/or forced labor, but the enforcement of these conventions, as well as
of existing national laws reflecting international agreements, has remained challenging, especially


﻿during the cotton harvest. Recognizing the need to change the system, the government of Uzbekistan
has announced its plans to mechanize 70% of cotton harvesting by 2016. The Asian Development
Bank, with full engagement from the World Bank, is working with the government to formulate a
strategy to mechanize agriculture, with a particular emphasis on cotton production.
0
The World Bank, in consultation with the government and development partners, has adopted a
multi-pronged approach to address child and/or forced labor issues in Uzbekistan. These include (i)
pursuing continuous country dialogue and collaboration with international/multilateral agencies and
donors to address these issues; (ii) performing sector analytic work and policy dialogue to promote
diversification away from cotton and mechanization of cotton harvesting; (iii) strengthening project-
level mitigation measures and binding provisions, including implementing a Third Party Monitoring
(TPM) and Feedback Mechanism (FBM) to help address child and/or forced labor issues in
connection with the project activities or within the project area; and (iv) promoting crop
diversification and intensification, and supporting agricultural mechanization through a number of
investment operations.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project area of over 120 thousand ha is entirely located in the Ferghana Valley (FV),
encompassing three regions: Andijan, Fergana and Namangan. Administratively, the project area is
part of Kurgantepa, Jalalkuduk, and Hujaobod and Bulokboshi districts of Andijan region and
located on the left bank of Karadarya River. The FV is one of the most populated and agriculturally
developed regions in Uzbekistan. The main sources of irrigation supplies in the valley are natural
waterways (mountain streams) - tributaries of the main Syr Darya River, and irrigation supplies
divert from the river through a system of main canals. The yield levels for the various crops in the
project area is significantly lower than yield levels elsewhere in the FV, which suggests a significant
degradation of the irrigation infrastructure and consequent lack of availability of irrigation water
compared to the irrigation requirement.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
O
MAWR will have the overall responsibility for project implementation. In view of good experience
during implementation of the current FVWRMP Phase I, the project will support MAWR in
O
implementing the project through establishment of a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) that is
adequately staffed with irrigation, agricultural, capacity strengthening and fiduciary specialists, and
in addition will engage a full time environmental specialist. Close involvement of I&D management
staff at Region, District and WCA level will be ensured, as well as of regional governments. The PIU
will maintain a main office in the FV under the supervision of a Deputy Director. The PIU will be
assisted by national and international consultants for all aspects of project management and
implementation, including contract administration, management, supervision and safeguards
compliance; M&E; preparation of follow-on investment operations; and institutional development.
Project implementation is anticipated to take about six years from July 2016 to March 2022.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Ekaterina Romanova (GSURR)
Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)


﻿Environmental Assessment     Yes         This policy is triggered because the implementation
OP/BP 4.01                               of Component A and some activities of Component
B is associated with certain environmental concerns.
The anticipated impacts are those caused by the civil
works on the rehabilitation and modernization of the
existing irrigation network, and on the flood control
and bank protection. These impacts may include
excessive dust and noise generation; damage to soil
and loss of the fertile layer due to excavations;
excessive fumes due to the use of heavy construction
machinery; generation of construction and domestic
wastes on the construction sites and on the affiliated
facilities (e.g. construction camps); impacts on
natural waterways which are the source of irrigation
supplies to be improved as a result of the project, and
on the riverine ecosystems which might be impacted
as a result of flood control activities. Crop
intensification and diversification activities, if not
properly managed, may represent a risk of
replacement of local species with newly introduced
varieties. The project will provide support to farmers
in accessing the credit lines and, thus, will stimulate
various types of agricultural activities which may
also represent a range of environmental concerns to
be properly assessed and mitigated. The
Environmental Assessment and Management Plan
will be prepared by the Borrower to address the
potential environmental risks and determine the
mitigation and monitoring programs to be
implemented by the Borrower.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  TBD          This is TBD for the present as further investigation
will need to be done through the ESIA to determine
whether any habitats or species of conservation
interest may be affected.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
Pest Management OP 4.09      Yes         This policy is triggered because of the potential
change/increase in pest management needs
associated with the agricultural diversification and
intensification. Because the project will directly
support these agricultural modernization activities,
and because the crops involved are likely to be of
types that are typically heavily treated with
pesticides. The project will not finance the purchase
of pesticides but improved irrigation network and
access to credit lines may cause increased use of


﻿pesticides by beneficiary farmers. These impacts will
be duly considered by the EAMP. Also, training will
be provided to farmers to raise awareness to the IPM
principles.
Physical Cultural Resources   No
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes           This policy is triggered due to the potential impact of
BP 4.12                                     rehabilitation and construction works under Comp. 1
The assessment of extent of resettlement, temporary
and permanent land acquisition is currently ongoing.
The Resettlement Policy Framework and
Resettlement Action Plan(s) will be prepared for the
Project.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     TBD           This policy is TBD for now, likely to become "No"
as the dam/reservoir supplying water to the project
area is on tributaries located at higher elevations that
are not affected by any catastrophic events associated
with dam safety (no direct impact of dam failure on
project performance). The team will consult the WB
focal point on the dam safety policy to confirm.
Projects on International     Yes           This policy is triggered because the main source of
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                        irrigation supplies are mountain streams - tributaries
to the Syr Darya River, which is defined as the
international waterway by OP 7.50.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 20-Sep-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
May 15, 2015 till August 31, 2015
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: IJsbrand Harko de Jong
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                          Date: 18-Sep-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Steven N. Schonberger (PMGR)                Date: 18-Sep-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


