                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                  Report No.: ISDSC20262

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Nov-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Sierra Leone            Project ID: P162166
                            Project Name:
                            Team Leader(s): Josef S. Trommer,Sheikh Alhaji Yayah Sesay
                            Estimated Date 15-Dec-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:                              Lending        IPF
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     0.684              Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:          0
                              Financing Source                                                                               Amount
                              Global Partnership for Social Accountability                                                     0.684
                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project's development objective is to support the attainment of GoSL's post-Ebola recovery
                           targets in Education and Health sectors by strengthening citizen monitoring of recovery targets at
                           community level and improving the oversight capacity of public sector institutions and accountability
                           of service providers.
                           C. Project Description
                           The overall objective of the project is to support the attainment of GoSL's post-Ebola recovery
                           targets in the education and health sectors through strengthening citizen participation in monitoring
                           and accountability of recovery targets at community level and improving oversight capacity of the
                           state institutions and accountability of service providers. The project will work with selected
                           hospitals and schools in three districts out of fourteen districts in the country, training civil society
                           and citizens to monitor and advocate around improved service delivery, and to take ownership of
                           service delivery outcomes that are specifically derived from the post-Ebola recovery targets in
                           education and health.

                           To support change, key reform "champions", will be identified at all levels: national, central and
                           local, within the Recovery Unit and government at-large that will address service delivery issues
                           identified by community members. Delivery agents within the Delivery Unit also have recovery
                           targets they are supposed to meet; through facilitating dialog between community members,
                           members of the delivery team and other relevant government counterparts, the project will
                           complement work undertaken by the Delivery Team and enhance their results, thus concretely
Public Disclosure Copy




                           supporting delivery agents in their work.

                           The project will identify and engage leaders within local structures for information and advocacy and
                           establish dialog platforms ("accountability forums") with the Delivery Unit. The project will
                           facilitate the translation of identified concerns into concrete programmatic and policy changes that
                           will ensure that the project moves beyond information and sensitization to tangible improvements in
                           service delivery. Finally through using mechanisms such as awards for the most improved sector, the
                           project will provide additional incentives for change within targeted sectors.

                           This project has the following components.

                           Component 1: Generating information to monitor sectorial service delivery.
                           The aim of this component is to produce systematic data and information to feed into citizen
                           monitoring mechanisms that will in turn help to identify budget and service delivery gaps and
                           bottlenecks. The Service Delivery Index (SDI) will capture citizen perceptions and track demand and
                           supply gaps in education and health services (e.g., availability of teachers, school administrators,
                           nurses and doctors, teaching and learning materials, health equipment as well as sector-specific
                           infrastructure investments such as the renovation and construction of new hospitals and health
                           clinics, classroom and other education support infrastructure) in their communities.

                           Component 2: Building state-citizen interfaces on public service delivery and community-based
                           structures for Social Accountability.
                           This component aims at opening up spaces for constructive engagement between consumers of
                           service delivery institutions (schools, hospitals and PHUs) and decision-makers that may in turn
                           result in concrete and observable improvements in health and education services at the facility level.
                           This will be accomplished through engagement with service delivery institutions on evidence-based
Public Disclosure Copy




                           data on impact of services and perception of service users on quality.

                           Component 3: Managing knowledge and learning, and project coordination.
                           This component aims to ensure production of knowledge and analysis about key political economy
                           dimensions of the project that will inform project strategy over the years on how to actually do social
                           accountability in fragile contexts. This information will also be available for external dissemination.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will be implemented in the following districts: Kono, Koinadugu, Western Rural and Bo.
                           The organization has previously worked in 2 out of the 4 districts: Kono and Koinadugu.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                           Triggered?           Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/                 No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                  No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                           No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09                      No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/              No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
                           Projects on International                    No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP             No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Josef S. Trommer,Sheikh Alhaji Yayah Sesay
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)                                         Date: 02-Nov-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Practice Manager/                Name: Asmeen M. Khan (PMGR)                                        Date: 16-Nov-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
