The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)




                       Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                    Restructuring Stage


        Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 3-May-2017| Report No: ISDSR21640




                        Regional Vice President:    Victoria Kwakwa
                               Country Director:    Rodrigo A. Chaves
                 Senior Global Practice Director:   Karin Erika Kemper
                    Practice Manager/Manager:       Iain G. Shuker
                             Task Team Leader:      Cary Anne Cadman
          The World Bank                                                                       RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)




.

I. BASIC INFORMATION

1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

Project ID                                                  Project Name
                                                            Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program-
P127813
                                                            Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI)
Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
Cary Anne Cadman                                            Indonesia
Approval Date                                               Environmental Category
21-Feb-2014                                                 Partial Assessment (B)
Managing Unit                                               Is this a Repeater project?
GEN2A                                                       Yes

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

Total Project Cost                                          Total Financing
110,460,000.00                                              63,080,000.00
Financing Gap
47,380,000.00

Financing Source                                                                                      Amount
Counterpart Funding                                                                              5,700,000.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                    47,380,000.00
Trust Funds                                                                                     10,000,000.00
Total                                                                                           63,080,000.00

2. PROJECT INFORMATION

    Current Project Development Objective
    The GEF GEO is the same as the PDO.
          The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)



    Proposed New PDO
    To strengthen institutional capacity in coastal ecosystems monitoring and research to produce evidence-based
    resource management information.
.




1. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

The restructuring exercise introduces a number of changes to the objective, scope, scale and nature of the COREMAP CTI
Project.

The new Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen institutional capacity in coastal ecosystems monitoring
and research to produce evidence-based resource management information.

The PDO will be achieved by strengthening national monitoring and research protocols and tools as well as human
resource capacity to conduct robust scientific coastal ecosystems monitoring and research activities out to 12 nautical
miles at a national scale.

Specific interventions will involve strengthening the institutional capacity of the Indonesian Institute of Science (LIPI) and
associated institutions to generate evidenced-based coastal ecosystems monitoring and research information relevant
to resource management decisions through a range of training, certification and collaborative research activities with
partner institutions. The restructured project investments will also involve upgrading of a number of existing LIPI
monitoring, learning and research facilities and assets as well as equipping a series of sub-national nodes at existing
institutional partner sites. In addition, the project will invest in extensive national and regional (East Asia and Western
Pacific) training and learning activities.

The geographic footprint of the project has been expanded through the restructuring exercise from select sites in
Eastern Indonesia to a national scale enabling further improvements in national monitoring and research data
availability relevant to end users that operate at a national scale. The geographic expansion also reflects the fact that
the Asian Development Bank (ADB) has opted to close its COREMAP CTI Project, leaving Western Indonesia COREMAP
CTI sites without further coverage. As such, this restructuring permits for continuation of the original twin coverage of
the ADB and World Bank COREMAP CTI project sites, allowing for expansion and improvement of ecosystem monitoring
and research activities to take place at all of the original COREMAP CTI sites.

The restructured project maintains the original design of four components, but these have been updated to reflect the
new PDO, scope and focus of the project.

The restructured components are as follows:
        The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)



Component 1: Institutional Strengthening for Coastal Ecosystems Monitoring
This component is designed to provide support for robust coastal ecosystems monitoring through activities in two sub-
components
1.1 Support for Robust Coastal Ecosystems Monitoring: (a) coastal ecosystems monitoring surveys in 29 COREMAP CTI
sites in Eastern and Western Indonesia; (b) develop, benchmark and launch Indonesia’s improved coral reef health
index; (c) upgrade LIPI monitoring protocols and toolkits; (d) enable LIPI to become a national certification entity for
coastal ecosystems monitoring; (e) develop a certification and training program for coastal ecosystems monitoring; (f)
establish a national network of assessment centers accredited to offer training and award certification against the
national coastal ecosystems monitoring standard; and, (g) establish seven sub-national assessment centers within
existing institutions (e.g. universities) linked to district and provincial coastal ecosystems monitoring programs.

1.2 Strengthen Technical Capacity for Coastal Monitoring End users: strengthen the technical capacity for coastal
ecosystems monitoring end-users through Masters Degree scholarships and training.

Component 2: Support for Demand-Driven Coastal Ecosystems Research
The aim of this component is to improve the quality, strategic prioritization and demand-driven nature of coastal
ecosystems research carried out in Indonesia by LIPI and associated research entities. To achieve this, the component
will support activities organized in the following two sub-components:
2.1 Strengthening Institutional Systems for Demand-Driven Coastal Ecosystems Research: (a) improve engagement
with and involvement of end users in defining research priorities and disseminating research outcomes; (b) organize two
national symposia per year to enhance cross-sector and inter-agency engagement in the coastal ecosystems research
process; (c) provide support for research and strengthen research networks and capacity; (d) undertake priority research
based on clear end user demand.
2.2. Strengthening Technical Capacity for Coastal Ecosystems Research: (a) strengthen human resources skills,
knowledge and capacity of LIPI and its research partners through delivery of targeted training; (b) develop LIPI’s role as a
regional center of excellence for coastal ecosystems research.
Component 3: Strengthening Institutional Systems for Coastal Ecosystems Monitoring and Research
This component will support renovation and upgrading of LIPI facilities and systems through interventions organized in
two sub-components, as follows:

3.1 Strengthen Institutional Capacity for Coastal Ecosystems Monitoring and Research: LIPI has several marine and
coastal campuses that are in need of upgrading in order for it to become a regional center of excellence. These
include: Marine Species Conservation Technical Units in Bitung, Sulawesi, Biak, Papua, Tual, Maluku, Ternate, North
Maluku, Mataram, Lombok; LIPI’s CRMIS Ancol Headquarters; training facilities at LIPI’s central Jakarta (Jl. Raden Saleh)
site and Pulau Pari field station; equipping 7 regional data nodes within existing institutions (i.e., universities), including
through the procurement of IT systems; and, installation of a sub-national network of 8 data loggers and automated
marine monitoring stations/buoys at existing LIPI sites.

3.2 Strengthen Coastal Ecosystems Monitoring and Research Data and Knowledge Networks: This sub-component will
function to: augment national holdings of coastal ecosystems data and enhance availability to end users by ensuring that
outputs from competitive grants and demand-driven studies are incorporated into the national data repository;
development of a long-term strategy and plan to meet the growing demand for coastal ecosystems data provision and
        The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)



dissemination that will result from LIPI’s new mandate from the National Geospatial Agency; commissioning of a review
of intellectual property rights and legal requirements associated with data management, and developing data sharing
processes, agreements and standards; implementation of a series of public information and awareness campaigns to
enhance public knowledge about coastal ecosystems and the outputs of LIPI’s monitoring and research programs; and, a
a COREMAP Program legacy campaign to raise awareness of the critical environmental, social and economic importance
of coastal ecosystems in Indonesia.

Component 4: Project Management
This component will support all of the administration and financial aspects of the project to meet World Bank
requirements and Government of Indonesia regulations. The component will support the following activities: (a)
monitoring and evaluation of Project performance; (b) learning networks and dissemination of best practice; (c)
compliance monitoring of safeguards and fiduciary risk management; and (d) coordination with project partners, in
particular continuation of close collaboration with the GEF IW Coral Reef and Related Ecosystems Project executed by
the University of Queensland.
.

3. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
   KNOWN)
The restructured project will now be national in scope in coastal areas across the country out to 12 nautical
miles, and specifically include 18 (eighteen) locations in Eastern Indonesia and 11 (eleven) locations in
Western Indonesia where coastal ecosystem monitoring surveys will be conducted, namely: (i) 7 districts
(Pangkep, Selayar, Sikka, Buton, Wakatobi, Biak, Raja Ampat); (ii) 7 marine conservation areas (Kapoposang,
Sawu/Kupang, Aru Tenggara, Banda, Kep. Waigeo Barat, Ayau/ Waigeo Barat, Padaido); (iii) 4 locations
responding to national priorities, including: Spermonde, Lombok/Sekotong, Kendari and Ternate; and, (iv) 11
Western Indonesia sites, including: Tapanuli Tengah, Nias Utara, Mentawai, Batam, Bintang, Lingga, Natuna,
Anambas, Pulau Pei, Gili Mataram, Sabang. The Project will renovate several existing LIPI facilities, including:
(i) MarBest Raden Saleh Campus; (ii) Pulau Pari MarBest Field Station; (iii) Ancol National Data Repository
Campus; (iv) UPTs: Tual, Biak, Bitung, Mataram and Ternate; and, (v) 7 sub-national data nodes within
existing institutions in East and West Indonesia. And, installation of 8 new sub-national network data loggers
at existing LIPI research and monitoring sites. The physical works will be undertaken in existing structures
and facilities, such that land acquisition will not be required or if any is, it will be limited. The initial screening
for the presence of Indigenous Peoples during preparation of COREMAP CTI indicated that there are a
number of Indigenous communities in COREMAP CTI districts, particularly in Kabupaten Buton and Wakatobi
(Bajo people). The Bajo are an ethnic minority who live on the sea (as itinerant seafarers) or in coastal areas
on the water, and are, thus, highly dependent on the sea for their livelihoods. In Kabupaten Sikka, Biak and
Raja Ampat, there are also Indigenous groups. Based on the IP mapping, the Indigenous peoples in Sikka and
Biak live in highland areas, while in Raja Ampat, the groups reside in the coastal area. No major social
impacts are anticipated to the communities, as the activities under the restructured project are focused on
research and monitoring and small civil works in existing facilities.



4. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM
        The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)




Name                                                       Unit
Ninin K. Dewi                                              GSUID
Kian Siong                                                 GEN2A
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
5. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED


 Safeguard Policies                       Triggered               Explanation

                                                                  The objective of the restructured project is to
                                                                  strengthen institutional capacity in coastal
                                                                  ecosystems monitoring and research to produce
                                                                  evidence-based          resource     management
                                                                  information. As such, the environmental impact of
                                                                  the project is not expected to be significant. The
                                                                  project aims to achieve its objective by investing
                                                                  the remaining project funds in strengthening
                                                                  national monitoring and research protocols and
                                                                  tools as well as human resource capacity to
                                                                  conduct more robust scientific coastal ecosystems
                                                                  monitoring and research activities out to 12
                                                                  nautical miles at a national scale.

                                                                  The physical activities will involve small civil works
                                                                  to renovate existing LIPI monitoring, learning and
                                                                  research sites and assets. In addition, the project
                                                                  will invest in extensive national and regional (East
Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes
                                                                  Asia and Western Pacific) training and learning
                                                                  activities.

                                                                  Any adverse impacts associated with the proposed
                                                                  activities are considered to be minor to moderate,
                                                                  reversible, and site-specific. Mitigation measures
                                                                  will be carried out through the set of best practice;
                                                                  namely screening criteria, good engineering design
                                                                  and construction practices. The existing project
                                                                  Environmental and Social Safeguard Framework
                                                                  (ESSF) will be updated to reflect the changes to
                                                                  the project as a result of the restructuring
                                                                  exercise.

                                                                  To minimize the likelihood of adverse
                                                                  environmental impacts that may result from
                                                                  project activities, the ESSF includes a negative list
                                                                  and environmental checklist. If the screening
       The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)



                                                              process suggests that a negative environmental
                                                              impact may result, the project will follow ESSF
                                                              guidance and the project operation manual to
                                                              prepare the relevant safeguard instruments (e.g.,
                                                              Environmental Management Plan).

                                                              No major social impacts are anticipated as the
                                                              activities under the restructured project are
                                                              focused on research and monitoring and small civil
                                                              work within existing facilities. The physical works
                                                              will be undertaken in existing structures and
                                                              facilities, such that land acquisition will not be
                                                              required or if any is, it will be limited.

                                                              Mitigation measures for potential impacts include
                                                              training   modules     and     procedures,    the
                                                              dissemination of environmental code of practice
                                                              and the development of criteria for design
                                                              evaluation based on basic civil engineering
                                                              standard and construction practices.

                                                              The overall impacts on Natural Habitats as a result
                                                              of restructured project interventions are expected
                                                              to be positive.

                                                              The outcome of improved coastal ecosystems
                                                              monitoring and research information availability at
                                                              a national level will permit end users to improve
                                                              resource management and conservation actions,
                                                              thereby protecting natural habitats and ensuring
                                                              their sustainable use.
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)          Yes
                                                              The project will not finance any civil works
                                                              activities in prohibited, critical natural habitats,
                                                              nor will any of its interventions result in the
                                                              significant conversion of natural habitats. This
                                                              project’s existing negative list will apply. The
                                                              project operation manual provides specifications
                                                              for management of small civil works to avoid any
                                                              degradation or conversion of natural habitats.




Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                   No
       The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)




Pest Management (OP 4.09)                 No



Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No

                                                              The restructured project may include activities
                                                              with an IP/ethnic minority presence, such as in
                                                              Kabupaten Raja Ampat, Buton and Wakatobi.
                                                              Findings from COREMAP 2 and CTI indicate that no
                                                              adverse impacts on IPs were identified during the
                                                              course of implementation. The project will need to
                                                              ensure      involvement of Indigenous groups,
                                                              particularly in areas where the IP groups are a
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)         Yes                 minority.

                                                              The project will ensure that information reaches IP
                                                              groups and they are afforded equal opportunity to
                                                              benefit from project activities. The Indigenous
                                                              Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) embedded in
                                                              the ESSF provides the guiding principles and
                                                              procedures that will be applied during activity
                                                              preparation and implementation.
                                                              The project activities involving small civil works
                                                              will be undertaken in existing facilities, such that
                                                              land acquisition will not be required or if any is, it
                                                              will be limited. The project will keep a record of all
                                                              such transactions and ensure that no individual
                                                              will be negatively affected by land acquisition. No
                                                              access restriction is expected from the proposed
                                                              project activities, which focuses on coastal
                                                              ecosystems monitoring and research, therefore no
                                                              impacts to community livelihoods are expected.

Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)   Yes                 The Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy
                                                              Framework (LARPF) embedded in the ESSF states
                                                              the principles and procedures to guide project
                                                              implementers in dealing with land acquisition
                                                              activities. The LARPF guides preparation of action
                                                              plans (LARAP) for any investments involving land
                                                              acquisition. The LARAP will provide a mitigation
                                                              plan to ensure that affected peoples will not be
                                                              worse-off due to project activities and that they
                                                              will be consulted during preparation and
                                                              implementation.
       The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)




Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                No


Projects on International Waterways (OP)
                                             No
(BP 7.50)


Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)    No

KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A. SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
   potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
   The COREMAP CTI project restructuring exercise aims to strengthen institutional capacity in coastal ecosystems
   monitoring and research to produce evidence-based resource management information. The restructured project
   will not generate any large-scale, significant or irreversible environmental and social impacts, therefore the
   safeguard issues and impacts associated with the project are expected to be minor to moderate, reversible and site-
   specific. Mitigation measures are carried out through the set of best practice in the project's Environmental and
   Social Safeguards Framework (ESSF), which is an annex to the Project Operations Manual (POM). The existing
   project ESSF will be updated to reflect the restructuring, in particular changes made to the type of project activities
   and institutional arrangements.

   Experience from the COREMAP project to date has shown that there are no significant, irreversible adverse impacts
   resulting from activities implemented under the project. Any adverse environmental impacts are typically site
   specific and small in scale.And, such impacts can be managed locally by adopting screening criteria, good
   engineering design and construction practices. This will also be the case for the restructured project in which the
   physical activities are limited to research center/office renovation. Therefore, the project will follow the same
   principles as its predecessors. Nonetheless, because of the national scope of the project, it is essential to ensure
   that sufficient attention is paid to the application of safeguard guidelines and to ensure adequate ongoing
   monitoring.

   The majority of social and environmental outcomes generated by the restructuring are expected to be positive. The
   activities indicated in the project as a result of the restructuring have been simplified, consequently any adverse
   impacts will be less compared to the original project. However, since the project will finance small civil works and IP
   groups are present in several participating districts, there is no consideration to change the safeguard policies
   triggered (Environmental Assessment/OP 4.01, Natural Habitats/OP 4.04, Indigenous Peoples/OP 4.10 and
   Involuntary Resettlement/OP 4.12). There is no change in the Category B categorization, which means no significant
   adverse environmental or social impacts are anticipated.



 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
      The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
      Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)



  No potential indirect nor long term adverse impacts due to the project restructuring are envisaged.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.

  N/A.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The Environmental and Social Safeguard Framework (ESSF) was prepared to set out procedures required by the
  COREMAP CTI project to minimize adverse environmental and social impacts that may occur during
  implementation. The current ESSF will be updated to reflect the changes in the role of the Indonesian Institute of
  Science and changes in project activities.

  The ESSF provides a negative list and a set of environmental and social screening procedures to guide
  implementation. The ESSF is comprised of an Environmental Management Framework, Land Acquisition and
  Resettlement Policy Framework (LARPF) which in and of itself includes a Process Framework for access restriction
  and an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF). The LARPF establishes principles and procedures to guide
  project implementers in managing land acquisition activities. The LARPF guides preparation of associated action
  plans (LARAP) for any investments involving land acquisition. The LARAPs provide mitigation plans to ensure that
  affected peoples will not be worse-off due to project activities and that they will be consulted during preparation
  and implementation. The Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) provides general principles and
  procedures that will be applied during preparation and implementation.

  Borrower Capacity

  The transfer in role of Implementing Agency from MMAF to LIPI will have a minor impact on Borrower safeguard
  capacity since LIPI currently serves as one of the project's three National Implementation Units and has already
  served as the original Implementing Agency for the first phase of the COREMAP APL. To support the transition to
  once again become the Project Implementing Agency, the Bank will provide LIPI with a refresher course in safeguard
  policy application and use, monitoring and compliance with the revised ESSF.

  And, to ensure that all safeguard issues are adequately monitored by LIPI going forward, staff will be assigned as
  safeguard focal points in LIPI. They will be responsible for ensuring application and monitoring of the ESSF for all
  activities necessitating safeguards coverage.



5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies,
  with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Project stakeholders include LIPI, its partner institutions and network, Academia, research agencies and other
  government agencies, district and provincial governments and Indonesian citizens with an interest in coastal
  ecosystem monitoring and research. The project will build the institutional capacity of LIPI staff and that of a
  number of associated national and sub-national entities associated with carrying out coastal ecosystems monitoring
  and research activities so as to generate robust monitoring and research information. This will involve a range of
  training, certification and collaborative research activities with partner institutions.
                        The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                        Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)



                     Upon completion of a round of Public Consultations, the updated ESSF will be disclosed in Bahasa Indonesia on
                     LIPI’s website and in English at the Bank’s InfoShop.


            DISCLOSURE_TABLE
            B. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

        Date of receipt by the Bank                                      Date of submission for disclosure
        24-Jul-2013                                                      25-Jul-2013
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                         Date of Disclosure
            Indonesia                                                       26-Jul-2013
            Comments
            The revised ESSF reflecting the scope, scale and nature of the restructured project will be disclosed in country on the
            LIPI website and at the Bank's InfoShop upon completion of a round of Public Consultation.


RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                Date of submission for disclosure
24-Jul-2013                                                                25-Jul-2013
“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                           Date of Disclosure
          Indonesia                                                         26-Jul-2013
           Comments


INDIG ENOUS_TA BLE




Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 Date of submission for disclosure
           The World Bank                                                                       RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)



24-Jul-2013                                                      25-Jul-2013
“In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                         Date of Disclosure
 Indonesia                                                       26-Jul-2013
 Comments




 COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                              Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                Yes
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the
                                                                                                Yes
 credit/loan?



 NH_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical
                                                                                                 No
 natural habitats?

 If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other
 (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures                   No
 acceptable to the Bank?



 IP_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate)
                                                                                                Yes
 been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?

 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice
                                                                                                Yes
 Manager review the plan?

 If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
                                                                                                NA
 approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Practice Manager?
          The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)



IR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy             framework/process
                                                                                                 Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice
                                                                                                 Yes
Manager review the plan?



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                 Yes
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                   Yes
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                 Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                 Yes
cost?

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
                                                                                                 Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal                             Yes
documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                   Cary Anne Cadman


    Approved By

    Practice Manager/Manager              Iain G. Shuker                           04-May-2017

.
