                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC17741

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Jul-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Albania                  Project ID: P159931
                            Project Name:
                            Team Leader(s): Bonnie Ann Sirois,Jonida Myftiu
                            Estimated Date 30-Sep-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:                               Lending       IPF
                                                                         Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    1.125               Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:         0
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Free-standing TFs for Albania Country Unit                                                 1.125
                            Environment        C - Not Required
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed development objective of the project is to: ➢❨ develop a road map for public sector
                           accrual accounting implementation and to support the early stages of this reform, including building
                           essential technical skills➢❨ .
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project encompasses activities under two broad components:

                           Component 1 - Development of public sector accounting and financial reporting in line with IPSAS.

                           Component 1.1: Assessment of the current situation on public accounting will be financed under
                           separate Band Executed TF - P159932 which complements this project. The aim of this activity is to
                           conduct a gap analysis comparing national accounting standards against IPSAS using the World
                           Bank➢❨ s standardized toolkit (Report on the Enhancement of Public Financial Reporting REPF).
                           The results of this gap analysis will incorporate a roadmap for the further development of national
                           accounting legislation and guidance, taking account of the Albania➢❨ s needs and capacity
                           constraints.

                           Component 1.2: Development of public accounting legal and regulatory framework.
                         Under this component, the project will support the development of public sector accounting
                         standards in accordance with IPSAS in Albania. This component encompasses the following
                         activities: i) translation of IPSAS into Albanian, ii) development and enactment of national
Public Disclosure Copy




                         accounting legislation, and iii) national level implementation guidance.

                         Component 1.3: Review and amendment of the national chart of accounts .
                         This component will include: i) the review, and ii) if needed, the amendment of the national chart of
                         accounts in order to be fully in line with accrual accounting/ budgeting and statistical needs.
                         Component 1.4: Gradual implementation of international accepted accounting standards in line with
                         IPSAS .
                         The project will focus on the implementation of the selected set of standards in budget institutions at
                         central government level, and at least one pilot at a subnational government level. The
                         implementation of the new accounting standards comprises both, the technical roll-out as well as
                         training in the use of the new standards, including the generation and interpretation of financial
                         information produced by the new standards. Training needs will be identified at the outset of the
                         program (cf. capacity gap analysis under component 1). Support will also be provided to the MoF
                         staff in leading the reform and address change management within the MoF and other budget
                         institutions.

                         Component 2 - Development of MoF capacities and of professional accounting skills for public
                         accounting practitioners
                         Component 2.1: Technical capacity building of the Financial Reporting Unit and Central
                         Harmonization Unit (CHU) at the MoF .
                         This activity includes: i) defining institutional responsibilities, and ii) setting up a work plan for the
                         newly created Financial Reporting Unit (Treasury) and the CHU.
                         Component 2.2: Development of professional accounting skills and a sustainable public sector
                         accounting training mechanism .
                         In order to improve the professional accounting skills and develop local training capacities, the
                         following activities are foreseen under this component: i) training of a selected number of financial
Public Disclosure Copy




                         officers to obtain an internationally recognized professional qualification certificate, ii) training of a
                         sufficient number of trainers through the train of trainers approach, and iii) institutionalization of a
                         local training and certification program at a local institution to ensure the sustainability of the
                         development of public accounting skills in the long-run. The training foresees a two year training of
                         one cohort (25 students in English) to obtain a professional qualification in IPSAS. Out of this
                         cohort, a maximum of 15 candidates will be selected to receive additional methodological training to
                         become trainers and be able to deliver the training afterwards. A continuous training and certification
                         mechanism will be established and institutionalized at a local institutions. A dedicated working
                         group, comprising all relevant stakeholders, will be established to define the content of the training
                         and prepare the relevant legal framework to regulate training for public accountants in Albania.

                         In terms of sequencing of the activities, the preparatory work for the implementation, i.e.
                         components 1.1-1.3 will precede the gradual implementation of the new standards under component
                         1.4. However, capacity building activities (components 2.1 and 2.2) will start immediately, in order
                         to ensure that the localization of the training program can be achieved within project duration. An
                         overview on the sequencing of activities is provided in annex 5.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                           Triggered?           Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/                 No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                  No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                           No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09                      No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/              No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
                           Projects on International                    No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP             No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Bonnie Ann Sirois,Jonida Myftiu
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler (SA)                              Date: 11-May-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Soukeyna Kane (PMGR)                                         Date: 16-May-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
