INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA8349
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Mar-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Lebanon                     Project ID:  P147854
Project Name: Lake Qaraoun Pollution Prevention Project (P147854)
Task Team       Maria Sarraf
Leader(s):
Estimated       30-Mar-2015                 Estimated    22-Jul-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GENDR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Agricultural extension and research (10%), General water, sanitation and flood
protection sector (90%)
Theme(s):       Water resource management (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      50.00             Total Bank Financing:    50.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
Borrower                                                                      0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        50.00
Total                                                                        50.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The development objectives of the project are to reduce the quantity of untreated municipal sewage
discharged into the Litani river and to improve pollution management around Qaraoun Lake.
3. Project Description
The project will comprise the following components:
Page 1 of 8


﻿Component 1. Improve the collection of the municipal sewage (US$ 45.5 million).
This component will finance activities that increase sewerage collection in areas where waste water
treatment plants have already been constructed in order to maximize the utilization of investments
O
U         already made:
Expansion of sewage network to connect to the Zahl6 WWTP (US$26 million)
The Zahlk Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP), which is part of Lebanon's wastewater master
plan, is currently under construction with funding from the Italian Protocol. The plant is expected to
become operational in October 2015. The plant is designed with a capacity for a daily flow of 37,300
m3 for 2015 and 56,000 m3 for 2030. The plant will connect to an existing network of about 350 km.
The project intends to finance: the construction of about 106 km of new sewerage network, the
rehabilitation of part of the old network, and 6,000 new house connections. According to the final
design, the gravity sanitary sewage network will not require any pumping station. The area that will
be covered is: Greater Zahlk (including Karak and Ksara); Saadnayel; part of Taalabay; Quaa El
Rim; Hezzerta; and part of Forzol.
The project is also expected to finance the completion of sewage coverage to Anjar WWTP (the
funding of which is under discussion with the Italian Government) and Aitanit WWTP (constructed
by USAID).
Component 2. Promotion of integrated pest management and good agricultural practices to reduce
agrochemical pollution in upper Litani (US$ 1.5 million).
Farmers in the upper Litani basin often use high amounts of fertilizers and pesticides, leading to
increased levels of nitrates and pesticides in the Litani River. This component will promote adoption
of sustainable production systems among farmers in the upper Litani basin, by introducing selected
IPM (for example, reduced pesticides application) and GAP (for example, reduced fertilizer
application and other conservation practices). These practices are expected to provide increased
quality of agricultural products (without reducing yields); farmers' savings (through decreased cost
of production); and reduced pollution of the Litani River. The component will target about 750
farmers; the emphasis will be on large irrigated farms in the West Beqaa district, given their impact
and their close proximity to Lake Qaraoun and Litani River. IPM activities will be implemented
through the Farmer Field Schools (FFS) methodology, which is a proven methodology that is based
on participatory approach to train and empower farmers on the use of IPM techniques and on the
proper handling and disposal of pesticides. Similar participatory approaches will be used to train
a        farmers on alternative methods and practices for sustainable fertilizer use in the project area.
Baseline surveys and regular farm visits will be conducted to monitor the use of agrochemicals by
targeted farmers as well as the sales of these chemicals in the project area.
Component 3. Capacity Building, Technical Studies and Project Management (US$ 3.5 million)
This component will fund institutional technical assistance for the Ministry of Energy and Water and
the Bekaa Water Establishment (BWE). It will also support the Litani River Authority (LRA) by
building on activities achieved under the USAID Litani River Basin Management Support Program
and continue to focus on strengthening its capacity to monitor water resources and conduct clean up
campaigns along the Litani river. It will also fund necessary technical, environmental and social
studies for establishing sorting and landfilling sites and closure of existing dump sites in the project
area.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The overall technical assistance under the project will cover the upper Litani watershed (upstream
Page 2 of 8


﻿from Qaraoun Lake), while direct investments will focus on the villages of Kaa El Reem, Hazarta,
Karak in the Greater Zahl6 area, villages around Anjar and Aitanit.
The Litani River is the principal artery of Lebanon, exceeding 170 km in length, and its major water
O
U        structure is the Qaraoun dam, which forms the Qaraoun Lake (or reservoir), which was built to
produce hydropower, and provide water for irrigation and water supply. The Upper Litani River
catchment extends over an area of 1,500 km2 (10% of the Lebanese territory) and comprises 99
towns/villages distributed into four administrative districts: Baalbeck, Zahl6, West Bekaa, and
Rachayya.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Chaogang Wang (GSURR)
Suiko Yoshijima (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies  Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental          Yes          The Government has prepared an Environmental and
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the entire
project, since site locations for construction of the sewage
network are still unspecified and the location of the
connectivity pipelines are not yet identified. The ESMF is
conform to the requirements of OP4.01 as well as the
Lebanese laws and/or regulations on environmental
reviews and impact assessment. The draft ESMF has been
cleared by the World Bank and disclosed in country and
at the infoShop.
Since the location of Investment 1 (i.e. sewage connection
to Zahle WWTP) has been identified, an Environment
Impact Assessment and Environment Management Plan
(EIA/EMP) has been prepared by the Government,
cleared by the WB and disclosed in country and at the
infoShop.
When locations of other investments are identified and
their designs are finalized, EIA/EMP will be prepared for
each, in accordance with their environmental risks, based
on the screening tools and guidelines established in the
ESMF.
The Government has also undertaken a design review of
Zahle WWTP which has been cleared by the WB and
disclosed in country and at infoShop. Once confirmed,
post/assessment of other WWTPs (Anjar and Aitanit) to
which the project may fund sewage network will also be
undertaken to determine current conditions of operations
and recommendations will be made to mitigate and/or
improve the existing conditions. These documents will be
also reviewed, cleared and disclosed in country and at
Page 3 of 8


﻿InfoShop before construction starts.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   No            The project will be implemented within the identified
villages and districts and at the 3 existing wastewater
facilities which are not located in the proximity of natural
habitats or protected areas.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No            The project will be implemented within the identified
villages and districts and at the 3 existing wastewater
facilities that are not in forested zones and generated
activities will not have any adverse impact on forests
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes            The project does not finance procurement or use of
pesticides/insecticides. However the project will provide
institutional support and capacity building on IPM
practices to reduce the use of fertilizers and pesticides in
the project area to key stakeholders (irrigated farmers,
research institutes and official/staff of MOA). The
capacity building may also have indirect impacts on
irrigation practices with reliance on application of
fertilizers and pesticides. This policy is being triggered to
ensure that these activities are well managed. The ESMF
includes an annex detailing the required IPM guidelines.
Physical Cultural        No            It was confirmed in the detailed design document that the
Resources OP/BP 4.11                  proposed sewage networks feeding into Zahle WWTP do
not pass physical cultural sites. It is also unlikely that
other networks to be designed during project
implementation will pass any physical cultural sites and
this will be avoided during detail design phase. Therefore,
OP4.11 is not triggered. However, as required by
Lebanese Government, the contract for construction of the
networks will include chance finds procedure in case any
physical cultural resources are found during excavation.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   No            There are no groups of indigenous people or indigenous
BP 4.10                                communities in the project areas.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes           The project will finance the sewage networks associated
OP/BP 4.12                            to wastewater treatment plants which have been or are
planned to be constructed. OP 4.12 is triggered and a
Resettlement Policy Framework has been prepared by the
client and cleared by the World Bank, although efforts
will be made to avoid land acquisition for the construction
of sewage pipelines. For the land used for wastewater
treatment plants, a post assessment will be carried out and
remedial actions will be taken if there are any pending
issues related to land use. In addition, a land acquisition
plan has been prepared for the section of the pipeline
connected to the Zahle WWTP since the alignment of the
section of pipeline has been determined. The RPF and
Page 4 of 8


﻿land acquisition plan have been cleared and disclosed
both in country and at InfoShop prior to project appraisal.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
)         4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
-         Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The nature of the project is to bring significant benefits to the environment and public health by
providing access to wastewater treatment facilities for those who currently have no access and are
discharging untreated wastewater directly into Litani River. Therefore, the project, by its very
nature, is a public good and will result in significant environmental improvements and long-term
public health benefits. However, some impacts on the environment are expected especially for the
activities under Component 1 as expansion of sewage networks involves construction. Mitigation
measures were identified to manage risks on environment as well as health and safety risks for
workers during construction. The leakage of wastewater from the broken or damaged pipes will be
mitigated by continuous monitoring and regular maintenance of the pipelines.
Efforts will be made to avoid land acquisition for the construction of sewage pipelines. However,
OP 4.12 was triggered and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared, approved
and disclosed. Since the connection with Zahle WWTP involves small land acquisition, a Land
Acquisition Plan (LAP) has been prepared, approved and disclosed.
0
Though the project will not finance the construction nor rehabilitation of the WWTP itself, it is
O           considered as an associated facility as wastewater network will be collected and treated at the
WWTP. Design review of Zahle WWTP has been conducted to ensure the compliance of WWTPs
and make sure that connected WWTPs will have enough capacity to treat the increased wastewater
and water quality at the final discharge is compliant. Design review has been approved and
disclosed in country and through infoShop. Water quality at the discharge from WWTP and sludge
disposal will be monitored by the Project.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The long term impacts of the project are related to potential leakage of wastewater during
operation. However, overall impacts on groundwater and soil are positive as the project will
provide the communities with access to wastewater treatment. The construction of sewage
networks will have positive impacts on environment and health for those living in these areas.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The sewage networks were designed based on its minimal adverse effects on environment and the
communities and mitigation measure have been identified where effects are unavoidable.
Page 5 of 8


﻿4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Council for Development and Reconstruction (CDR) has prepared safeguards instruments and
will be responsible for the implementation of the ESMF, site-specific EIAs/EMPs, RPF and LAP.
CDR will provide updates on implementation of safeguards instruments to the Bank, which will be
included in the bi-annual project progress report. The Ministry of Environment will monitor the
environmental impacts of the project, the implementation of the safeguards instruments for the
whole project components.
The legal basis for the EIA system is established in the Environment Protection Law No. 444/2002
and Law No. 690/2005 on the reorganization of the MOE and the EIA decree No. 8633/2012 and
its annexes. The features of the Lebanese EIA system are compatible with most of the World Bank
EA Policy (OP 4.01) and the EC EIA regulations. MoE has experience and knowledge of the
World Bank safeguards policies and will work with CDR to make sure safeguards instruments are
properly implemented.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders include the Ministry of Environment, Council of Development and
Reconstruction, Municipalities, Union of Municipalities, Bekaa Water Establishment, Zahle and
Bekaa Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Ministry of Public Health, Ministry of Interior and
Municipalities, and local residents.
A consultation meeting was held on September 13, 2014 in Chtaura to discuss the findings of the
ESMF; EIA/EMP for Zahle network and the RPF. Project affected people were consulted for LAP
in February 2015. The CDR issued a letter to all key stakeholders at least a week ahead of the
consultation inviting them to attend the consultation. The invitation letter was followed up by
emails and phone calls to remind people to attend. The consultation session was divided in three
parts. The first part includes a welcoming address by the organizing institutions. The second part
consists of a presentation of the documents in local language (Arabic) to ensure maximum
comprehension and the third part is dedicated to questions and answers. The final documents
reflected concerns and issues shared at the consultation.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              10-Feb-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           12-Feb-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Lebanon                                                  11-Feb-2015
Comments: In addition, design review of Zahle WWTP has been disclosed in country on March
13, 2015 and at infoShop.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              10-Feb-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           12-Feb-2015
Page 6 of 8


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Lebanon                                                  11-Feb-2015
Comments: In addition, LAP has been discslosed in country on March 13, 2015 and at infoShop.
O
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                              10-Feb-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           12-Feb-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Lebanon                                                  11-Feb-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [ X] No [ ]  NA [  ]
Is a separate PMP required?                            Yes[   ] No[X]      NA [   ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a    Yes [  ] No [   ]   NA [ X ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Page 7 of 8


﻿Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes[X]  No[     NA
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes[X]  No[   NA
o          in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]  No[       NA[
0          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[      NA[
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Maria Sarraf
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name:                                      Date:
Practice Manager/     Name:                                      Date:
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


