                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA17885
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Apr-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kenya                              Project ID:   P152394
                            Project Name:      Transforming Health Systems for Universal Care (P152394)
                            Task Team          Yi-Kyoung Lee
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          11-Apr-2016                        Estimated   15-Jun-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GHN01                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Health (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Child health (30%), Health system performance (30%), Population and
                                              reproductive health (30%), Nutrition and food security (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     191.10           Total Bank Financing:                 150.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                150.00
                              Global Financing Facility                                                                   40.00
                              Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund                                            1.10
                              Total                                                                                      191.10
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to improve utilization and quality of primary health care
                           services with a focus on reproductive, maternal, newborn, child, and adolescent health services.


                                                                        Page 1 of 7
                         3. Project Description
                         The Project will achieve this objective by: (i) improving access to and demand for quality PHC
                         services; and (ii) strengthening institutional capacity in selected key areas to improve utilization and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         quality of PHC services. Implementing a set of evidence-based - high impact and cost-effective -
                         interventions is expected to contribute to universal health coverage (UHC) with improved equity and
                         enhanced efficiency. The outcomes will be achieved through the three components below.

                         Component 1: Improving PHC Results

                         Component 1 aims to improve the delivery, utilization, and quality of PHC services at the county
                         level with a focus on RMNCAH. It will support counties to scale up evidence-based, county
                         appropriate supply- and demand- side key priority interventions along the continuum of care. This
                         component will focus on: (i) making existing facilities functional to deliver quality essential PHC
                         services; and (ii) increasing demand for services at the community and facility levels. The former
                         includes expanding the availability of quality basic and comprehensive emergency obstetric and
                         neonatal care, and ensuring an effective referral system. The latter includes strengthening community
                         units to (i) deliver preventive and promotive health care including access to safe water and sanitation,
                         improved hygiene practices and nutrition, and (ii) engage the community to shape the delivery of
                         PHC services (e.g., community dialogue days).

                         Component 2: Strengthening Institutional Capacity

                         Component 2 aims to strengthen institutional capacity to better deliver quality PHC services under
                         Component 1. This component will focus on four key areas:

                         2.1. Improving Quality of Care: The Project will support (i) the Department of Health Standards,
                         Quality Assurance and Regulation as well as the health regulatory boards to: (a) strengthen
                         inspection for private and public health facilities, and (b) institutionalize quality assurance towards
Public Disclosure Copy




                         certification; (ii) the Division of Family Health to: (a) develop and/or disseminate RMNCAH related
                         strategies and guidelines including improving adolescent sexual and reproductive health and nutrition
                         to address high teenage pregnancy and stunting, and (b) conduct operations research; and (iii) the
                         Kenya Medical Training College to strengthen midwifery training.

                         2.2. Strengthening Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) and Civil Registration and Vital Statistics. The
                         Project will support the Division of Health Information, Monitoring & Evaluation and Research to:
                         (i) operationalize the M&E framework; (ii) strengthen the health information system; and (iii)
                         working closely with the Civil Registration Department, pilot innovative approaches to improving
                         coverage of vital events registration within the health sector.

                         2.3. Supporting Health Financing Reforms towards UHC. The Project will support the Division of
                         Health Care Financing to: (i) conduct analytical work to inform the implementation of health
                         financing strategy (HFS) and health-financing reforms towards UHC; (ii) disseminate the HFS to get
                         buy-in from various stakeholders drawing from the recently completed stakeholder analysis; and (iii)
                         build capacity for UHC leadership at the national and county level.

                         Component 3: Project Management

                         Component 3 aims to facilitate and coordinate project implementation and enhance cross-county and


                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         intergovernmental collaboration. This will include two areas:

                         3.1. Project Management (including M&E and fiduciary activities): The Project will finance project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management staff at both levels of government, office equipment and operating costs for day to day
                         management of the Project including M&E and fiduciary activities (e.g., independent integrated
                         fiduciary review agent). This includes annual cross-county verification, periodic surveys and process
                         evaluation to monitor implementation progress and address any implementation challenges. The
                         Project will also finance technical assistance to support the Project sub-technical working group
                         under the Intergovernmental Forum for Health in carrying out their responsibilities.

                         3.2. Cross-county and Inter-governmental Collaboration: The Project will finance activities that
                         promote cross-county initiatives and inter-governmental collaboration to address common demand-
                         and supply-side bar riers. Examples include cross-county study tours to share knowledge and
                         capacity building in areas that affect several counties such as drafting county health bills and
                         improving supply chain management of strategic commodities.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is expected to be rolled out in all 47 counties. The intent is targeting areas that are
                         currently underserved in each county; these areas may include vulnerable and marginalized groups.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Benjamin Kithome Kilaka (GSURR)
                         Edward Felix Dwumfour (GEN01)
                         Gibwa A. Kajubi (GSU07)
                         Maina Ephantus Githinji (GENDR)
                         Susanne Ndunge Ndivo (GSURR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            Providing essential health care under the Project such as
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     family planning, antenatal care, skilled delivery, and
                                                                    postnatal care; and enforcing quality of care standards for
                                                                    improved client experience, patient safety and
                                                                    effectiveness of care are likely to lead to the generation of
                                                                    health care wastes which are likely to present potential
                                                                    adverse impacts to the environment. The Project will not
                                                                    support civil works other than maintenance and very
                                                                    minor renovation of existing health facilities.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP     No
                          4.04
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36         No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09 No

                          Physical Cultural          No
                          Resources OP/BP 4.11



                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      Yes            Some of the 47 counties including Trans-Nzoia, Kwale,
                            BP 4.10                                    Kilifi, Baringo, Nakuru, Lamu have known populations of
                                                                       Indigenous People. A vulnerable and marginalized
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       groups’ framework (VMGF) has been prepared by the
                                                                       Ministry of Health (MOH) in consultation with the
                                                                       vulnerable and marginalized groups (VMGs). The VMGF
                                                                       will: (i) provide guidelines which will enable the project
                                                                       to avert any potentially adverse effects on the VMGs’
                                                                       communities: and (ii) ensure that the VMGs receive social
                                                                       and economic benefits that are culturally appropriate, and
                                                                       inclusive in both gender and intergeneration terms.
                            Involuntary Resettlement No                No new construction would be financed under the Project
                            OP/BP 4.12                                 and therefore there will be no land acquisition leading to
                                                                       involuntary resettlement and/or restrictions of access to
                                                                       resources and livelihoods.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Public Disclosure Copy




                              There are no significant and/or irreversible adverse environmental and social issues anticipated
                              from the investments to be financed under the Project. The Project will not support civil works
                              other than maintenance and minor renovation of existing health facilities. The main environmental
                              safeguard policy relates to health care waste management, in view of the risks associated with the
                              Project. Providing PHC services under the Project such as family planning, antenatal care, skilled
                              delivery, and postnatal care; and enforcing quality of care standards for improved client
                              experience, patient safety and effectiveness of care are likely to generate health care wastes which
                              present potential adverse impacts to the environment. The envisaged environmental risks at project
                              implementation include healthcare waste which may be solid or liquid, including but not limited to
                              infectious waste and other medical supplies that may have been in contact with blood and body
                              fluids, highly infectious wastes (especially from the laboratories), and non-infectious waste from
                              normal operations.

                              It is anticipated that the Project will have positive social impacts at the individual, community,
                              county and national level.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Most of the impacts anticipated will be positive for all communities including for VMGs and
                              minimal, if any, negative social impacts are anticipated from the Project. Positive impacts
                              anticipated include: (i) increased demand for and utilization of PHC services by improving

                                                                        Page 4 of 7
                           knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors of communities towards the continuum of essential care
                           services such as family planning antenatal care, skilled delivery, postnatal care, and adolescent
                           reproductive health services; (ii) improved access to PHC services by strengthening county’s
Public Disclosure Copy




                           capacity (for example, financing, workforce, products, information and governance) to deliver
                           effective and efficient integrated interventions at the communities and facilities; and (iii) improved
                           quality of PHC services by ensuring constant availability of essential inputs (for example, human
                           resources, equipment, commodities, water, and so on) and enforcing quality of care standards for
                           improved client experience, patient safety and effectiveness of care.

                           Social risks envisioned in the implementation process include: (i) possibility of elite capture at the
                           community and county levels thus excluding target groups; (ii) political capture as the project is
                           being launched in the lead up to the national elections in 2017; and (iii) leakages of inputs and
                           resources as funds for facilities are to be channeled to county health facilities in remote villages
                           with limited supervision. These risks will be mitigated through the following: (i) capacity
                           development of key project implementers; and (ii) awareness creation and building capacity of
                           VMG’s community health structure (e.g., community health volunteers/workers) on PHC at the
                           community level, advocacy skills to understand and influence the PHC services, use of appropriate
                           participatory approaches for improving health services uptake, and application of social
                           accountability tools at community and county health services levels for enhanced accountability
                           and transparency.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Medical waste is inevitable in health care. There were therefore no alternatives considered.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The government of Kenya has updated Health Care Waste Management Plan (HCWMP) 2012
                           which focuses on waste generation, as well as segregation, storage, collection, transport, and final
                           disposal practices; technologies for waste disposal; public awareness programs; and relevant
Public Disclosure Copy




                           national legislation. The MOH has also prepared a Health Care Waste Management Strategic Plan
                           2015-2020, which focuses on strategic and professional management of health care waste
                           generated from the health care industry in Kenya. The HCWMP 2016-2021 is disclosed at the
                           MOH website and in the InfoShop.

                           A VMGF has been prepared and outlines the processes and principles of: (i) screening to
                           determine if the project activities will be undertaken in the vicinity of vulnerable and marginalized
                           communities; and (ii) preparing a vulnerable and marginalized groups plan (VMGP), including the
                           social assessment process, consultation and stakeholder engagement, disclosure procedures and
                           communication. The VMGF also spells out: (i) an appropriate gender and inter-generational
                           inclusive framework; and (ii) appropriate grievance handling procedures, from community level,
                           county and national level. The VMGs and other stakeholders (for example, civil society
                           organization, local leaders) will be actively engaged in (i) free and prior informed consultation of
                           VMGs; and (ii) monitoring project implementation at the various levels through, participation in
                           health management structures. The VMGF is disclosed on the MOH website and the InfoShop.

                           The World Bank has supported a number of projects in the health sector and these projects have
                           addressed the concern of health care wastes and the VMGs. There is therefore a good
                           understanding among the MOH counterpart on environmental and social risks related to health
                           care wastes. Most of CDOHs are understaffed and have limited capacity in the management of

                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                           environment and social issues since the health sector was recently devolved. The Project
                           Management Team will: (i) work with counties to develop and guide implementation of VMGPs,
                           when required; (ii) build capacity of county staff on the required policies and use of the social and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           environmental screening tools and checklists; (iii) help them monitor implementation of VMGPs
                           and HCWMP; and (iv) report any safeguards related risks and mitigation measures undertaken as
                           part of the quarterly progress report to the Bank. In order to mitigate risks, the Project will also
                           disclose the Project information including detailed activities planned in culturally appropriate and
                           accessible manner.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders include MOH, county governments, NGOs, private and mission health
                           facilities, municipal councils and health facilities, health workers, patients, and people living near
                           health facilities and dump sites. Consultation for the Health Care Waste Management Strategic
                           Plan and VMGF was through public hearings, stakeholder workshops and meeting of the heads of
                           the implementing agencies.

                           For disclosure, the HCWMP, VMGF, and related documents were discussed by stakeholders
                           including VMGs, civil society organization, counties, and the MOH. The final documents are
                           posted on the websites of the MOH. In addition, the documents are disclosed at the World Bank
                           Information Center in Nairobi and the InfoShop in Washington DC.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      31-Mar-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   13-Apr-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kenya                                                            13-Apr-2016
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      24-Mar-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   13-Apr-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kenya                                                            13-Apr-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment



                                                                       Page 6 of 7
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Yi-Kyoung Lee
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                          Date: 13-Apr-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Magnus Lindelow (PMGR)                           Date: 13-Apr-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                        Page 7 of 7
