                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA18622
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Nov-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Nov-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                              Project ID:   P153604
                            Project Name:      Poyang Lake Basin Town Water Environment Management Project (P153604)
                            Task Team          Ximing Zhang,Solvita Klapare
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          21-Nov-2016              Estimated     17-Mar-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GWA02                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       219.93           Total Bank Financing:    150.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                                   69.93
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     150.00
                              Total                                                                                     219.93
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project development objectives are to reduce the pollutant discharge into selected waterways,
                           and improve management of water quality in selected counties in the Poyang Lake basin within
                           Jiangxi Province.
                            3. Project Description
                           a.      Overview.

                           The Jiangxi Provincial Government proposes to utilize the World Bank loan in managing the water


                                                                       Page 1 of 14
                         environment in the key towns of Poyang Lake basin. Seven counties - Duchang, Poyang, Yugan,
                         Jishui, Fengxin, Jingan and Shangli, have been selected for project implementation. These seven
                         counties represent a mixed pattern of geographic distribution across the basin: three sites are in close
Public Disclosure Copy




                         proximity to the main lake, one site along the mid-stream of a main river draining into the lake, two
                         sites adjacent to the tributary streams of a main river, and one site at the remotest distance from the
                         lake. The water quality of Poyang Lake is closely associated with the quality and environment of the
                         water and land bodies in these contributing catchments, and vice versa.

                         The project is designed to integrate different ways of environmental protection to improve the water
                         quality of Poyang Lake basin, including by means of wastewater treatment and solid waste
                         management, as well non-structural measures. As such, the project will focus not only on
                         engineering aspects but also on enhancing institutional mechanisms, improving operation and
                         maintenance (O&M) and monitoring systems to help the selected counties in Jiangxi Province to
                         enhance water environmental services, including wastewater collection and treatment systems, urban
                         storm water management, river and lake environment restoration, solid waste collection and
                         transportation system, and participatory integrated environment management system.

                         b.      Proposed Project components.

                         The proposed project activities consist of four main components, including:

                         Component 1:Institutional Strengthening for Water Management (US$23.33 million): The key
                         activities include:
                         (a) establishment of the Lake Management Platform (LMP) designed to strengthen the Poyang Lake
                         basin➢❨ s management, institutional and knowledge sharing architecture. The LMP is intended to
                         provide an efficient institutional framework that ensures sound coordination with affiliated agencies
                         involved in managing the Lake➢❨ s water environment ;
                         (b) establishment of water environment monitoring systems, through installation of monitoring
Public Disclosure Copy




                         stations, provision of monitoring equipment and facilities as well as establishment of integrated
                         information monitoring system and early warning system; the water environment monitoring systems
                         will provide information for government decision making for integrated water environment
                         management and public awareness on environmental protection;
                         (c) preparation of studies related to ecological protection of the Poyang Lake. This will include
                         financing mechanisms to improve water management. Incentive mechanisms designed to reduce
                         non-point source pollution from agricultural and aquacultural practices will also be considered;
                         (d) provision of training to personnel of organizations responsible for water quality monitoring and
                         environmental enforcement;
                          (e) preparation of sensitivity assessment of Poyang Lake. This would strengthen basin-wide water
                         environment management planning through evaluation of water quality improvement and protection,
                         water quantity management, land uses changes, biodiversity conservation, urbanization and
                         demographic changes, tourism impact and industrialization, basin pollution, with climate resilience
                         and adaptation measures; and
                         (f) enhancement of participatory sustainable lake basin management. This would include: disclosing
                         information about Poyang Lake protection to the public and grassroots level organizations; and
                         ensuring soundness of infrastructure design and operational sustainability through environmental
                         awareness and social activities at the county and village levels.
                         Component 2: Lake and River Restoration and Improvement of Wastewater Management (US
                         $140.67million): This component would restore river and lake environment for Yugan, Poyang and


                                                                      Page 2 of 14
                         Duchang Counties, and improve domestic wastewater system in Duchang, Jing➢❨ an, Fengxin and
                         Jishui Counties. The main activities include:
                         (a) restoration of lake and river environment in Zhuhu Lake, Pipa Lake, and Zoujiazui lakes &
Public Disclosure Copy




                         stream ➢❨ located respectively ➢❨ in Poyang, Yugan, and Duchang Counties. The restoration
                         measures include:: (i) construction of bio-retention swales to intercept runoff pollutants from being
                         discharged directly into the lakes; (ii) removal of a small amount of lake sediment to reduce the inner
                         lake pollution source; (iii) development of constructed wetlands designed to remove pollutants from
                         storm water to be discharged into the lakes; (iv) rehabilitation of water diversion structures including
                         four sluice gates and one pump station; and (v) ➢❨ non-structural➢❨ measures, including
                         introduction and coordination of best farmland practice/regulations, and sound aqua-cultured
                         practices; and
                         (b) enhancement of wastewater management through: (i) construction of wastewater interceptors/
                         collections and storm water pipelines, as well as associated roads rehabilitation in order to improve
                         the wastewater collection systems in towns of Fengxin, Duchang, Jing➢❨ an, and Jishui Counties;
                         The Project will not set up new wastewater/solid waste treatment plants; (ii) construction of rural
                         wastewater collection systems and small wastewater treatment facilities such as wetlands and
                         wastewater treatment tanks in villages around lakes; (iii) establishment of household connections in
                         Poyang county.
                         The wastewater collection system will connect to county wastewater treatment plants (WWTP),
                         which have sufficient treatment capacity and satisfactory operations. One of the purposes of this
                         component is to demonstrate an integrated watershed management approach by focusing on key
                         areas for protection, improving water quality and environmental protection, and establishing
                         ecological pollution-control zones.
                         Component 3: Component 3: Improvements in Solid Waste Management (US$27.70 million): This
                         component would improve solid waste collection and transportation systems in rural and urban areas
                         of Duchang, Yugan, Jing➢❨ an and Shangli Counties, to reduce solid waste disposal to lake/river
                         systems of Poyang Lake basin. The collected solid waste will be treated and disposed to local
                         landfills ➢❨ in Yugan and Jing➢❨ an Counties. The main activities include:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (a)      provision of solid waste bins and construction of solid waste collection stations (a total
                         number of about 24,000);
                         (b)      provision of solid waste collection vehicles (a total number of about 220);
                         (c)      construction of nine solid waste transfer stations; and
                         (d)      installation of local solid waste management information systems in Shangli, Duchang, and
                         Jing➢❨ an Counties to ensure a proper management of solid waste collection and transfer systems
                         created under the project, and to integrate the existing urban solid waste management system with the
                         newly established. The solid waste collection and transportation system will connect to existing solid
                         waste treatment plants in the three counties. The management information system will also be linked
                         to the local county urban management information systems, which are currently being set up;
                         (e)      investments at the village level for the improvement of solid waste collection would be
                         implemented through public participatory method, using participatory manual.
                         Component 4: Project implementation support (US$5.56 million): Supporting the overall capacity of
                         the Project Implementing Entity to coordinate, manage and supervise the implementation of the
                         Project, including: (a) provision of consulting services to enhance engineering design, construction
                         supervision, and environmental and social management; (b) carrying out of capacity building
                         activities through workshops, training and study tours; (c) carrying out offinancial management,
                         procurement, contract supervision and monitoring and evaluation including procurement of external
                         social, resettlement and environmental monitoring services; and (d) the operation of Project
                         management offices (including the purchase of office equipment).


                                                                      Page 3 of 14
                         c.      Gender.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         There is strong evidence that gender inequalities contribute to poverty and reduce human well-being,
                         and that gender issues are an important dimension of the fight against poverty
                         Worldwide good performance on gender mainstreaming in projects requires: (a) carrying out a
                         gender analysis as part of the project's social assessment; (b) introducing relevant design elements;
                         and (c) tracking project performance through the inclusion of gender disaggregated indicators. The
                         project has conducted a standalone social assessment, in which a close attention to gender aspects has
                         been paid. This included investigating on and consulting with female beneficiaries in the project
                         areas in order to clearly identify their needs and concerns, as well as possible project impacts, and
                         explore both mitigation measures of such impacts and opportunities for women targeted activities to
                         achieve project objectives. The project design foresees female participation in project activities,
                         capacity building and M&E activities. Specific indicator(s) related to women's participation is
                         included in the Results Framework and will be closely monitored during project implementation.

                         The Social Assessment carried out during project preparation revealed that higher share of women
                         compared to men are involved in farming, forestry, stockbreeding or fishery activities. Hence, the
                         incentive mechanisms established for enhancing environmentally-friendly farming and fishing
                         practices will directly benefit women. The survey carried out as part of the SA indicates that a lesser
                         share of female respondents in the project area carry out responsibility for wastewater disposal,
                         compared to men. However, this amounts to over a third of women being directly exposed to the
                         health risks related to wastewater. Improving wastewater collection and disposal practices thus will
                         benefit health of the women, children and elderly that women are typically taking care of. The
                         survey also revealed that women are predominantly more in charge of solid waste disposal, hence the
                         municipal solid waste collection improvements will directly benefit women population. Also,
                         activities that will introduce new mechanisms in solid waste collection propose to specifically target
                         women. The social gender action plan has been developed as part of the SA, through extensive
                         process of consultation, also proposes a list of activities that are expected to increase environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and health impact awareness and offer additional income earning opportunities.

                         d.    Lessons learned from Jiangxi Poyang Lake Basin and Ecological Economic Zone Small
                         Town Project

                         The project faces risks in terms of institutional capacity and inter-agency coordination, issue that is
                         also observed in other provinces in China. Collaboration in controlling and reducing pollution at their
                         source is the most effective way of environmental management. This requires clarity of
                         responsibilities of each authority, as well as full collaboration to meet the joint objective of having a
                         cleaner environment. Equally important is to considerably strengthen institutional coordination
                         mechanisms, not just for project purposes, but also for the sustainability of project results.
                         Similarly, frequent changes in investment decisions slows down project implementation. It is critical
                         that county governments maintain ownership of the proposed sub-projects, even with the change of
                         the county leadership to ensure continued focus on agreed project activities and development
                         objectives. To address these institutional risks, a participatory approach is being taken for
                         environmental management under the Project. In addition, county governments have provided
                         official commitment letters to the provincial government upon the request of PDOF and PDRC,
                         stating that the county governments will implement project activities in accordance with the project
                         activity plan designed and agreed during project preparation.



                                                                       Page 4 of 14
                         e.      Global Lessons Learned and World Bank's Value Added

                          Lessons learned from World Bank-financed pollution control and ecological restoration projects as
Public Disclosure Copy




                         well as lessons from other countries➢❨ experience s have been used to inform the preparation and
                         key concept of the project, particularly in relation to:

                         - Establishment of the Lake Management Platform as a basis for institutional cooperation and
                         information sharing ➢❨ the World Bank financed Iran Northern Cities Water Supply and Sanitation
                         Project (INCWSSP) that aimed to reduce pollutant loads to the Caspian Sea highlights the
                         importance of closely coordinating activit ies among various sectoral stakeholders so that the benefits
                         are realized in a timely manner. The forms, functions and responsibilities of the LMPs in various
                         regions/countries differ. For example, the Chesapeake Bay Restoration Program in the USA is a
                         regional partnership that brings together all levels of stakeholders, including leaders and experts from
                         a vast range of agencies and organizations, including federal and state agencies, local governments,
                         non-profit organizations and academic institutions. Partners work together through the Bay
                         Program➢❨ s goal teams, workgroups and committees that ensure effective collaboration and
                         information sharing.
                         - Comprehensive lake-wide vulnerability assessment ➢❨ need for a lake-wide perspective in
                         tackling environmental degradation has proven to be a vital element for the success of the Lake
                         Victoria Environmental Management Program. Such comprehensive lake management plans have
                         also been prepared as part of other established lake basin restoration programs (e.g., Opportunities
                         for Action: An Evolving Plan for the Lake Champlain Basin (USA/Canada), Comprehensive
                         Management Plan for the Pontchartrain Basin (USA)).
                         - Participatory approach as an essential element has been proven (a) in nearly all water quality
                         improvement programs. For example, the Lake Victoria Environmental Protection Project proved
                         that involvement of communities in watershed management is a prerequisite to successful control of
                         non-point sources of pollution. The Lake Champlain Basin Program works in close partnership
                         between government agencies from New York, Vermont, and QuÃ©bec, private organizations, local
Public Disclosure Copy




                         communities and individuals to coordinate and fund lake restoration efforts. The Lake Action Plan is
                         available as an online management plan. This allows the agencies and the public to learn about the
                         plans and activities intended to clean the lake.
                          -       Financial incentives for lake water protection ➢❨ the recently piloted 'River Head' scheme
                         in the Poyang Lake basin serves as an important incentive (for details see Annex 3) in taking
                         individual responsibility for the water environment. The Project proposes to carry out additional
                         detailed research on other forms of incentives. International experience will be taken into account,
                         for example: (i) compensation schemes for fishery management in Biwa Lake (Japan), which allows
                         fishermen to acquire specialized fishing boats and gear reducing over-fishing; (ii) imposition of
                         annual fee to be paid by aluminum smelter and hydropower producer of Lake Toba (Indonesia); (iii)
                         polluter-pays principle for pollution control in Seine Normandy River Basin (France).

                         The project is expected to contribute to both China➢❨ s national strategy on water security and
                         ecological civilization agenda. Water security has become a high priority for Chinese decision
                         makers at all levels. The strategy focuses on applying systematic treatment and combination of
                         structural and non-structural measures in water sector to promote ecological safety, economic
                         security and the safety of human health and lives. The project would contribute to, through integrated
                         and participatory approaches, sustainable water and environment management, improvement of
                         ecological conditions, promotion of social and economic environment of Poyang Lake basin, as one
                         of the key areas of Chinese water system.


                                                                      Page 5 of 14
                         Apart from the critical investment activities to address lake water quality, the value added of the
                         Bank for this project lies primarily on the institutional capacity building component. This includes an
Public Disclosure Copy




                         institutional framework that ensures sound coordination with all affiliated agencies that help manage
                         the lake➢❨ s water environment through the proposed lake management platform (LMP).
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project includes seven counties with total population of about 4.2 million - Duchang, Poyang,
                         Yugan, Jishui, Fengxin, Jingan, and Shangli. These seven counties represent a mixed pattern of
                         geographic distribution across the Poyang Lake basin: three counties (i.e., Duchang, Poyang, Yugan)
                         are in close proximity to the main Lake, one (i.e., Jishui) along the mid-stream of a main river
                         draining into the Lake, two (i.e., Fengxin, Jingan) adjacent to the tributary streams of a main river,
                         one (i.e.,Shangli) at the remotest distance from the Lake. The water quality of Poyang Lake is closely
                         associated with the quality and environment of the water and land bodies in these contributing
                         catchments, and vice versa. Poyang Lake is in the north of Jiangxi Province, covering an area of
                         catchment of 162,000 km2. The Lake is renowned as the largest fresh water lake in China and the
                         wetland of national and international significance. Located in the subtropical monsoon climate zone,
                         the project area features moderate climate, sufficient sunshine and rainfall, distinctive seasons and a
                         long frost-free period. The average annual rainfall is about 1,700 mm, about 60% of the rainfall is in
                         April-June.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Feng Ji (GEN2A)
                         Songling Yao (GSU02)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            The project is proposed as a Category A project mainly
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     because some project activities are in the vicinity of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    Poyang National Wetland Park and the project will
                                                                    support the clean-up of two polluted lakes. It triggers
                                                                    OP4.01Environmental Assessment. The project is
                                                                    expected to bring overall environmental benefits, leading
                                                                    to the reduction of pollution loads discharged into Poyang
                                                                    Lake and contributing to the improvement of public
                                                                    health and living environment in the selected seven
                                                                    counties. The project itself is a set of mitigation measures
                                                                    to address the existing environmental problems in Poyang
                                                                    Lake Basin area. But the project would also bring some
                                                                    adverse impacts: (a) general construction impacts, (b)
                                                                    dredging in lake/pond (i.e., Pipa in Yugan County, and
                                                                    Zhoujiazui in Duchang County), and the disposal of
                                                                    dredged sediments; and (c) adverse impacts (e.g., odor,
                                                                    waste, increased traffic volume) associated with the
                                                                    operation of solid waste collection and transfer facilities
                                                                    and sewage treatment facilities (see Section II.A (1) for
                                                                    details). As such, OP4.01 is triggered.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP     Yes            Poyang Lake is an important natural habitat for migratory


                                                                      Page 6 of 14
                         4.04                           birds. It is not expected that the project would have the
                                                        potential to cause significant conversion or degradation of
                                                        natural habitats. Given that the project would reduce
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        pollution loads discharged into Poyang Lake, the largest
                                                        freshwater lake in China and benefit this natural habitat,
                                                        Natural Habitats OP4.04 is triggered (see Section II.A (1)
                                                        for details).
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    The project will not have impacts on the health and
                                                        quality of forests, nor affect the rights and welfare of
                                                        people and their level of dependence upon or interaction
                                                        with forests, nor aim to bring about changes in the
                                                        management, protection, or utilization of natural forest or
                                                        plantations.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes    The project will not include any procurement of pesticides
                                                        or pesticide application equipment,; nor lead to
                                                        substantially increased pesticide use and subsequent
                                                        environmental and health risks. But the project will
                                                        support training and studies for non-point sources
                                                        pollution management for agriculture activities, which
                                                        may lead to the reduction of pesticides discharged into
                                                        Poyang Lake. As such, this policy is triggered.
                         Physical Cultural        No    The field survey and the EA confirm that the project will
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           not affect any PCRs. This policy is not triggered.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No    Screening on ethnic minority was conducted by the TT in
                         BP 4.10                        the pre-identification mission and identification mission.
                                                        The screening, including consultation with the seven
                                                        project counties and the Provincial Minority Department,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        concluded that there is no minority village/community in
                                                        or collectively attached to project areas. Other ongoing
                                                        World Bank financed projects in the same area in the
                                                        province verified that no minority is found around the
                                                        Poyang Lake. The conducted social assessment also
                                                        verified the above findings. As such, the project will not
                                                        trigger the OP 4.10, Indigenous People.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   The project will permanently and temporarily acquire
                         OP/BP 4.12                     some land for construction of infrastructure and facilities
                                                        related to storm water disposal, wastewater collection and
                                                        treatment, and solid waste collection and treatment,
                                                        ecological restoration of some small lakes and river
                                                        sections, etc. OP 4.12, therefore, is triggered. A
                                                        Resettlement Plan (RP) has been prepared for all the
                                                        activities, including ancillary facilities to be identified in
                                                        each county, which have been integrated into a
                                                        comprehensive RP.
                                                        A full social assessment, especially on social waste and
                                                        wastewater collection, has been conducted around the



                                                         Page 7 of 14
                                                                       project areas to: (a) investigate social economic baselines
                                                                       of the project areas; (b) understand participation
                                                                       willingness of targeted beneficiaries; (c) investigate
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       gender issues and identify appropriate actions to address
                                                                       such issues; and (d) identify most appropriate
                                                                       implementation arrangements and specific mechanism
                                                                       where needed for proposed project activities. Results of
                                                                       the SA have been fully incorporated into project design,
                                                                       as well as EMPs, ESMF and RPs.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation
                            4.37                                       of any dams as defined under this policy, and there are no
                                                                       dams➢❨ impact on the safety and operation of the project
                                                                       financed facilities.
                            Projects on International   No             There are no international waterways in the project area.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No             The project area is not in disputed area.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environmental Assessment:
                              Environmental Assessment (EA) was conducted for the project in accordance with applicable
                              Chinese EA regulations and the World Bank Safeguards Policies. The project itself is a set of
                              mitigation measures to address the existing environmental problems in Poyang Lake basin area,
Public Disclosure Copy




                              and will bring about overall environmental and social benefits, such as: (a) reducing pollution
                              loads discharging into Poyang Lake, e.g., annual reduction of 2,709 tons of COD, 561 tons of
                              Total Nitrogen and 44 tons of Total Phosphorus; and (b) contributing to the improvement of living
                              environmental in the selected counties with a population of 1.28 million people. The project would
                              also bring some adverse impacts, including: (a) general construction nuisance (e.g. dust, noise,
                              wastewater); (b) impacts on the Poyang National Wetland Park due to activities in Poyang County,
                              i.e., construction of bio-retention swales and constructed wetlands to treat non-point source (NPS)
                              pollution, and the installation of small scale wastewater treatment facilities at rural villages; (c)
                              sediments dredging impacts (e.g., short disturbance to water quality) at Zoujiazui Lake in Duchang
                              County, and the outlet channel of Pipa Lake in Yugan County, and the disposal of sediment
                              (approximately total 13,000m3); and (d) adverse impacts (e.g., odor, dust, waste, noise) associated
                              with domestic solid waste collection and transfer stations, sewage pipelines and small scale
                              sewage treatment facilities during operation. With respect to the cumulative impacts, the EA
                              indicates that the project contributes to the alleviation of the pollutants discharged into Poyang
                              Lake and the improvement of water quality in the selected area. At PCN stage, given details of
                              some project activities were not known, this project was proposed as Category A project by taking
                              a precautionary approach. At PAD stage, the physical investment of the project are well defined
                              which mainly includes construction of sewage/storm water collection system in the urban area of
                              the selected counties; small scale sewage collection and treatment facilities at villages; nonpoint
                              source pollution management; and solid waste collection and transfer facilities etc.. Adverse


                                                                        Page 8 of 14
                         impacts of these investments are well known which are mainly associated with construction. These
                         adverse impacts are site-specific; short, and limited, few if any of them are irreversible, and can be
                         readily mitigated with the measures proposed in the ESMP. The EA shows that the project is not
Public Disclosure Copy




                         likely to have significant adverse environmental impacts, nor contribute negatively to cumulative
                         impacts on VECs.

                         Natural Habitats:
                         The project will finance small-scale wastewater treatment facilities (with total treatment capacity
                         of 2,600m3/day) at the existing 35 villages located in the vicinity of Poyang National Wetland
                         Park. To reduce the NPS pollution, the project will build approximately 90 km bio-retention
                         swales and constructed wetland around Zhuhu Lake, which is part of Poyang National Wetland
                         Park and serves as the drinking water source for local population. In addition, the project will
                         support the rehabilitation of Zoujiazui Lake and Pipa Lake, which have been heavily affected by
                         human activities. It is not expected that these activities would have the potential to cause
                         significant conversion or degradation of natural habitats. Instead, these activities would reduce
                         pollution loads discharged into Poyang Lake, the largest freshwater lake in China and benefit this
                         important natural habitat. As such, Natural Habitats OP4.04 is triggered.

                         Pest Management (OP4.09):
                         The project will not include any procurement of pesticides or pesticide application equipment; nor
                         lead to increased pesticide use. The project will support training and studies for non-point sources
                         pollution management for agriculture activities, which may lead to the reduction of pesticides
                         discharged into Poyang Lake. As such, this policy is triggered.

                         Social aspects:
                         The project will permanently and temporarily acquire some land for construction of infrastructure
                         and facilities, the OP 4.12, therefore, is triggered. Based on resettlement planning in each county, a
                         comprehensive resettlement plan (RP) was prepared.
                         Consultations with the seven project counties and the Provincial Minority Department concluded
Public Disclosure Copy




                         that there are no minority villages/communities in or collectively attached to project areas. Other
                         World Bank financed projects in Jiangxi Province verified that there is no minority found around
                         the Poyang Lake. Therefore the project will not trigger the OP 4.10, Indigenous People.
                         The project will result in land acquisition, other than resettlement, at 140 villages in 19 townships,
                         with 194 mu permanent collective land acquisition and 428 mu state-owned land acquisition, as
                         well as 1,121 mu land leasing for project construction. About 117 households with 443 persons
                         will be affected by land acquisition, and 7,852 persons will be temporarily disturbed in
                         construction period. Because most of land to be acquired is unused land and the project activities
                         are in small scale and could be flexibly located, the impact of land acquisition is minor, with a
                         ratio of land acquisition of less than five percent in each affected village.. Further, eight activities
                         are found related to the project to extent, of which two ones were defined as linked projects and
                         the other six ones were conducted due diligence review on social side. The two linked activities
                         were identified, of which resettlement impacts were fully investigated, evaluated, provided with
                         measures, and integrated in the RP. The impacts are to acquire 20 mu collectively owned land, and
                         to closure 338 mu fishpond, with livelihood influence on 24 households with 90 persons.

                         338 mu fishpond will be closed in the project implementation stage, about in 2018 according to the
                         current plan. The closure is after end of a commercial contact on the fishpond utilization.
                         Therefore there is no livelihood impact related to the closure.



                                                                     Page 9 of 14
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The Project will bring about overall environmental and social benefits, and contribute to the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           improvement of living environmental in the selected counties and benefit local people. It is likely
                           that future projects would replicate the project activities, which would lead to continuous
                           reduction of pollutant discharge into the Poyang Lake, and improve the livelihood of around 40
                           million people linked to Poyang Lake.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Alternative Analysis was carried out for the investment components during the feasibility study
                           and the EA to minimize environmental impacts. The EA and the feasibility study analyzed
                           alternatives for wastewater collection and treatment options, solid waste collection and transfer
                           options, sediment dredging options, and ➢❨ without project➢❨ situation, etc.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Based on the EA, a stand-alone ESMP has been developed for each of the seven project counties
                           to avoid, minimize, and mitigate the potential adverse impacts. The ESMPs specify mitigation and
                           enhance measures for the project activities, including:
                           (a)      Environmental Code of Practices (ECOPs) for civil work contactors to be included into
                           the bidding documents and civil work contracts;
                           (b)      Specific mitigation measures to protect the Poyang National Wetland Park, such as good
                           management of construction activities (e.g., noise reduction, proper light ensuring health and
                           safety of workers) to minimize potential impacts on birds and the Park; and only indigenous plants
                           allowed to be used for the lakeshore restoration to prevent spread of invasive species;
                           (c)      Sediment dredging and disposal of dredged sediments in an environmentally sound
                           manner, such as the selection of dredging methods and dredging timing, and the good management
                           of sediments stockpile sites and dewatering effluent etc. Laboratory analysis of sediment samples
Public Disclosure Copy




                           have been taken confirming that dredged sediments are not toxic and can be applied as greening
                           soil in wasteland or woodland. As such, sediments will be removed from the lakes, and, after
                           dewatering, sent to the designated sites (wasteland or woodland) for disposal;
                           (d)      Measures to mitigate impacts associated with domestic solid waste collection and transfer
                           stations and sewage pipelines, for example: (i) minimum buffer distance will be used between
                           waste transfer stations and the nearby villages; (ii) minimum buffer distance will be used between
                           villages➢❨ effluent outlets and the drinking water sources in Poyang County; (iii) waste transfer
                           station will be equipped with deodorization equipment etc.; (iv) mitigation measures for abnormal
                           scenarios are proposed, such as leakage of sewers; and (v) measures for worker health and safety
                           are included in the ESMP. Wastewater and domestic solid waste to be collected at the counties
                           would be safely disposed in WWTPs or SWTPs. Due diligence (as part of the EA) was conducted
                           confirming that these facilities are in compliance with relevant Chinese regulations; and
                           (e)      Mitigation measures for social impacts identified in the social assessment.

                          Social Aspects
                          The Resettlement Plan (RP) was prepared based on information disclosure policy, participation of
                          the affected villagers, in line with the World Bank OP 4.12, Involuntary Resettlement, and
                          domestic laws and regulations. It provides details on resettlement implementation procedures and
                          requirements to be followed during project implementation, including compensation rates,
                          mitigation measures to restore livelihoods, institutional and monitoring arrangements, grievance


                                                                    Page 10 of 14
                         redress mechanism, etc. Internal and external resettlement monitoring arrangements were
                         developed and included in the RP. These cover the monitoring indicators, frequency, agency
                         qualification and their roles. The tabulated resettlement budget was determined in the document
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and was committed to be fully financed by the PMO.

                         Only minor land acquisition is to happen with limited livelihood impacts, therefore the restoration
                         measures will rely on cash compensation plus social security program and training, which was in
                         detail designed in the RP. The land compensation rates are based on the latest standards of
                         provincial governments; and a training plan was prepared with budget. For those who do not lose
                         land but will be affected in the construction period, the project will take measures to better
                         organize construction scheme or to use better construction technic skill to avoid or minimize
                         disturbance.

                         A full social assessment, especially on social waste and wastewater collection, has been conducted
                         around the project areas to: (a) investigate social economic baselines of the project areas; (b)
                         understand participation willingness of targeted beneficiaries; (c) investigate gender issues and
                         identify appropriate actions to address such issues; and (d) identify most appropriate
                         implementation arrangements and specific mechanism where needed for proposed project
                         activities. The results of the SA have been and will further be incorporated into project design,
                         such as: i) the SA recommended that the project should reduce fee related to wastewater, solid
                         waste for poverty households, provide more training opportunities; ii) the SA assisted
                         determination on site section of solid waste in Shangli County, and increased sewer connection in
                         communities in Yugan County, and changed location of wastewater discharge in Poyang County,
                         and reduced land acquisition in Duchang County

                         The SA and RP were prepared by the Jiangxi PMO, reviewed by the Bank, and were found
                         compliant with the Bank requirements. The documents were locally disclosed and will be
                         disclosed by the WB. The PMO will commit to further incorporate the SA findings in the project
                         detailed design and monitor the social impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The SA and the RP were developed through extensive consultations and participation process. The
                         stakeholders➢❨ concerns and needs were discussed with the Bank task team, the PMO and the
                         design institutes, and were incorporated in the project FS and will be integrated in the project
                         design. The recommendations from the consultations were or will be reflected in the project
                         design; the detailed participation information was described in the SA.

                         A grievance redress mechanism was designed as part of the RP, including a process and a
                         grievance record table, in which grievances can be filed both orally and in writing. The process
                         starts from village and neighborhood committee level, and can be elevated to county/district, city
                         level if complainants are not satisfied with the resolution at the lower level. Complainants also can
                         file their cases in court if not satisfied with the resolution by the project authority. All grievances
                         and their resolution will be recorded. This mechanism has been disclosed to the local population.

                         Project preparation and implementation have been delegated to the Project Management Office,
                         which is housed in the Foreign Investment Management Office of Jiangxi Provincial Development
                         and Reform Commission. This Office has been managing several World Bank- and ADB-financed
                         projects in the past 20 years, and accumulated rich experiences in project management. This Office
                         is also the provincial PMO of ongoing Bank financed Jiangxi Poyang Lake Basin and Ecological
                         Economic Zone Small Town Development Project. It is fully resourced and staffed (project

                                                                    Page 11 of 14
                           coordinator, full-time translator and technical specialists for finance, procurement and water
                           resources and safeguards). At the county level, all seven project counties have established the
                           Project Leading Groups (PLGs) and PMOs. The PLGs are headed by county Mayor or standing
Public Disclosure Copy




                           vice Mayor, and formed by various government line agencies. PMOs are established in county
                           Development and Reform Commission, Foreign Investment Management Office, or Poyang Lake
                           Basin Management Office. The Bank provided training to county PMOs on safeguards policies.
                           Experienced safeguards consultants have been hired to assist with the preparation of safeguards
                           instruments, and more consultants will be hired during implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key beneficiaries of the project include about 1,285,000 residents, of whom around 646,000
                           are female, in the seven selected counties/cities in Jiangxi Province. The project beneficiaries
                           include rural and urban residents and participating farmers.

                           During the EA preparation, two rounds of public consultation were undertaken: the first round at
                           the beginning of EA preparation (EIA TOR) starting in November 2015 and the second round in
                           2016 after the first draft EA safeguards documents were prepared. Consultations were carried out
                           through questionnaires, interviews and meetings with project affected people, experts, and
                           government agencies. In general, local people support this project. Main feedback from the public
                           has been addressed in the project design and the ESMP➢❨ s mitigation measures. In accordance
                           with the Bank➢❨ s information disclosure policy, prior to project appraisal, the environmental
                           safeguards documents were locally disclosed at the local government websites and library on July
                           25, 2016 with an announcement published at local newspaper on July 30, 2016; the social
                           safeguards documents were disclosed at local government websites on August 31, 2016, with an
                           announcement published at local newspaper on September 5, 2016. The safeguards documents
                           were disclosed at the Bank➢❨ s external website on September 9, 2016.

                           A resettlement management system with proper staff and resources in the PMO and in project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           counties will be established prior to resettlement commencement according to the RP, to internally
                           monitor the resettlement progress and report semiannually to the Bank. A dedicated staff was
                           appointed in the PMO and each county PMO to be responsible for the resettlement related
                           assignment. In addition, an experienced external resettlement monitor will be contractually
                           engaged according to the RP to ensure regularly monitoring and reporting. Further, the training
                           program in the RP will be conducted as early as possible to ensure capacity building.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       24-Aug-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    09-Sep-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                             25-Jul-2016
                           Comments: na
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       24-Aug-2016


                                                                    Page 12 of 14
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      09-Sep-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                               31-Aug-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments: na
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         24-Aug-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      09-Sep-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         na
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?

                                                                     Page 13 of 14
                             Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)

                             8800 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ximing Zhang,Solvita Klapare
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                             Date: 13-Nov-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Sudipto Sarkar (PMGR)                         Date: 13-Nov-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 14 of 14
