INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA15174
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Oct-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Jan-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Somalia                    Project ID:   P150374
Project Name: Somali Urban Investment Planning (P150374)
Task Team       Dean A. Cira
Leader(s):
Estimated                                  Estimated     21-Dec-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSU19                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Urban Transport (40%), Sub-national government administration (20%), Solid
waste management (20%), Water supply (20%)
Theme(s):       Other urban development (50%), Municipal governance and institution building
(20%), Urban services and housing for the poor (20%), D ecentralization (8%),
Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (2%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
O
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       6.00            Total Bank Financing:     0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                         Amount
Borrower                                                                     0.00
Somalia Multi-Partner Fund                                                   6.00
Total                                                                        6.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
To provide (i) an assessment of the feasibility of, and preliminary plans for, selected urban
investment and institutional strengthening activities in southern Somalia, Puntland and Somaliland,
and (ii) enhanced project preparation and implementation capacity of participating agencies.
Page 1 of 9


﻿3. Project Description
The SUIPP comprises a "project to prepare a project". The main project, called the Urban
Development Project (UDP), has a currently estimated budget envelope of US$86.1 Im (excluding
currently unspecified contingency amounts), intended for support by the MPF. Pursuant to relevant
Bank Operating Procedures, which specifically allow for such situations, and given that the project
has an environmental safeguard categorization of B, the activities to be supported under the UDP will
include both detailed project design and implementation. In brief they constitute the rehabilitation
o        and upgrading of primary and secondary/community roads and the renovation of the BRA
administrative building in Mogadishu, a potential combination of the upgrading of intra-city roads
and/or bridge-building in Garowe, the enhancement of solid and liquid waste management and water
supply in Hargeisa, the extension and institutionalization of the Local Development Fund, and
institutional strengthening activities focused on the three municipalities and the Hargeisa Water
Authority. All of these projects are expected to have moderate to significant environmental impacts,
equivalent to Category B. These activities have been identified through a process of technical work
and dialogue the Bank Task Team has undertaken during a number of visits to the three cities and are
described in the Project Information Document for the UDP and in the Aides Memoire produced
after each visit.
Preliminary preparation, which includes feasibility studies and preliminary design for the main
infrastructure activities under the UDP and a range of institutional assessments, will be undertaken
under the SUIPP - i.e. the project which forms the subject of this assignment - also to be supported
by the MPF. The output of the technical work undertaken under the SUIPP will provide the basis for
the preparation of the UDP. It should be noted that final design work itself - e.g. detailed
engineering design, social and environmental impact assessments, exploratory drilling and
preparation of bidding documents - will not be undertaken as part of the SUIPP. They will be
undertaken as part of the UDP, and funding to cover these costs will be included in the project
documentation and proposals relating to that operation.
Overall, the SUIPP will support two basic types of activity:
1.     feasibility and preliminary design studies for the physical investments that will supported by
the UDP, and institutional assessments of the agencies that will execute these investments to provide
an informational and analytic base for the preparation of institutional strengthening activities that
will be supported by the UDP. In order to facilitate the quick execution of these activities in the
fragile and conflict affected environment of the Somali territories, they will be executed by the Bank
pursuant to OP 10 (para 12)
2.      provision of technical assistance to enhance the capacity of the Somali executing agencies to
prepare and implement the UDP effectively and efficiently and to mitigate fiduciary and safeguards
risk. These activities will be client executed.
These activities are described on a component-by-component basis below.
Component 1: Mogadishu (US$ 1.73m)
Feasibility and preliminary design studies for the primary roads will be undertaken to assess whether
the selection of the three roads by the BRA is the most efficient use of roads funds in relation to the
roads already being upgraded with Turkish assistance, survey these roads, take soil core samples
along the roadway to determine the existing sub-base and base materials of the roads, determine the
Page 2 of 9


﻿standards for roads construction, locate the options for road material quarries, locate options for the
asphalt and concrete batching plants, assess the labor pool available in Mogadishu vis-d-vis roads
construction, and provide cost estimates. For the secondary/community roads, the activities will
focus on a dialogue with communities to determine the priority works to be undertaken in each of the
17 Districts in Mogadishu, to determine optimum implementation modalities, and provide cost
estimates.
Environmental and social (E&S) due diligence work will contribute to the sub-component via two
main types of activities: (i) a baseline survey of environmental and social information, data and
issues that would help to identify E&S constraints, but also areas of potential enhancement of project
outcomes, and provide E&S information, criteria and constraining factors for the subsequent design
process; (ii) the development of an environmental and social management framework, which would
constitute a generic tool for managing social and environmental risks related to urban investments,
regardless of funding source, in the Somali territories for use by entities such as local governments
and water utilities.
At the institutional level, an assessment will be undertaken of the BRA and the Ministry of Public
Works (MoPW) of the FGS in order to provide an informational and analytic foundation for the
detailed preparation and execution of institutional strengthening activities that will be undertaken
under the SUDP. The assessment will focus on basic conditions of performance, strategic planning
capacity, technical and operational capacity, fiduciary systems, transparency and accountability
mechanisms and environmental and social management.
In order to establish sufficient capacity to prepare and then implement the SUDP, technical
assistance for the BRA will need to be recruited under SUIPP comprising a full-time project
coordinator, full-time procurement specialist, full-time financial management specialist, a part-time
social and environmental specialist, and a part-time monitoring and evaluation specialist. Operating
and minor equipment costs related to the recruitment and employment of these positions will also be
incurred. In addition, some training and capacity building for these individuals and other staff
associated with preparation and execution of the SUIPP and SUDP will be required.
Component 2: Garowe (US$ 0.98m)
Feasibility and preliminary design studies for the identified roads and potential bridges will be
undertaken to estimate costs and identify the trade-offs to inform the selection of potential roads and
bridge construction activities to be undertaken under SUDP within the available budget envelope,
survey the roads, determine the standards of roads/bridge construction, identify options for sourcing
of materials and equipment, and assess the labor pool.
Environmental and social due diligence work will contribute to the sub-component via two main
types of activities: (i) a baseline survey of environmental and social information, data and issues that
would help to identify E&S constraints, but also areas of potential enhancement of project outcomes,
and provide E&S information, criteria and constraining factors for the subsequent design process; (ii)
the development of an environmental and social management framework, which would constitute a
generic tool for managing social and environmental risks related to urban investments, regardless of
funding source, in Puntland for use by entities such as local governments and water utilities.
At the institutional level, an assessment will be undertaken of the Garowe Municipality (GM) in
Page 3 of 9


﻿order to provide an informational and analytic foundation for the detailed preparation and execution
of institutional strengthening activities that will be undertaken under the SUDP. The assessment will
focus on basic conditions of performance, strategic planning capacity, technical and operational
capacity, fiduciary systems, transparency and accountability mechanisms and environmental and
O
social management.
In order to establish sufficient capacity to prepare and then implement the SUDP, technical
assistance for the GM will need to be recruited under SUIPP comprising a full-time project
coordinator, full-time procurement specialist, full-time financial management specialist, a part-time
social and environmental specialist, and a part-time monitoring and evaluation specialist. It is
possible that some of these roles could be combined, thus generating efficiencies. The potential for
this will be explored as the SUIPP is executed. Operating and minor equipment costs related to the
recruitment and employment of these positions will also be incurred. In addition, some training and
capacity building for these individuals and other staff associated with preparation and execution of
the SUIPP and SUDP will be required.
Component 2: Hargeisa (US$ 1.03m)
Feasibility and preliminary design studies for the solid and liquid waste investments will be
undertaken to determine the costs and siting of bulk solid and liquid waste disposal/treatment sites
and improvements in transfer points/stations, determine necessary construction standards and the
basic technologies that are most appropriate and cost-effective, identify options for sourcing of
materials and equipment, and assess the labor pool, and deter mine requirements (financial, technical
and institutional) for sustaining and expanding the system of solid waste collection that has been
introduced under donor-funded technical assistance efforts in recent years. This work has already
been completed for the water supply sub-component (under the UN-Habitat supported project) and
so is not required under SUIPP.
Environmental and social due diligence work will contribute to the sub-component via two main
types of activities: (i) a baseline survey of environmental and social information, data and issues that
would help to identify E&S constraints, but also areas of potential enhancement of project outcomes,
and provide E&S information, criteria and constraining factors for the processes for design and
o         environmental / social assessments planned for SUDP or other downstream planning activities; (ii)
the development of an environmental and social management framework, which would constitute a
generic tool for managing social and environmental risks related to urban investments, and planning
follow-up investigations, assessments and analyses (for e.g. water supply and waste management
activities) regardless of funding source, in Somaliland for use by entities such as local governments
and water utilities.
At the institutional level, assessments will be undertaken of the Hargeisa Municipality and the
Hargeisa Water Agency in order to provide an informational and analytic foundation for the detailed
preparation and execution of institutional strengthening activities that will be undertaken under the
SUDP. The assessments will focus on basic conditions of performance, strategic planning capacity,
technical and operational capacity, fiduciary systems, transparency and accountability mechanisms
and environmental and social management. In the case of the HWA, the assessment will build on the
review being carried out by the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) as part of their Corporate
Governance Advisory support to the agency. The SUIPP institutional assessment will identify
potential residual activities from WSP's work; and recommend areas for future support in SUDP to
Page 4 of 9


﻿enable HWA to take on these residual activities.
In order to establish sufficient capacity to prepare and then implement the SUDP, technical
assistance which can be shared by the HM and HWA will need to be recruited under SUIPP by HM
comprising a full-time project coordinator, full-time financial management specialist, full-time
procurement specialist, a full-time social and environmental specialist, and a full-time monitoring
and evaluation specialist. Operating and minor equipment costs related to the recruitment and
employment of these positions will also be incurred. In addition, some training and capacity building
for these individuals and other staff associated with preparation and execution of the SUIPP and
SUDP will be required.
Component 4: Cross-cutting Activities (1.83m)
Local Development Fund. The preliminary preparation activities for the LDF component to be
conducted under the SUIPP will constitute an assessment of the LDF focusing on quantum and
allocation of the funding it provides, the usage of the funds, the efficiency of the funding and
allocation process, the performance criteria, fiduciary issues, environmental and social management
approaches used by beneficiary local governments, reporting and monitoring, budgeting and
planning, and related issues. Detailed design of the support to be provided will be undertaken under
the SUDP.
Cross-cutting studies. There will be two of these. One will focus on the issue of conflict. The
SUDP will be will be implemented in three urban areas, namely, Mogadishu, Hargeisa and Garowe.
These contexts - and particularly those most affected by conflict - require that enhanced attention be
paid to understanding potentially harmful conflict and fragility factors which could affect the project
that the potential conflict-increasing impacts of each of the main project activities be assessed, and
that mitigating strategies be identified. To this end, conflict assessment/mitigation work is necessary
at two levels. First, an assessment will be undertaken to identify differentiated sources of conflict
and fragility and their potential impacts on the specific activities which are likely to constitute the
SUDP, to sensitize the design of the operation to such factors, and to develop a screening tool which
can be utilized in the detailed preparation of the project components to identify potentially conflict-
aggravating impacts of project activities and develop strategies to mitigate these impacts. This will
o        include an initial, quick "do no harm" screening of the proposed SUDP investment activities which
will feed into the feasibility studies under the SUIPP. Second, the conflict screening tool will need to
be applied in greater detail during the detailed preparation of SUDP to gain a better understanding of
the conflict factors surrounding the project activities and to identify opportunities for the activities to
help, where possible, mitigate conflict.
Second, evidence indicates that infrastructure development projects can have social, human and
economic impacts and outcomes for targeted communities. Infrastructure development furthermore
can have different impacts and outcomes on men and women, influencing access to services and
economic opportunities, resource allocations, and participation in community decision-making.
Given that the SUDP will be one of the first major infrastructure investment projects that will take
place across the Somali territories in many years, it is important to begin to develop an understanding
of these impacts, particularly to inform the character and design of infrastructure investment
interventions that will take place in the future.
To this end, an evaluation of the socio-economic impact of select urban infrastructure components
Page 5 of 9


﻿will be conducted, including a disaggregation of some of the results by gender, to improve the
understanding and knowledge of the impact of project activities of the kind anticipated under SUDP.
This evaluation will be conducted in two phases. Overarching survey design, including evaluation
tools and protocols, will be developed during the SUIPP to assess and evaluate the social and
O
U         economic impacts of the SUDP, including the differentiated impact of select components on men and
women, both during and at the end of the project (i.e. the impact of project implementation and
project outputs). Thereafter, impact evaluation activities, including survey administration, data
collection and analysis of results, will be undertaken during the implementation of SUDP. The
evaluation activities will focus tentatively on road construction activities in Garowe, assuming the
feasibility of security and other conditions.
Financial Audit. An external financial audit of the project will be undertaken across all the four
implementing agencies by an external audit firm which will be procured and funded by the project.
Further detail on the project financial audit is provided in Section VI C.
Implementation enhancements to mitigate security and operational risks (US$ 0.85m). As elaborated
in the Implementation Arrangements section, enhanced implementation modalities will be provided
by a UN Agency for a number of the project components in order to mitigate the security and
operational risks associated with working in the current Somalia environment. These have associated
costs.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented in the cities of Mogadishu, Hargeisa and Garowe in the territories of
Somalia. The physical environment in all project areas and locations is characterized by a strong
existing anthropogenic imprint typical for intra-urban areas, including transport infrastructure,
residences, shops, workshops, managed drainage systems and highly altered biodiversity and land
cover. Virtually all of the project planning activities will pertain to the footprint of pre-existing
infrastructure, which has deteriorated or been destroyed due to war or neglect.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Abdoul Wahabi Seini (GSU01)
Wolfhart Pohl (GCFDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Page 6 of 9


﻿Involuntary Resettlement No
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
O
)         4.37
Projects on International  No
O
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
At this stage, the project will not finance any physical activities, civil works or final design studies
for the potential investments in urban infrastructure in Mogadishu, Hargeisa and Garowe.
Nevertheless, as the technical assistance and preparatory work provided is intended, and likely to
result in concrete investment planning, the project has been classified as safeguards category B.
SUIPP's main focus will be on the establishment of institutional structures and capacity, the
definition of potential project portfolios, and the production of feasibility studies and
environmental and social framework instruments.
A separate and subsequent project, the Urban Development Project (UDP), will be dedicated to the
concrete preparatory work, which would include the identification of specific projects, their
respective technical designs and eventual implementation, as well as the associated environmental
and social assessments, management plans and possibly additional thematic studies (e.g. on waste
management and water supply). Preparation of the UDP will commence once the preparatory work
supported by the SUIPP is completed.
Under the above described project design, the appropriate environmental instrument for the SUIPP
has been determined as an environmental and social management framework (ESMF) to inform
and guide the overall engineering designs and techno-economic planning process. The TOR for
this E&S management framework have been produced by the Bank team during the project
preparation phase as safeguards planning instrument. The TOR have been prepared under
continuous dialogue with key stakeholders in the participating municipalities, and a summary has
been disclosed in the World Bank's infoshop.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
N/A
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower's safeguards capacities were assessed to be low during project preparation. Thus the
team has taken the lead in designing the safeguards process and preparing the required
documentation. The Borrower has been involved in a consultative and information-sharing
manner, but will be trained and guided to assume successively more responsibility during further
Page 7 of 9


﻿project preparation, especially UDP. While specific environmental experience and expertise is
sparse in the municipal authorities (which are expected to be the implementing agencies),
engineering capacities are significantly higher.
O
The project thus plans to build on and expand safeguards expertise from the technical personnel of
the implementing agencies, who will be trained in good housekeeping and basic environmental
management. In parallel the project will deliver targeted capacity building in form of training and
parallel work of counterpart staff with World Bank specialists and Consultants, in a "learning by
doing" manner.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders at this stage will be the urban management institutions and utilities in
Mogadishu, Hargesia and Garowe. They have been continuously involved in the safeguards
process, as well as the preparation of the TOR for the ESMF. The TOR has been disclosed in the
World Bank's infoshop.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              01-Dec-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           02-Dec-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
The Environmental and Social Safeguard Management Framework is to be developed as part of the
project. The Terms of Reference for this assignment has been developed and disclosed through
submission to Infoshop on 2 December 2014.
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ] No[X]   NA[    ]
report?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Page 8 of 9


﻿Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ No        NA [ X
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ No     NA   X
o          in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [   No[       NA[X]
0          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [   No[      NA[X]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Dean A. Cira
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)             Date: 10-Jan-2016
Practice Manager/     Name: Idrissa Dia (PMGR)                   Date: 10-Jan-2016
Manager:
Page 9 of 9


