INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCI 159
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Apr-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Macedonia, former Yugoslav               P149955
Republic of
Project Name:    Road Upgrading and Development Project (P149955)
Task Team        Rakesh Tripathi,Liljana Sekerinska
Leader(s):
Estimated        01-Jun-2015                Estimated     29-Sep-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (90%), General public
administration sector (10%)
Theme(s):        Regional integration (50%), Trade facilitation and market access (50%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     137.00             Total Bank Financing:   100.00
U       Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                         37.00
o          International Bank for Reconstruction and Development           100.00
Total                                                           137.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase transport connectivity along parts of east
Corridor VIII, as well as other priority regional road corridors and to support improvements in road
operations and asset management practices.
C. Project Description


﻿Note: the PDO has been modified since the concept note meeting and will be reflected in the
Appraisal stage ISDS.
Component 1: Construction of Corridor VIII : Rankovce - Kriva Palanka (estimated cost of USD 80
million, of which USD 72 million will be financed by IBRD loan). This will finance the construction
of the express road along the east section of road Corridor VIII which connects to Bulgaria. The new
road sections will be 25 km long, with a width of 11.4m and 12.5m.
Component 2: Establishment of Bridge Management System (BMS) (estimated cost of USD 5
million, of which USD 4.5 million will be financed by IBRD loan). This component aims at
strengthening the PESR's overall capacity to manage and maintain the country's bridge assets. The
core focus of this activity would be to support PESR to introduce a bridge management system
(BMS). This will entail: provision of equipment and software, diagnostic assessment of bridge
condition, creation of a bridge maintenance and investment plan using BMS, and training for
technical and administrative staff. Throughout the project implementation, additional activities
focusing on technical capacity of PESR may be identified. It will also finance technical assistance,
equipment, and operational costs associated with the implementation of the project. This would
include: beneficiary satisfaction activities, as well as mid-term and impact evaluation surveys;
strengthening the technical capacity of the PMT through the provision of technical assistance; and
carrying out the annual financial audits of the Project.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Environmental Safeguards: The project area includes green fields, and hilly and mountainous terrains
along the eastern part of Corridor VIII connecting the country with Bulgaria. Component 1 envisages
a new construction, and in most instances road alignment will pass through untouched natural
landscapes which might also be a habitat for various animals.
Social Safeguards: The proposed project road is passing through a lightly populated area. Until now
the proposed road Rankovce - Kriva Palanka has defined a preliminary route. Based on the defined
preliminary route, it is unlikely that the project will cause displacement of the dwellings. The most
probable impact will be acquisition of land, which would either be agriculture land, pastures and/or
forestry.
The proposed project could eventually be followed up by an activity to improve the pavement on the
existing Corridor VIII road from the capital Skopje to Rankovce. At this time there are neither
detailed plans nor preparatory documents for this activity.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
This project will be the fourth project implemented with a World Bank loan since 2008; therefore,
the borrower is well familiar with the World Bank procedures and requirements. More than two years
ago the implementing agency PESR (Public Enterprise for State Roads) established a department to
deal with environmental and social aspects related to roads construction and rehabilitation. Besides
the World Bank funded projects, the department also handles the projects supported by EBRD and is
familiar with the respective performance standards as well. The staff of the department consists of
two environmental specialists handling the social agenda as well. However, the staffing plan of
PESR envisages hiring additional staff who will be specifically assigned to the social aspects.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


﻿Bekim Imeri (GSURR)
Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment  Yes         This policy is triggered because the implementation
OP/BP 4.01                              of the Project's Component 1 will be associated with
significant environmental impacts caused by new
constructions of the express road Rankovce - Kriva
Palanka along the east section of Corridor VIII. The
construction will be carried out mainly in untouched
mountainous areas, green fields, hilly terrains, forest
areas used, inter alia, for guided hunting, etc. The
exact types of natural habitats to be disturbed as well
as their biological and ecological value are yet to be
defined. In order to carry out a proper assessment of
anticipated environmental impacts and to proposed
adequate mitigation, a full Environmental and Social
Impact Assessment (ESIA), including Environmental
Management Plan, will have to be developed by the
Borrower/Implementing Agency for the proposed
road. Such ESIA and EMP should be developed by
the client, reviewed and approved by the Bank, and
disclosed and discussed with the project stakeholders
by the project appraisal. The ESIA and EMP will be
prepared by an independent consultant contracted by
the Borrower (PESR). Also, Component 2 will
provide Technical Assistance for the establishment
Q)                                               of country-wide Bridge Management System (BMS),
which will entail, inter alia, development of bridge
maintenance and investment plans. The project will
ensure (through respective Terms of References and
consultancy contracts) that the environmental aspects
of proposed investment activities are duly considered
and addressed in the framework of those investment
plans.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes         While the specific alignment is not known at this
time, it is known that in part or entirely it will go
through natural habitat areas. The ESIA should
provide for an overview of the project areas that is
sufficient to indicate whether they are likely to
contain any particularly sensitive and/or important
(or critical) natural habitat areas or assets. The ESIA
will determine specific mitigation measures to be
implemented to address the identified impacts.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          The Project does not involve forest management or


﻿use per se. Potential impacts on any natural forests
will be covered under OP 4.01.
Pest Management OP 4.09       No
a
hysical Cultural Resources  No           This policy is not triggered, however, the ESIA and
0P/l3P 4.11                                EMP will identify the institutional responsibilities
and procedures to be followed in case if any chance
finds occur in the project area.
S   Indigenous Peoples 0P/l3P     No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes          The policy is triggered because the Project's
BP 4.12                                    Component 1 will lead to acquisition of land. Most
probably this will be pastures, forests and agriculture
land and less likely construction land. There is low
likelihood for any kind of displacement, either
dwellings or businesses, because the routes for the
proposed roads will pass through uninhabited areas.
Given that in the early stage of project preparation
there will be projects with unknown impacts
pertinent to Social Safeguards, a Resettlement Policy
Framework will be prepared to guide land
acquisition and potential displacements during the
project implementation. For the projects whereby
impacts are known Resettlement Action Plans will be
developed for each road section.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No
Projects on International     No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 07-May-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The safeguard related studies should be conducted between 01-Feb-2015 till 31-May-2015. The
draft safeguard documents will be submitted for RSA's review and clearance by May 10, 2015.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Rakesh Tripathi,Liljana Sekerinska
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                        Date: 20-Apr-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Juan Gaviria (PMGR)                       Date: 21-Apr-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


