                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC12781

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Mar-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Mongolia                        Project ID:       P155305
                            Project Name:   Capacity Building for MNAO through Establishing a Countinuing Professional
                                            Development Strategy and Program
                            Team Leader(s): Regis Thomas Cunningham,Badamchimeg Dondog
                            Estimated Date 16-Mar-2015
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GGODR                           Lending           Lending Instrument
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           General public administration sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):            Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (20%), Other
                                                 accountability/anti-corruption (20%), Other public sector governance (60%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.38                            Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                                         0
                              Supreme Audit Institutions Capacity Development Fund                                          0.38
                            Environment        C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The main objective of the proposed project is to strengthen MNAO’s capacity, primarily in financial
                           audit and audit firm contracting and oversight, through development and implementation of a
                           comprehensive and systematic continuing professional development strategy together with a time-
                           bound action plan that is needs-driven, tailored and sustainable. To achieve this objective, the current
                           capacity strengths and gaps in financial audit and related areas will be independently assessed by a
                           peer SAI. In parallel to this assessment, MNAO personnel will be surveyed and participate in focus
                           groups to identify their requests for and perceptions of their professional development needs and
                           alternative means to achieve these objectives. The results of the financial audit peer review and the
                           knowledge and learning needs assessment to be carried out under this proposed project, as well as the
                           2010 performance audit peer review, will feed into development of a CPD strategy for the institution
                           that will then be developed into a 3-year knowledge and learning program. Furthermore, as part of
                           the project, tailored training materials will be developed and actual training will be delivered to
                           MNAO staff as per the CPD strategy and the knowledge and learning program. While the specific
                         content and depth of topics to be covered under the CPD program are largely to be identified and
                         tailored as per the assessments to be carried out, an early indication of capacity gaps reveals such
                         areas as MNAO staff’s knowledge and understanding of the relevant standards, i.e. IPSAS and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         newly translated ISSAIs, quality control, contracting and quality assurance of private audit firm
                         engagements, and audit of the consolidated financial statements of the Government.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed project will assist MNAO in establishing and implementing a comprehensive and
                         systematic CPD strategy and program. For this purpose, two assessments will be carried out largely
                         in parallel to identify learning needs early in the project:
                         •        Independent, external peer review using SAI PMF to identify what MNAO may not yet
                         know or perceive as its training needs (what MNAO doesn't know it doesn't know).
                         •        A knowledge and learning expert guided assessment of mostly internal perceptions of
                         training needs and demand for training.

                         These two complimentary assessment tools will provide inputs into the design and development of a
                         formal CPD program that includes both (a) hard skills in technical topics such as accrual based
                         IPSAS and ISSAI application and (b) soft skills such as leadership and teamwork. These inputs are
                         targeted to be completed within the first 6-9 months of the Project.

                         MNAO desires to develop a well thought through systematic CPD program that provides necessary
                         knowledge and learning opportunities to each auditor at the appropriate time in his or her MNAO
                         professional career using the most appropriate means of learning and technology (classroom, on-the-
                         job, self-study, distance learning, etc.) and takes into consideration the wide geographic dispersion of
                         MNAO auditors. Moreover, learning will be tracked and monitored for each MNAO auditor, whether
                         he or she is based in a remote part of Mongolia or at MNAO headquarters, to ensure an effective,
                         efficient, and economic systematic application of the CPD program.

                         The CPD Program will also address the important corporate transitional issues faced by MNAO in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         regards to: (a) bringing the recently incorporated decentralized regional auditors up to a consistently
                         high level of knowledge and skills with MNAO headquarter's auditors, and (b) applying the recently
                         translated ISSAIs that are now in printing. The design and development of the CPD program is
                         targeted to be completed within the first 15-18 months of the Project.

                         Development of training materials, strengthening of trainer skills, training and other knowledge and
                         learning activities will be mostly concentrated in the final 18-21 months of the project. Obtaining
                         and adapting ISSAI and other clearly-needed training materials will begin early in the project and
                         training in such subjects could begin even before the CPD strategy and program are formally
                         finalized and approved.

                         Details on the activities proposed for implementation at MNAO with support from the SAI Capacity
                         Development Fund can be grouped in the following five main activities to be implemented over the
                         course of three years (with the approximate budgets identified):

                         Activity 1: Conduct a peer review of MNAO’s financial audit activities by an experienced SAI using
                         the INTOSAI’s SAI PMF methodology as deemed appropriate (USD 70,000, SAI personnel and
                         travel cost). A peer review has never been performed on MNAO’s financial audit capabilities.
                         MNAO critically needs, and its management supports, a peer review concentrating on its financial
                         audit capacity and related domains. The peer review would provide an objective, third-party
                         assessment of its strengths, weaknesses and priority improvement needs. These priority areas for
                         improvement would then be incorporated in the organization’s CPD strategy and the relevant
                         knowledge and learning program.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Activity 2: In parallel to the SAI peer review, a comprehensive MNAO knowledge and learning
                         needs assessment will be carried out covering the entire organization, including its local branch
                         office staff (USD 40,000, local consultants). The knowledge and learning needs assessment will be
                         carried out to identify capacity gaps from within the organization. This assessment will cover all
                         MNAO staff, both at the central and local branch offices and utilize various surveying methods such
                         as enquiry, questionnaire, focus group discussions, individual interviews etc.

                         Activity 3: A comprehensive, needs-driven and sustainable continuing professional development
                         strategy together with a detailed action plan for three years will be developed based on the peer
                         reviews conducted at MNAO and the knowledge and learning needs assessment (USD 40,000,
                         international consultant + local consultant).
                         Activity 4: Development of customized training materials tailored to MNAO’s capacity building
                         needs described in the CPD strategy and knowledge and learning program and delivery of the actual
                         training to MNAO personnel during most of the three-year period of the CPD program (USD
                         210,000, international and local consultants, local and regional training, including some but minimal
                         travel costs). While the specific content and depth of topics to be covered under the training program
                         are largely to be identified and tailored as per the assessments to be carried out, an early indication of
                         capacity gaps reveals such areas as MNAO staff’s knowledge and understanding of the relevant
                         standards, i.e. IPSAS and ISSAIs (IPSAS implementation guidance and training is being developed
                         and delivered by MOF; ISSAI training materials will be translated into the Mongolian language and
                         adapted for the Mongolia context), quality control, contracting and management of private audit firm
                         engagements, and auditing of the consolidated financial statements of the Government. At the end of
                         project period, training coverage of over 90 percent of the total auditing staff, or approximately 350
                         auditors, is expected. Training delivery is expected to include innovative modalities such as online/
                         virtual training using a newly established VPN connection available throughout MNAO offices. To
Public Disclosure Copy




                         minimize project costs, MNAO will seek to utilize, translate and customize for the local context as
                         necessary, existing ISSAI and other training materials that may be available from IDI or other SAIs.

                         Activity 5: Technical assistance to establish an efficient and fully transparent and documented
                         procurement process for contracting private audit firms (USD 20,000, international consultant + local
                         consultant/interpreter). As part of the project, the current MNAO practice of engaging private audit
                         firms to conduct the annual financial audits of budget entities and state-owned enterprises on behalf
                         of MNAO will be analyzed to improve documentation and transparency. Such efforts will be timely
                         and beneficial as, in addition to budget entities, IFI-funded projects are starting to engage in a similar
                         practice where MNAO carries out auditor selection for the projects but by following the IFIs’ own
                         procurement procedures. This proposed project will aim at strengthening and streamlining MNAO’s
                         private audit firm selection processes carried out for budget entities and IFI-funded projects. For
                         these audits conducted by private audit firms MNAO will apply its quality control and quality
                         assurance framework, which may need improvement if identified as priority areas of capacity
                         development as per the continuing professional development strategy and the relevant training
                         program.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                           Triggered?           Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/                 No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                  No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                           No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09                      No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/              No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
                           Projects on International                    No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP             No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Regis Thomas Cunningham,Badamchimeg Dondog
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                                           Date: 24-Jun-2015
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Roberto Tarallo (PMGR)                                       Date: 13-Jul-2015
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
