                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC13216

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Jun-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Swaziland                       Project ID:      P152528
                            Project Name:     IMPROVING PUBLIC SECTOR PERFORMANCE PROJECT (P152528)
                            Task Team         Barbara Kasura Magezi Ndamira
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         10-May-2016                     Estimated        05-Jul-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GGO13                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General public administration sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Administrative and civil service reform (40%), Managing for development
                                              results (30%), Participation and civic engagement (10%), Edu cation for all
                                              (10%), Health system performance (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     25.00                   Total Bank Financing:         25.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      25.00
                              Total                                                                      25.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           To improve public financial management and performance management in selected ministries in
                           Swaziland
                           C. Project Description
                           1.     The proposed project is an Investment Project Financing operation financed by a US$25
                         million IBRD loan over a five year period. The project is designed to reflect the strategic areas of the
                         National Development Strategy (1997-2022), currently under revision. Additionally, it draws from
                         subsequent strategic documents such as the Poverty Reduction Strategy Action Plan (2008), the PFM
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ActionPlan (2012), the National Development Plan (2014-2017) and the Program of Action
                         2013-2018. More importantly, it is designed to facilitate the government's renewed focus on
                         improved public sector performance through the Business Process Re-engineering Initiative in the
                         Prime-Minister's Office. The project strategy is three-fold. The first is to focus on actionable
                         interventions that address key management challenges in selected ministries to unblock constraints
                         that hinder the performance of their mandates (especially those related to human resource
                         management and financial management).The selected ministries are among the strategic ministries
                         whose functions are described in the government’s definition of first work status; three of them
                         (education, agriculture and health) account for nearly half of the total number of civil servants, and
                         there are also in the process of undertaking their own reform initiatives linked to improving frontline
                         service delivery.
                         2.       The project will provide support for activities that can improve the out-put of ministries and
                         value for money. It will focus on a core set of ministries to support “turn around” in the way in which
                         staff and financial resources are allocated and managed. By addressing these constraints, the
                         ministries could be better prepared to unleash their organizational potential to deliver their mandates
                         fully, by strategically (and productively) deploying their human resources and managing their
                         finances adequately in pursuit of their respective mandates. It is expected that this initial intervention
                         could create the basis for additional good management practices to be mainstreamed into the
                         management of selected ministries. Participating ministries have been identified by the government
                         based on its strategic priorities as outlined in the Plan of Action 2013-2018 (Vision 2020). They
                         include the Ministries of Education; Health; Agriculture; Public Works; and Public Service.

                         Component 1: Human Resource Management (US$ 9 million)

                         Sub-Component 1.1: Improved Human Resource Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3.       This sub-component aims to build the capacity of participating ministries to efficiently
                         manage their human resources. Main activities include: (1)Conduct a Functional Review of human
                         resource management in selected ministries to identify capacity and efficiency gaps; (2) Review the
                         allocation of tasks in selected ministries; and design and implement a simple work-flow management
                         system, incorporating unit and staff work plans from strategic plans; (3)Strengthen quality
                         management in ministries, and improve functions and task structure, including reporting and
                         evaluation of core ministerial functions; (4)Develop HR capacity and systems in each ministry, in
                         collaboration with the Civil Service Commission to strengthen supervision of ministry staff; (5)
                         Update HR management modules compatible with existing HRMIS to improve HR management and
                         payroll controls; and (6)Conduct semi-annual sample payroll audits to determine compliance with
                         establishment reg ister; update personnel records; and report deficiencies.

                         Sub-Component 1.2: Improved Human Resource Planning and Development

                         4.       This sub-component will support the planning and development of human resources in
                         participating ministries. Main Activities include: (1) Support an assessment of the SIMPA
                         (infrastructure, accommodation, staffing, curricula, instructional approaches, management and HR
                         systems, and financing); (2) Develop and implement a program for in-service training of civil
                         servants, including senior managers; and (3) Establishment of the Executive Cadre of civil servants
                         aimed at preparing Director level civil servants for leadership positions in the public sector.
                         Component 2: Strengthened Public Financial Management (US$ 8 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-Component 2.1: Improved Public Financial Management

                         5.       This sub-component aims at improving the financial management infrastructure as well as
                         strengthening the capacity of the staff for financial management. Main Activities include: (1)
                         Acquisition of hardware and software for Financial Management Information System (FMIS); and
                         capacity building to maintain, use and audit the new FMIS environment; (2) Development and
                         implementation of a risk management system, development of a risk management framework and
                         consultations with ministries, facilitation of risk assessment workshops, and the development of risk
                         registers; (3) Implementation of an internal audit framework consistent with the International
                         Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing; and (4)Capacity building of auditors in
                         the Office of the Auditor General in the execution of Performance and Value-for-Money audits.

                         Sub-Component 2.2: Strengthened Public Procurement

                         6.       The aim of this sub-component is to support the improvement of procurement standards in
                         Swaziland, as well as to improve the value for money of government purchases. Main activities
                         include: (1) Develop a customized electronic procurement system: The electronic system will
                         incorporate modules for bidding, framework agreements for common-use items, procurement
                         information management, and systematic disclosure of procurement data to facilitate ‘evidence-
                         based’ decision making; (2) Support establishment of procurement cadre and professionalization of
                         public procurement. The activities will include establishment of procurement thematic courses and
                         certification programs with local institutions for sustainable capacity building arrangement, sector-
                         specific training of government staff in public procurement; and development of a strategy towards
                         the establishment of a multi-grade procurement officer category in the country’s public service, with
                         promotion and career development possibilities within the procurement function; (3)Support to the
                         Swaziland Public Procurement Authority (SPPRA): This will include capacity building of SPPRA
Public Disclosure Copy




                         staff by training on public procurement, procurement auditing, regulation etc. and by establishing
                         twinning arrangements and visits to other countries having track records of effective procurement
                         regulatory functions; and (4) Development Impact Monitoring and Evaluation. This will be
                         conducted jointly with the Development Impact Monitoring and Evaluation (DIME) team of the
                         World Bank and SIPPRA. It will involve the implementation of randomized control trials to
                         understand the extent to which: training of health facility staff in medical stock forecasting; and
                         audits of the medication distribution chain reduce the stock out rates and the leakage of drugs in
                         Swaziland’s health facilities. It will also measure effects on the usage of health facilities and relevant
                         health outcomes.

                         Sub-Component 2.3: Strengthened Public Investment Management

                         7.       The objective of this sub-component is to improve the management of the government’s
                         capital budget. Main activities include: (1)Establish the Public Investment Management Unit;
                         conduct PIM assessment to guide the implementation of reforms in the area of public investment
                         management; review the required laws and regulations for multi-year appropriations for multi-year
                         investment projects and identify required changes to the budget law;(2)Conduct a detailed review
                         and stock-taking exercise of the existing public investment portfolio and preparation of a criteria and
                         methodology for prioritizing and rationalizing the existing public investment portfolio; and (3) Build
                         capacity within Ministry of Economic Planning and Development and other line Ministries in the
                         relevant areas of public investment management.

                         Component 3: Improved Statistical Capacity and Policy Coordination (US$6 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-component 3.1: Statistical Capacity Building

                         8.       The objective of this sub-component is to improve the quality of data available for policy
                         making. Main Activities include: (1) Strengthening the institutional capacity of the CSO; (2)
                         Developing a national framework for management of official statistics; (3) Development of
                         methodologies and Survey Design; (3) Acquisition of software development for data entry; (4)
                         Technical Assistance in conducting the field work and quality assurance; and (5)Development of an
                         in- service training program for government statistics in collaboration with the Swaziland Institute of
                         Management and Public Administration.

                         Sub-component 3.2: Policy Planning, Coordination and Implementation

                         9.       The aim of this sub-component is to support the operations of the office of the Prime
                         Minister. Main activities include: (1)Undertake a functional review of the Cabinet Secretariat to
                         address both capacity and structural gaps that undermine its ability to coordinate government policy
                         formulation and implementation;(2)Strengthen capacity for policy development, implementation,
                         monitoring and evaluation: Support strengthening the Policy and Program Coordination Unit (PPCU)
                         to provide advisory support to the Cabinet Secretariat through improved policy formulation; policy
                         research and coordination; (3)Support the development of a Government Communication Strategy
                         and dissemination of Cabinet; decisions, strengthen outreach of the PM’s office to ministries and
                         other stakeholders; and (4)Strengthen coordination and implementation of performance targeting by
                         developing systems for monitoring government performance in key agreed target areas; monitoring
                         implementation of key Cabinet decisions and for monitoring performance of Principal Secretaries.

                         Component 4: Project management and monitoring (US$2 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         10.    This component will support the day to day management of the project to ensure proper
                         adherence to the Bank’s fiduciary and project management guidelines.

                         Sub-component 4.1: Project Management

                         11.     This sub-component will finance the costs associated with project implementation such as
                         stakeholder engagement, change management, monitoring and evaluation, financial management and
                         procurement activities provided as part of project management. Main activities include: (1)
                         Stakeholder engagement w orkshops; (2) Financial and procurement services; (3) Training and
                         capacity building; and (4) Monitoring and evaluation of project activities.

                         Sub-component 4.2: Citizen Engagement

                         12.     This sub-component the project will finance a citizen engagement activity building on the
                         existing Smart Partnership program that the government is currently implementing. Participating
                         ministries will be supported to conduct a series of citizen engagement activities to proactively
                         communicate their programs with various citizen groups, civil society coalitions, and other
                         stakeholders and to receive feedback from citizens about service quality and deficiencies. Main
                               activities include: (1) Implementation of Customer Satisfaction Surveys; and (2) Holding of
                               Quarterly Smart Partnership Forums.
                               D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                               analysis (if known)
                               N/A

                               E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                               N/A

                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment                                    No
                                 OP/BP 4.01
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                 No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                          No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                     No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources                                 No
                                 OP/BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.10
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                No
                                 BP 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No

                                 Projects on International      No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Sep-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      N/A
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Barbara Kasura Magezi Ndamira
                                 Approved By:


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)   Date: 05-Apr-2016
                         Practice Manager/     Name: Guenter Heidenhof (PMGR)   Date: 05-Apr-2016
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
