                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC14784

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Nov-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Nov-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Tanzania                         Project ID:      P150361
                            Project Name:      Second Tanzania Water Sector Support Project (P150361)
                            Task Team          Yitbarek Tessema
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          21-Nov-2016                      Estimated        23-Jan-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GWA01                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    235.00                     Total Bank Financing:        225.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            10.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  225.00
                              Total                                                                        235.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The overall WSDP II program Development Objective is "Improving integrated water resources
                           management by strengthening water sector institutions and increasing access to water supply and
                           sanitation services".

                           The Project Development Objective is to strengthen integrated water resources management in
                           Tanzania to support productive sectors ; and improve water supply service delivery in urban areas of
                           Tanzania.
                           C. Project Description
                           1.      The proposed project will support targeted interventions within the Water Resources
                         Management and Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Themes, focusing on improving integrated
                         water resources management; and enhancing the operational efficiency and expansion of urban water
                         supply and sewerage services particularly in Dar es Salaam. The focus will be based on the most
Public Disclosure Copy




                         critical requirements for impact, supporting innovation, and the Bank➢❨ s comparative advantage
                         vis-Ã -vis other support to the sector. Detailed activity design, contribution from other development
                         partners and allocation between the components is expected to be firmed up during project
                         preparation.

                         2.       The Bank➢❨ s fiduciary and safeguards oversight responsibility will be limited to the
                         activities funded by IDA. Furthermore, in coordination with the fiduciary, legal, and safeguards
                         units, the Bank should provide advice and technical support to government and other development
                         partners to establish a separate fiduciary management mechanism including possibly the hiring of a
                         firm (e.g., a fiduciary agent) to provide the service for the entire program and to fill the potential gap
                         that may be created due to the Bank➢❨ s limited focus to its area of operation.

                         I.      Water Resources Management ➢❨ (WRM) (US$ 60 M)

                         3.       The WRM component would build on successes achieved under WSSP-I and continue to
                         promote integrated climate resilient investment planning in the basins, including institutional
                         capacity building to plan and manage water and land use at a basin level. Activities would also
                         support strategic planning and implementation of priority investments identified in the nine basin
                         IWRMD plans (currently in draft stage and scope to be confirmed during preparation); adoption of
                         sustainable land and water management practices to reduce land degradation in targeted production
                         and natural landscapes, to build resilience to climate risk. Some of these physical investments will
                         focus on priority basins, while other activities will support the overall information base and
                         institutional framework for water management at decentralized and national level, while placing
                         stronger emphasis on performance management and strategic outcomes. The main focus of this
                         component will be on strengthening the Water Resources Management (WRM) institutions at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         center, basin, and sub basin levels to enable them to effectively coordinate the various sector
                         institutions competing for water and manage the tradeoffs and complementarity of the intended uses.
                         More emphasis will be placed on supporting the development of inter-sectoral collaborative
                         framework at national and basin level; and improving the information base for effective management.

                         II. Urban Water Supply and Sewerage (US$155 million):

                         4.       The operational efficiency of the utilities in large urban areas and small towns is very low as
                         evidenced by the high rate of Non-Revenue Water (NRW) which affects the utilities capability to
                         effectively and sustainably provide the services. The situation is worse in Dar es Salaam city where
                         the NRW rate is as high as 53% and the service coverage is about 50% while a huge amount of water
                         is being produced from various sources to augment the existing system. With the completion of the
                         ongoing and planned projects under the WSDP, the daily water production is expected to grow by
                         more than double from the current 300, 000 Cu. M to 756,000 Cu. M. This will further exacerbate
                         the loss as higher pressure is being added to an old distribution system. With regard to sewerage,
                         only 10% of the city is covered by sewerage network.

                         5.      Inefficient and uncoordinated management of the Dar es Salaam water and Sewerage
                         services is a major contributor to the poor service levels. Cognizant of this, the MoW has initiated a
                         reform process to reorganize the Dar es Salaam Water and Sewerage Authority (DAWASA) and the
                         Dar es Salaam Water and Sewerage Corporation (DAWASCo) who are responsible for delivery of
                         water and sewerage services in the city. The Bank has been supporting the initiative through
                         technical assistance to assess the situation and propose possible options for reorganization of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         institutions based on experience from similar reforms successfully undertaken in the region. The
                         primary focus in the urban water supply and sewerage component is to support the GoT initiative to
                         improve the operational efficiency of the Dar es Salaam city water and sewerage service delivery inst
                         itutions. The project will also support selected additional towns to improve their operational
                         efficiency through technical assistance, consultancy, training, and procurement of goods and works.

                         III. Project Management and Implementation Support (US$ 10 million):

                         6.       This component will provide capacity building and technical assistance to strengthen the
                         ability of the Project Coordination Unit (PCU), the Procurement Management Unit (PMU) and
                         departments in the MOWI and implementation agencies (DAWASA, DAWASCO, WBOs) to carry
                         out and manage the project. Primarily this component will ensure that: planning and monitoring of
                         the project is implemented as per the agreed procedures and the necessary capacity building support
                         is prioritized and implemented effectively and efficiently.
                         7.       The institutional arrangements used under the WSSP ➢❨ I will be maintained and remain
                         aligned with the structure of the GoT. However, minor modifications to the program implementation
                         arrangement may be needed under the proposed project particularly to strengthen safeguards
                         management, financial planning and utilization, and ensure the delivery of cost-effective technical
                         solutions.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         8.       The project supports activities in the river basins. With the exception of support to Dar es
                         Salaam, specific geographic areas will be selected on the basis of demand from beneficiary
                         communities. In Dar es Salaam, the project will support a variety of activities including expansion
                         and rehabilitation of water supply and sewerage services. Initial activities will focus on capacity and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         efficiency improvements and institutional reform. Project safeguards management will follow a
                         similar arrangement that was used under the first phase of the program, namely through preparation
                         of an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy
                         Framework (RPF), which will outline the safeguards due diligence requirements for project
                         investments. The ESMF and RPF are being updated to reflect lessons learned from earlier
                         implementation. Specifically, the instruments are being strengthened to better identify and manage
                         subprojects with an elevated level of environmental or social risk. These documents are in an
                         advanced stage of preparation.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         9.       The MoW is responsible for overall implementation of the project ESMF and RPF, with
                         specific activities the responsibility of the local government entities responsible for subproject
                         execution. Other institutions such as the Vice President➢❨ s Office ➢❨ Division of Environment
                         (VPO-E), and the National Environment Management Council (NEMC), have the mandate for
                         promoting sound environmental management and overseeing the environmental licensing process to
                         assure compliance of national regulations. As mentioned above, project safeguards management will
                         follows a similar arrangement that was used under the first phase of the program, with the ESMF and
                         RPF being updated to reflect lessons learned from earlier implementation. These lessons include
                         aspects related to improving institutional arrangements and capacity for safeguards management.
                           10.     In this regard, the environment and social management of the program is currently handled
                           by an overall safeguards environment coordinator supported by an international expert. The Ministry
                           of Water (MoW), learning from implementation of WSDP-I and realizing the need to strengthen
Public Disclosure Copy




                           safeguard management capacity has initiated a process to establish a formal safeguards unit within
                           the ministry. In order to enhance safeguard oversight, the Ministry is requesting other WSDP
                           implementing agencies to assign experts to have primary responsibility for safeguards aspects.
                           Development of environmental and social management guidelines for Category C subprojects has
                           also been recommended to improve environmental and social performance, to simplify
                           implementation and ensure consistency.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Jane A. N. Kibbassa (GEN01)
                           Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (GSU07)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment        Yes            The projects supports a range of infrastructure
                           OP/BP 4.01                                     investments aimed at improving integrated water
                                                                          resources management and expanding access to
                                                                          water supply and sanitation services. Such
                                                                          investments will require environmental due
                                                                          diligence.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04     Yes            Water supply and sewerage investments could
                                                                          potentially have impacts on natural habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36              No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09         No             The project doesn➢❨ t have connection with the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                          procurement of pesticides or pesticide application
                                                                          equipment; neither will it have connections with
                                                                          pesticide use that might increase in health and
                                                                          environmental risks.
                           Physical Cultural Resources     Yes            The potential exists that construction of large water
                           OP/BP 4.11                                     infrastructure could result in ➢❨ chance finds➢❨ .
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP        TBD
                           4.10
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/    Yes            The projects supports a range of infrastructure
                           BP 4.12                                        investments aimed at improving integrated water
                                                                          resources management and expanding access to
                                                                          water supply and sanitation services. Such
                                                                          investments will require land for their
                                                                          implementation.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37       Yes

                           Projects on International       No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                                 BP 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 02-Oct-2016
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The ESMF and RPF are at advanced stage and expected to be completed prior to appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Yitbarek Tessema
                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (RSA)                                                                                              Date: 16-Nov-2016
                                 Advisor:
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Jonathan S. Kamkwalala (PMGR)                                                                                          Date: 17-Nov-2016
                                 Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
