                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA15621
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Apr-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            India                             Project ID:   P150308
                            Project Name:       IN:Citizen-Centric Service Delivery Reform Assam (P150308)
                            Task Team           Vikram K. Chand,Mohan Nagarajan
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           08-Feb-2016                       Estimated   06-Jun-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GGO18                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Public administration- Information and communications (50%), Sub-national
                                                government administration (50%)
                            Theme(s):           Other public sector governance (50%), e-Government (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:        49.00           Total Bank Financing:  39.20
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          9.80
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                39.20
                              Total                                                                                      49.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to improve access in the delivery of select public services in
                           Assam.
                            3. Project Description
                           Project Background

                                                                       Page 1 of 10
                         The Citizen Centered Service Delivery Reform Project aims to serve the citizens of Assam,
                         especially the poor, through effective Right To Public Services (RTPS) Act implementation in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         State. Its Project Development Objective is "to improve access in the delivery of select public
                         services in Assam." With a financial outlay of US$ 49 million (out of which US$ 39.2 IDA funding
                         and US$ 9.8 Government funding), the Project takes an integrated approach to improve citizens’
                         access to public services and strengthen accountability, addressing both the supply-side and demand-
                         side aspects of service delivery.

                         The Government of Assam, recognizing the need to strengthen service delivery access, had enacted
                         the Assam Right to Public Services (ARTPS) Act 2012 to ensure citizens’ access to public services
                         in a timely, efficient, and accountable manner. The Act enables the citizens of Assam to get notified
                         public services within a stipulated time frame and also fixes responsibilities on public servants to
                         provide these services in a time–bound manner. A formal appellate process under the Act has
                         provisions penalizing designated government officials for his/her failure to give the services as
                         sought by the citizens within a stipulated time. 55 services related to 14 departments have so far been
                         notified by the State government under the RTPS Act.

                         Government to Citizens (G2C) services in Assam are being provided by approximately 31
                         departments. Most of the 31 G2C Departments maintain their own individual offices at the District
                         level, and have direct contact with citizens with respect to the services they deliver. The District
                         Office, headed by the Deputy Commissioner, plays the lead role in service provision – managing
                         sub-divisional, circle and block operations. Service delivery capacity is nevertheless weak at many
                         offices at district and sub-district levels.

                         On a request from the Government of Assam, the World Bank has committed contributing IDA
                         credit funding of US$ 39.2 million under the Citizen-Centered Service Delivery (CCSD) Project to
                         support and enhance the state initiatives for improving citizens’ access to public services and
                         strengthen accountability under the ARTPS Act 2012. Earlier, through a Non-Lending Technical
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Assistance (NLTA), the World Bank had supported analysis of public administration constraints to
                         service delivery for enabling a clear understanding of bottlenecks and challenges to service delivery
                         access in the state. Simplification and streamlining of administrative procedures, reduction in levels
                         for processing service delivery requests, and preparation of a comprehensive ICT plan and associated
                         back end process re-engineering for efficient G2C service delivery emerged as certain key
                         recommendations of this analytical work. The recommendations have been incorporated in the
                         design of the Project activities.

                         Project Components

                         The Project consists of two components. Component One: Technical Assistance (US$ 31.7 million)
                         will finance activities designed to strengthen RTPS implementation; support process reforms/e-
                         enablement in targeted services; establish one-stop-centers; and create citizen feedback mechanisms.
                         This component will disburse against eligible expenditures upon submission of IFRs. Component
                         Two: Results-based Financing (US$ 7.5 million) provides incentives for achieving results with
                         respect to improving the access and accountability of RTPS services. This component will disburse
                         against agreed eligible expenditure programs (EEPs) upon achievement of Disbursement Linked
                         Indicators (DLIs).

                         Component One: Technical Assistance (US$ 31.7 million IDA; US$ 7.925 million GoA)

                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         This component will provide specialized technical assistance to support implementation of the
                         government program and the achievement of the PDO. Eligible expenditures under this component
Public Disclosure Copy




                         are consulting and non-consulting services, acquisition of goods and operating costs. This component
                         will provide funding for the following 4 sub-components:
                         •        Sub-component 1. Strengthening RTPS implementation. Activities under this sub-component
                         will include the creation of (i) a comprehensive RTPS ICT platform for automated tracking of
                         individual service requests and appeals, actions taken by the designated officer and staff, and rule-
                         based escalation in case of time overruns beyond the stipulated period; (ii) a Management
                         Information System (MIS), along with institutional mechanisms, to ensure that data from the MIS is
                         used for calibrating the implementation of RTPS, and (iii) an online portal to promote proactive
                         disclosure related to citizens’ entitlements under the Act and procedures for accessing RTPS
                         services, as well as allow citizens to apply for services online. In addition, this sub-component will
                         finance two other activities, including (iv) capacity-building to support adaptation to electronic
                         processing, and (v) the design and implementation of a change management strategy. Finally, the
                         Project will support the creation of a high-level delivery unit with adequate authority and capacity to
                         drive RTPS implementation across the state.
                         •        Sub-component 2. Supporting Process Re-engineering in Targeted Services. Activities under
                         this sub-component will include: (i) integration of electronic approaches to G2C service delivery
                         with 15 targeted RTPS services initially within three Departments (Revenue and Welfare of Plain
                         Tribes and Backward Classes, and Transport as well as, the Guwahati Municipal Corporation; (ii)
                         process simplification, such as delegating responsibilities to lower levels of government, reducing the
                         number of supporting documents required to access services; (iii) improving the field verification
                         system for delivery of selected services, and streamlining the issuance of digitally signed
                         certificates ; (iv) the development of a quality management system within departmental delivery
                         processes; and (v) the creation of an integrated electronic repository of government-issued
                         certificates available online.
                         •        Sub-component 3. Setting up One-Stop Service Centers. Activities under this sub-component
                         will include (i) creating 425 One-Stop-Service Centers in blocks/circles and other designated offices;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (ii) equipping them with critical ICT infrastructure and reliable broadband connectivity to handle
                         RTPS requests and deliver e-enabled targeted services ; (iii) hiring contracted staff to operate centers
                         (two per center), and (iv) supporting other incidental costs (e.g., maintenance). Beyond these, the
                         Project would explore alternative methods such as the use of Online to Offline (O2O) mechanisms,
                         in view of the limited ICT connectivity in the state. Given that the connectivity solutions under this
                         subcomponent focus primarily on the block and circle levels, such O2O mechanisms could play a
                         vital role in bringing services even closer to local communities.
                         •        Sub-component 4. Promoting Citizen Engagement. Activities supported will include (i) a
                         state-wide Information and Education Campaign (IEC) to publicize the provision of RTPS Act and
                         the procedures related to accessing RTPS services; (ii) the development of a mobile and web-based
                         citizen feedback system based on individual transactions; (iii) the establishment of a toll-free call
                         center to provide assistance to citizens and register grievances for redress. These apart, Citizen
                         Engagement will be accentuated by custom made location specific social accountability measures
                         such as Social Audit and Citizen Score Cards. These will be designed as a part of the overall
                         monitoring and evaluation arrangements.

                         Component Two: Results-Based Financing (US$ 7.5 million IDA; US$ 1.875 million GoA)

                         This component aims to support the Government of Assam to implement critical public management
                         reforms related to delivery of public services. Specifically, this component supports the

                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                         Government’s Program which aims to broaden access to RTPS services particularly with regard to
                         scheduled areas, increase the number of notified services and incentivize the establishment of one-
                         stop service centers across the state.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         A result-based financing approach will be used to provide incentives for achieving key results. It will
                         disburse upon achievement of key results as measured by the Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs)
                         and against the execution of agreed-to Eligible Expenditures Programs (EEPs).

                         Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs): Four DLIs have been selected for providing incentives to
                         expand the coverage of RTPS to tribal districts; increase the number of services notified under the
                         law; promote the setting-up of one-stop centers; and encourage the use of RTPS services by an
                         increasing number of citizens.
                         •         DLI 1: Increase in the volume of applications submitted on-line for RTPS services (US$2.5
                         million). The Project will also incentivize citizens’ increased access to services under RTPS, given
                         that citizens are mostly unaware of the Act and how to access services under its provisions; and
                         number of citizens accessing RTPS services is meager.
                         •         DLI 2: One-stop shop service access centers fully operational (US$1 million). The fully
                         equipped and adequately staffed centers would be required to function at least six hours on all
                         working days to receive RTPS service requests and be able to electronically deliver the targeted set
                         of RTPS services.
                         •         DLI 3: Access to RTPS services expanded in underserved areas of Assam (US$2.5 million).
                         The RTPS Act has not been implemented in the six autonomous districts and 20 formal
                         endorsements of the Autonomous Councils would be required before an Act of the State Legislature
                         is enforced within their jurisdiction. The Government of Assam has initiated dialogue with the
                         Autonomous Councils to extend the coverage of RTPS Act to all these six autonomous districts.
                         •         DLI 4: Increased number of services notified under RTPS Act (US$ 1.5 million). The result
                         based financing approach would also incentivize expansion of the number of services from the
                         present 55 services to at least 80 services over the next five years. Some key services such as the
                         issuance of ST and income certificates and income certificates would be notified as RTPS services
Public Disclosure Copy




                         over time.

                         Additional details on the Project activities, DLIs, and Eligible Expenditure Programs are provided in
                         the Project Appraisal Document.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project activities will be executed across Assam, the largest state in the North East region of
                         India. Assam is one of the seven north-eastern states (together called as 'seven sisters'), which is
                         situated just below the eastern Himalayan foothills. The State of Assam spreads over an area of
                         78,438 sq km and is surrounded by six of the other Seven Sister States: Arunachal Pradesh,
                         Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram, Tripura, and Meghalaya. Geographically, Assam and these States are
                         connected to the rest of India via a strip of land in West Bengal called the Siliguri Corridor or
                         "Chicken's Neck". Assam shares international borders with Bhutan and Bangladesh. A significant
                         geographical aspect of Assam is that it contains three of six physiographic divisions of India - The
                         Northern Himalayas (Eastern Hills), The Northern Plains (Brahmaputra plain) and Deccan Plateau
                         (Karbi Anglong). The River Brahmaputra, the life-line of Assam becomes a braided river (at times
                         10-16 km wide) and with tributaries, creates a flood plain. The hills of Karbi Anglong, North Cachar
                         and those in and close to Guwahati (also Khasi-Garo Hills) are originally parts of the South Indian
                         Plateau system. In the south, the River Barak originates in the Barail Range (Assam-Nagaland


                                                                      Page 4 of 10
                         border) flows through the Cachar district with a 40–50 km wide valley and enters Bangladesh with
                         the name Surma River. The Brahmaputra and the Barak rivers are part of the two of the major
                         National Waterways and together cover almost 1000 km across the State.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Population of Assam according to the 2011 census stands at around 31 million, making it the
                         14th most populated State in India. 86% of the population lives in rural areas. Assam is an agrarian
                         state with only limited industrialization. The only Project activities that are expected to beset with
                         potential of pollution relate to the installation and operation of electric generators which are expected
                         to be housed in the existing (government) buildings.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Gaurav D. Joshi (GEN06)
                         Suryanarayana Satish (GSU06)

                         6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental                Yes            The project activities are limited in their physical scope
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                       and could have, albeit very small, impacts on the
                                                                     environmental receptors. A simple EMP that will be
                                                                     implemented at the block/taluk level has been prepared to
                                                                     handle these impacts of material storage, installation and
                                                                     operation of generators, use of electronic equipment, etc.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP       No             The project activities are confined to areas that are within
                         4.04                                        office complexes or buildings and not close to any
                                                                     important natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36           No             The project does not involve any commercial logging. It
                                                                     also does not involve any forest land.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No                  Project activities are not likely to use any pesticides.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural            No             No cultural resources are likely to be affected by the
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11                        project as the sites of works are likely to be within
                                                                     existing premises of government offices.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/       Yes            There are tribal people living in the state and are likely to
                         BP 4.10                                     be impacted by the Project. The Project activities will not
                                                                     result in any adverse or negative impact on tribals.
                                                                     However, to ensure that the Project does reach tribals viz.,
                                                                     inclusion and equity, the policy is triggered. Accordingly,
                                                                     a Tribal Development Plan has been prepared.
                         Involuntary Resettlement No                 The only activity requiring lands relate to the
                         OP/BP 4.12                                  establishment of one stop centers. These will be housed in
                                                                     the existing government buildings. So, private land
                                                                     acquisition is not warranted. Hence, this policy is not
                                                                     triggered.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP         No
                         4.37
                         Projects on International    No
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50


                                                                       Page 5 of 10
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environmental Safeguard Issues and Impacts

                             The proposed activities would have limited environmental impacts as they concentrate mostly on
                             the technical assistance. The key environmental issues that arise out of the limited physical
                             activities under the project pertain to the installation of the small infrastructure/equipment – V-Sat
                             arrangements, generators for power supply to the centers, and the handling and disposal of
                             electronic equipment and batteries. The limited impacts that may arise include the safety of
                             workers and people using the premises for currently rendered services, proper location and
                             installation of generators, for minimizing noise and air emissions, proper handling of fuel during
                             the operation. Fire safety could be a consideration where fuel quantities are large. For equipment
                             which are at the end-of-use, such as handling and disposal of batteries, which may contain Lead,
                             and electronic devices like computer which contain hazardous material, needs to be proper to
                             avoid unnecessary contamination due to indiscriminate handling and disposal. There are no likely
                             large-scale, significant or irreversible impacts due to the project activities.


                             Social Safeguards Issues and Impacts

                             Key interventions relate to the establishment of One Stop Centers and ensuring connectivity. The
                             Centers are expected to be of the size of about 600-800 sq. ft. and will be housed in the existing
Public Disclosure Copy




                             government buildings/campuses belonging to the district or sub-district offices. At the best, the
                             Project may have to invest in refurbishing of the existing structures so as to make it fulfill the
                             Project's requirements. Hence, the Project need not acquire lands. So, OP 4.12, on Involuntary
                             Resettlement, is not triggered.

                             Assam is an ethnically diverse state with different languages, traditions and cultural practices; it is
                             the melting pot of a large number of ethnic tribes and races, which have infused richness in the
                             cultural tapestry of Assam. The total tribal population in the state is 3,308,570, which is 12.4% of
                             the total population of the state or 3.72% of the total tribal population of the country. The tribal
                             population in Assam is predominantly rural with 94.4% residing in rural areas. The tribal people
                             normally live in contiguous areas; and their lives are closely associated with nature – streams,
                             trees, plants, animals, etc. It is therefore recognized that maintaining their identities would
                             invariably mean keeping their traditional environment intact with them. In order to protect the
                             interests of the tribal population in the North Eastern states, provision of Sixth Schedule is
                             enshrined in the Constitution under Articles 244(2) and 275(1) to enable autonomous
                             administration of the tribal areas of Assam. Six tribal districts of Assam - Karbi Anglong, Dima
                             Hasao, Kokrajhar, Chirang, Baksa & Udalguri - have been declared as the Scheduled Areas. The
                             administration of these autonomous areas is vested in the Autonomous Councils established as per
                             the provisions laid down in the Sixth Schedule. These Councils are endowed with legislative,
                             judicial executive and financial powers.


                                                                        Page 6 of 10
                          While the tribal populations of Assam are not socio-culturally cut-off, there is a discernible gap in
                          development in the scheduled areas as compared to the state in general. Isolation from the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          mainstream society, economic and social backwardness, poverty and its manifestations, low levels
                          of literacy and health care, primitive system of production, etc. has limited the development in
                          certain pockets, especially in Scheduled Areas. The history of vulnerability and prolonged
                          marginalization puts forth the need for inclusion of tribals as an important stakeholder group in all
                          developmental activities undertaken and ensuring that they receive due attention not only to meet
                          the basic needs but also to encourage them to participate actively in the development process.
                          Thus, while Project activities will have no negative impacts on the tribals, dedicated efforts are
                          required to ensure that the tribals derive full benefits from the Project. This in view, the project has
                          prepared a Tribal Development Plan aimed at ensuring inclusion of, and equity among, the tribals.

                           The Tribal Development Plan (TDP) is unique as it has a provision for Results Based Financing,
                           and accordingly Disbursements Linked Incentives (DLIs) have been developed. Key indicators for
                           this includes: (i) extending the RTPS Act to the Scheduled Areas; and (ii) establishment of One
                           Stop Centers in the Scheduled Areas.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Not anticipated.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Not anticipated.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment. A PMU has been established in the ARIAS for managing this
                           project. The PMU has prepared an Environmental Management Plan that lays out the project and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ways to handle anticipated environmental impacts. It has a structured set of formats to be filled up
                           by block/taluk level officers at various stages of the sub-project to ensure that the environmental
                           aspects are considered properly during selection of the location, installation and operation of
                           equipment, and end-of-use phases. The PMU will also confirm the application of the same,
                           including during site visits. A consolidated tracking form has been devised to monitor progress in
                           implementation of these measures during the course of the project.

                          OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples. Towards its compliance, a Tribal Development Plan has been
                          prepared. The principal objectives of the plan are to ensure dedicated focused attention to the
                          tribals, thereby ensuring free, prior and informed consultation with the tribals, especially living in
                          the Scheduled Areas, and that they are able to participate in, and derive fully the benefits of the
                          Project. The Tribal Development Plan outlines a strategy and implementation action plan prepared
                          blending the existing government framework and traditional systems of tribal governance, so as to
                          enable to extend the benefits of the Assam Right to Public Services (RTPS) Act to tribal people of
                          Sixth Schedule areas and those residing in other districts. The Project seeks to provide access to
                          information relating to service delivery focusing on procedures and processes for accessing
                          services under the RTPS law; and will establish One-Stop-Service Centers for RTPS service
                          delivery closer to tribal people. Concepts of community collaboration and community driven
                          development principles of equity, inclusion, participation, autonomy and accountability would
                          form the core of the tribal development strategy. Activities under the Project do focus on


                                                                      Page 7 of 10
                           capacitating citizen stakeholders and creating an enabling environment to strengthen structured
                           engagement between service providers and tribal community members. A separate budget
                           provision has also been made for the preparation and implementation of the Plan.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Borrower has been associated with the Bank for a number of years and successfully
                           implemented several projects. Currently, there are four projects in the spheres of agriculture, rural
                           water supply, water resources and public financial management, which are under various degrees
                           of implementation. Performance of most of these projects has been rated as satisfactory. Thus, the
                           Borrower is well versed with the Bank's procedures including managing safeguards. The current
                           Project, in fact, is anchored with the on-going project management unit (Assam Rural
                           Infrastructure and Agriculture Services Society) which has operational units in each of the 27
                           districts. The state level management unit is planned to have four key senior level specialists –
                           social development, communication, information technology and monitoring and evaluation - to
                           spearhead the implementation of the Project. At the grassroots, the Project plans to deploy 800
                           personnel to manage the one stop centers. In the tribal areas, plans are afoot to deploy rather
                           exclusively the tribal people.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The stakeholders of the Project are:
                           •        Common citizens, notably the poor who depend on basic services of the Government;
                           •        Tribal people in Sixth Schedule and non-Schedule areas of Assam; and excluded social
                           groups, such as Adivasi migrant workers in Tea Gardens, and residents of riverine and border
                           areas;
                           •        Government of Assam Departments involved in RTPS service delivery;
                           •        The Autonomous Councils in Sixth Schedule areas; and the Councils established under
                           State Legislations; and
                           •        NGOs, civil society and community based groups with specialization working with
                           underserved populations.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Project has held extensive consultations with the stakeholders both in the Scheduled Areas
                           and in the Non-Scheduled areas. The former includes three major meetings in three districts:
                           Baksa (Salbari Sub-division), Karbi Anglong (Hamren Sub-division) and Dibrugarh. Of these
                           three, Baksa and Karbi Anglong are Sixth Schedule districts; and the stakeholder consultation in
                           Dibrugarh was attended by representatives of other Scheduled Tribes such as Mishing & Sonowal
                           Kachari communities. More than 200 citizen representatives have participated in these
                           consultations, and participation by women was far higher than that of men. This apart, a series of
                           consultations were conducted with groups of citizens (tribals and non- tribals included) in six
                           districts: Kamrup, Kamrup Metro, Nalbari, Baksa, Sonitpur and Morigaon. Feedback evinced in
                           these meetings has been fed into designing of the Project.

                           Formal consultations have been held after the draft EMP was disclosed for comment and feedback
                           on the same has been included in the finalized version.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          27-Jan-2016
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                       15-Mar-2016



                                                                      Page 8 of 10
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           India                                                            28-Jan-2016
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      29-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   29-Jan-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            29-Jan-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies




                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Vikram K. Chand,Mohan Nagarajan
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Alexandre Arrobbio (PMGR)                     Date: 21-Apr-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 10 of 10
