                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC19597

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Aug-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             World                          Project ID:       P161232
                            Project Name:   Support to Research and Development at the International AIDS Vaccine
                                            Initiative
                            Team Leader(s): Robert Oelrichs
                            Estimated Date 03-Oct-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GHN05                          Lending           IPF
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 2                              Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Free-standing TFs for HDNVP                                                                    2
                            Environment        B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To support the International AIDS Vaccine Initiative (IAVI) in the development of a novel HIV
                           vaccine candidate through a program of fundamental translational research and product development.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project will entail further research to optimize the replicating vector platform. The applied
                           research required to optimize vaccine vector design to ensure efficacy and safety of a vaccine for
                           wide-scale usage is considerable. Informed by the studies conducted as part of the project P119051
                           using Sendai virus vector candidate, the research in the current project will include iterative design
                           and the systematic investigation of modified vectors and vaccination regimens in order to identify the
                           most practical effective route and dose, mainly in a series of monkey studies. The research will help
                           identify and characterize the immunologic mechanisms that provide protection, which will inform
                           improvements in the HIV vaccine candidates as well as direct how the vector can be used to develop
                           vaccine candidates against pathogens of poverty. The project might consider clinical trials in humans
                           at a later stage.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           New York City, USA and other laboratories in USA and Europe
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           IAVI is one of the leading institutions in this field of HIV vaccine research and is well positioned to
                           carry forward the replication-competent vector platform. This capacity is demonstrated in its current
Public Disclosure Copy




                           related work in the development of VSV-based vaccines. A comprehensive assessment of IAVI's
                           financial management, procurement, and safeguard capacity was undertaken during the project
                           P119051, which concluded that IAVI has adequate rules and procedures, staff, and systems. All
                           safeguard and Fiduciary indicators were assessed as satisfactory during project preparation,
                           supervision and ICR. The organization overall had not only a good financial management system, but
                           strong systems in fiduciary risk management. The initial review of IAVI also highlighted the
                           technical know-how, experience, and procurement capacity to undertake the procurement activities
                           under the Trust Fund TF071457. Environmental due diligence note was prepared for P119051 that
                           stated that IAVI works exclusively with certified and accredited research and manufacturing
                           organizations and laboratories that meet GLP and GMP requirements. The risks and mitigation
                           measures from the due diligence note are reflected in the ISDS for the project. IAVI is familiar with
                           safeguard policies of the World Bank and has demonstrated effective safeguard management during
                           ongoing partnership with the World Bank.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Africa Eshogba Olojoba (GEN05)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The proposed Safeguards Instrument for the
                           BP 4.01                                              project is an Environmental Management Plan
                                                                                (EMP) which will draw upon a due diligence
                                                                                document prepared for the previous project
                                                                                P119051. The EMP will identify risks, measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                to mitigate those risks, and indicate how
                                                                                implementation of the measures will be
                                                                                monitored. This is appropriate because activities
                                                                                and conditions of the current project are the
                                                                                same. Although the project is not anticipating
                                                                                clinical trials in humans, the EMP will include
                                                                                appropriate provisions to reflect the risks
                                                                                associated with human trials and propose
                                                                                relevant mitigation measures. The EMP will be
                                                                                disclosed prior to Appraisal. Given the nature of
                                                                                this project, no public consultation is required
                                                                                beyond disclosure on website with a mechanism
                                                                                for people to ask questions or make comments
                                                                                for the team's consideration and/or response.

                                                                                Adverse environmental health impacts may
                                                                                occur from improper biosafety measures during
                                                                                vaccine construction and characterization, or
                                                                                virulence and/or toxicological studies at AIDS
                                                                                research laboratories; or during AIDS vaccine
                                                                manufacturing at manufacturing facilities; or at
                                                                clinics during AIDS vaccine tests on humans.
                                                                The risk - which is high - is associated with the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                exposure of AIDS culture by researchers, AIDS
                                                                vaccine prototype by production facility
                                                                personnel, or HIV infected blood by such
                                                                personnel at the clinics as nurses, physicians,
                                                                laboratory analysts, technicians, and other
                                                                health workers. The exposure may be through
                                                                an intact or broken skin or a puncture wound, or
                                                                through the eyes or other mucous membranes
                                                                such as nose and mouth. Sharps or broken glass
                                                                contribute to injuries leading to human
                                                                exposure. Another area of risk is associated with
                                                                the management of wastes from project
                                                                activities. Handling of animals during testing
                                                                and disposal of animal carcasses are also areas
                                                                that require special attention. Despite the above-
                                                                mentioned risks, the project is not expected to
                                                                have any large-scale, significant and/or
                                                                irreversible impacts as appropriate mitigation
                                                                measures will be taken.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No   The project will not affect any protected areas,
                                                                known natural habitats, or established or
                                                                proposed critical natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No   The project will not involve commercial logging
                                                                operations in primary tropical moist forests,
                                                                purchase of logging equipment for use in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                primary tropical moist forests, or production or
                                                                trade in wood or other forestry products from
                                                                unmanaged forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No   The project will not procure any pesticides nor
                                                                will it result in an increased use of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No   The project will not affect sites with
                         BP 4.11                                archeological, paleontological, historical,
                                                                religious, or unique natural values.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No   The project will not affect indigenous people.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No   Involuntary resettlement would not be triggered.
                         4.12
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No   The project will not involve construction or
                                                                rehabilitation of dams, nor will it rely on the
                                                                performance of any dam.
                         Projects on International         No   There are no project activities involving
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   international waterways as defined in the policy.
                                                           No
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP                                  The project is not located in any known area of
                           7.60                                                              territorial disputes defined in the policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Robert Oelrichs
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                                           Date: 17-Aug-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Ernest E. Massiah (PMGR)                                     Date: 17-Aug-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
