INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
0                                               Report No.: ISDSCI 1783
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:          Africa                     Project ID:   P154403
Project Name:     IGAD - Building Disaster Resilience to Disasters through Risk Management
and Climate Change Adaptation
Team Leader(s): Francis M. Muraya
Estimated Date    09-Mar-2015
of Approval:
Managing Unit:    GSURR                      Lending       Lending Instrument
Instrument:
Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%), Public administration-
Water, sanitation and flood protection (25%), General education sector (20%),
General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (35%)
Theme(s):         Natural disaster management (60%), Social Protection and Labor Policy &
Systems (10%), Other urban development (5%), Climate change (25%)
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:   4.5                  Total Bank Financing: 0
Financing Gap:        0
Financing Source                                                           Amount
Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery                             4.5
Environment       C - Not Required
Category:
B. Project Development Objective(s)
To strengthen the resilience of IGAD's sub-region, member countries Kenya, Uganda, Djibouti,
Ethiopia, Sudan, South Sudan and Somalia) and communities to the impacts of natural disasters,
including the potential impacts of climate change, in order to reduce poverty and promote sustainable
development.
C. Project Description
The Inter-Governmental Authority on Development (IGAD) is mandated to promote regional
cooperation, development and drought control of the 7 Member States (MS), covering a population
of around 250 million inhabitants. It has the mandate to lead the general political dialogue on food
security and environmental protection, peace and humanitarian affairs in those countries. At IGAD
the unit of Disaster Risk Management (2 officers including a UNISDR Technical Assistant) is
housed in the Peace and Security Division under the Humanitarian Affairs section.


﻿Over the years, the IGAD Secretariat with active participation and involvement of the member states,
relevant regional and international organizations and agencies elaborated a disaster management
strategy and compiled a comprehensive Disaster Risk Management Programme. The IGAD Council
of Ministers endorsed the Disaster Risk Management Programme for the IGAD Region in 2004 and
O
entrusted the Secretariat with its implementation. The Secretariat, therefore, has responded to these
challenges since 2004 by implementing the Regional Disaster Risk Management Programme (DRM).
IGAD Member States with the support from the Secretariat and partners have made encouraging
progress towards the implementation of the DRM programme by putting in place appropriate
policies, plans, institutional frameworks and capacities among other mechanisms. Despite such
progress there still remain many gaps and challenges impeding the realization of DRM. Experiences
have shown that past strategies and response mechanisms have never been adequate. In this regard,
there is need for a comprehensive policy on disaster risk management that is proactive, harmonises
policies and activities as well as opens initiatives for regional collaboration, take initiation in
integrating DRM and Climate Change adaptation measures and strengthen institutional capacities.
Expected results & proposed activities
The program is developed around eight components to be implemented in three phases, over a period
of 4 years. Expected results and proposed activities are the following:
1. IGAD DRM Strategy/Program is reviewed and framework/strategy to integrate DRM and CCA
developed and adapted by DRM and climate services institutions in the member states;
*      Engage expert(s) to review DRM program and develop framework to integrate DRM and
CCA.
*      Organize meetings to review drafted framework.
2. Policies, strategies and legal framework for DRM in member states reviewed and in place, and
fully operational; awareness and political commitment to DRM increased in the IGAD region and
legislative process considered in member states; framework policy/protocol for sharing information
on cross border hazards developed and endorsed by member states;
*      Support member states in formulating DRM policy, strategies.
* Establish regional and national DRM parliamentarians' forum.
*      Organize outside and within the region exposure visits to policy and parliament levels.
3. The IGAD Disaster Response Fund (IDRF) is strengthened and fully operational and capacity on
a       monitoring and disaster assessments strengthened;
*      Recruit technical assistant to assist in operationalizing the IDRF.
*      Organize meetings of DRM Technical Advisors.
*      Organize trainings and disaster assessments missions.
*      Involving the private sector in emergency response and strengthening the Fund.
*      Mobilization of resources for the Fund.
4. Framework/strategy to establish flood-hazard early warning systems at regional level and tested at
selected member states as well as demonstration of early warning and early action developed and
adopted;
*      Review existing policies on flood warning
*      Develop flood forecasting policy
*      Develop web-based post flood GIS and remote sensing assessment tools
*      Maintenance of the regional post flood assessment tools: consultancy services
*      Publication and translation
5. Institutional capacity of IGAD &DRM authorities in the member states to manage disaster risks
strengthened;


﻿*      Conducting Post Disaster Needs Assessment Trainings (PDNA).
*      Promoting Community Based DRM.
*      Conducting trainings on DRM for media, journalists and DRM technicians.
 *    Carryout vulnerability & risk assessment in hazard prone areas (using the IGAD hazard
O
U       maps).
6. Framework/strategy for mainstreaming DRM in school (education) curricula with potential
linkages to the safe school program developed and adopted by member states; and involvement of
the youth in the region in DRM is ensured;
Develop framework for mainstreaming DRM in school curricula.
Mainstreaming DRM in school curricula in selected member states.
*      Organize workshops, meetings.
*      Promote youth involvement in DRM.
7. Promotion of Climate Smart Agriculture in an integrated manner is enhanced and replicated in
some member states;
*      Technical expert to lead the promotion activity.
*      Organize technical workshops.
*      Sharing climate smart agricultural practices through exchange visits.
8. Strengthened implementation and coordination capacity at the IGAD Secretariat
Overall implementation arrangements
This program shall support IGAD Secretariat in its efforts to improve its institutional performance in
dealing with DRM and that of the MS. The IGAD Climate Predictions and Applications Centre
(ICPAC) is a specialized institution of IGAD where the DRM program is hosted and this particular
program is being implemented. ICPAC is an important IGAD institution with regard to analysis and
prediction of climate at regional level; it makes important contributions in addressing potential
climate related hazards in the IGAD region that cause disasters. ICPAC is one of the African
Regional Climate Centres qualified to benefit and obtain EU funds under the current 10th EDF
funding and implementation arrangements. IGAD Secretariat/ICPAC and particularly the DRM Unit
will play the coordination role during the implementation period. The Technical Advisory
Committee (TAC) is the mechanism established by the IGAD MS to provide technical guidance and
support to the DRM section, monitor the progress of DRM, and prioritize hazards to address in
member states and in the region. The same TAC members will play a crucial role during the project
o implementation period. The Executive of IGAD and the Directorate of ICPAC will provide overall
policy directives, supervision and the DRM Unit will be in charge of the overall day to day project
implementation.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project activities are technical assistance and training that will be delivered through workshops
and meetings at office environments. No physical investments or feasibillity studies will be financed
through this operation.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The borrower has implemented simiilar Bank-financed operations in a manner acceptable to the
World Bank, and complies with its member countries' safeguard policies.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


﻿II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies            Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/  No           It is expected that the proposed project would be
BP 4.01                                    an EA Category C project, as no physical works
or studies in preparation of such works will be
financed with the proceeds of the project. Thus
the policy is not triggered.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No           No physical interventions on natural habitats
will be financed with the proceeds of the
project. Thus the policy is not triggered.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No           No physical interventions on forests will be
financed with the proceeds of the project. Thus
the policy is not triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09       No           No physical interventions will be financed with
the proceeds of the project. Thus the policy is
not triggered.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  No        No physical interventions will be financed with
BP 4.11                                    the proceeds of the project. Thus the policy is
not triggered.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10  No          There are no indigenous peoples in the project
area. No field level implementation is foreseen.
Thus the policy is not triggered.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  No         No physical interventions will be financed with
4.12                                       the proceeds of the project. Thus the policy is
not triggered.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No            No physical interventions will be financed with
r                                                  the proceeds of the project. Thus the policy is
not triggered.
Projects on International     No           No physical interventions will be financed with
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       the proceeds of the project. Thus the policy is
not triggered.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No        No physical interventions will be financed with
7.60                                       the proceeds of the project. Thus the policy is
not triggered.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
IV. APPROVALS
Team Leader(s):      Name: Francis M. Muraya
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards  Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)             Date: 15-Apr-2015
Advisor:


﻿Practice Manager/          Name: Sameh Naguib Wahba (PMGR)                         Date: 15-Apr-2015
Manager:
U
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.
U


