INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC8904
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Apr-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Nigeria                    Project ID:   P146330
Project Name:   NG-Electricity Transmission Project (P146330)
Task Team       Erik Magnus Fernstrom,Rahul Kitchlu
Leader(s):
Estimated       30-Sep-2015                Estimated     30-Oct-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEEDR                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (80%), General energy sector
(20%)
Theme(s):       Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     350.00            Total Bank Financing:  350.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
Borrower                                                         0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development          350.00
0         Total                                                          350.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to improve the capacity and efficiency of the transmission
network and increase electricity services.
C. Project Description
A.     Concept


﻿The proposed Nigeria Electricity Transmission and Access Project (NETAP) would channel
concessional public financing to critical parts of the supply chain which are unlikely to be fully
financed from private sources. It complements private investments and investments from the FNG's
own resources. The proposed project would support transmission network investments as well as
O
access investments. As new generation investments are coming on line, transmission is increasingly
the critical link of the energy value chain and the potential limiting factor of investment underpinning
the success of the entire reform program. The proposed NETAP will also finance specific programs
to increase quantity, quality and access to the electricity network, particularly in the Northern areas
of the country where economic activities have long suffered from the lack of affordable energy
supply. Finally, the proposed NETAP will also provide targeted technical assistance and capacity
building support to the FGN agencies to support the implementation of the Project.
B.     Description of Project Components
Component 1: Transmission Network Improvement (IBRD US$650 million) component 1 would
finance selected investments highlighted in the TCN Investment Plan, as follows:
Sub-Component 1(a): Transmission Network Rehabilitation (IBRD US$200 million). This
subcomponent would finance a subset of refurbishment and replacement sub-projects included in
Package 1 of the TCN Investment Plan. These investments are needed for refurbishing existing
facilities, to restore the network to its rated capacity, and to reduce high ATC&C losses associated
with the transmission network.
Sub-Component 1(b): Transmission Network Expansion Investments (IBRD US$200 million). Sub-
Component 1(b) would finance a subset of new capacity expansion sub-projects identified under
Package 2 of the Investment Plan. Package 2 of the TCN Investment Plan outlines investments
needed for new transmission and sub-transmission lines, sub-stations, as well as associated
equipment and costs of implementation, such as: retaining owner's engineers, in order to expand the
grid capacity to 10,000 MW. IBRD support would finance investments grouped by geographic
locations to reduce interdependence and increase efficiency in implementation. Target zones may
include North-West zone including the Kaduna-Kano Axis and the South-West zone including the
Lagos network. Support would be geared towards underpinning key potential 'growth poles' in the
country to spur access enhancement as well as growth of commerce, job creation, and shared
a      prosperity. The exact geographic locations to be financed by IBRD support have not yet been
determined.
Sub-Component 1(c): Transmission Network Expansion Partnerships (IBRD US$200 million). Sub-
Component 1(c) would support a subset of new capacity expansion sub-projects identified under
Package 2 of the Investment Plan. The project team, in cooperation with IFC and MIGA, will carry
out an assessment during project preparation to identify the optimal use of WBG instruments to
finance these greenfield transmission sub-projects. The assessment will review the possibility of
various public private partnership (PPP) arrangements, including build, own, operate, and transfer
(BOOT) type arrangements to leverage the use of public funds. Financing supplied under Sub-
Component 1(c) could be used as TCN's equity or debt participation in such arrangement or used to
provide guarantees to assist with securitization of private capital mobilization.
Sub-Component 1(d): Efficient Network Management (IBRD US$50 million). Complementary to the
TSP investments under Sub-Components 1(a), 1(b), and 1(c), Sub-Component 1(d) would support
improvements to efficient management of the increased national grid infrastructure. Support would


﻿be provided for a subset of investments identified in the TCN Investment Plan for the SO and the
MO, such as: integrated operation of the power system, restoration and expansion of the SCADA
system, and telecommunication equipment.
O
U       Component 2: Capacity Building and Technical Assistance (IDA US$50 million): This Component
will support much needed capacity building and technical assistance activities at key sector
institutions and other relevant stakeholders in order to ensure that the implementation of reform
program is successfully carried out. The support provided under this Component will not only assist
in implementation of the investments identified under NETAP, but will benefit the sector as a whole
with the overall goal of scaling-up energy access in Nigeria. Capacity building and TA activities will
be identified during project preparation to be complimentary to ongoing support from other donors.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project is national in scope. The NETAP Project will finance both 'brownfield' transmission
network rehabilitation sub-projects as well as new 'greenfield' transmission network capacity and
efficiency enhancement sub-projects. In addition, the proposed NETAP will also finance specific
programs to increase access to the electricity network as well as diversification of the generation mix
(solar IPP development. The locations of the electric distribution and transmission rehabilitation
investments are given in the description of Component 2 above. The exact routing of greenfield
transmission network lines is not known at this time.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Borrower, Nigeria has adequate institutional and legal framework that would ensure satisfactory
compliance with World Bank safeguard Policies. In particular the Bank's involvement in the energy
sector has been significant, including the Nigeria Electricity and Generation Improvement Project
(NEGIP) and Additional Financing, Power Sector Guarantees Project (PSGP) that includes the entire
WBG. The safeguard performances of the projects have been satisfactory as the client has shown
sufficient capacity and goodwill in implementing these above referenced projects.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Amos Abu (GENDR)
O
Paula F. Lytle (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 is triggered
OP/BP 4.01                              as the NETAP Project will finance a range of
activities that could result in adverse environmental
and social impacts. These activities include both
'brownfield' transmission network rehabilitation sub-
projects as well as new 'greenfield' transmission
network capacity and efficiency enhancement sub-
projects. In addition, the proposed NETAP will
finance specific programs that will also include
needed refurbishing and replacement of existing
facilities. In particular, the refurbishing of existing
stations may lead to hazardous wastes generation that


﻿needs to be properly managed. An ESMF will be
prepared, consulted upon and disclosed before
appraisal. ESIAs for specific subprojects may also be
prepared, consulted upon and disclosed before
appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes         The project is not expected to impact natural
habitats. However, some of the proposed activities
that would be funded by the project such as
transmission lines might pass through natural
habitats, thus triggering World Bank's OP/BP 4.04.
To mitigate the potentially significant adverse
environmental and social impacts to acceptable level,
the Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) will have dedicated sections and
annexures on protection of natural habitats including
procedures and processes for creating biodiversity
offsets as might be required.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          Yes         The project is not expected to have substantial
impacts on forests in Nigeria. However, some of the
proposed activities that would be funded by the
project such as transmission lines might pass through
forests thus triggering World Bank's OP/BP 4.36.
Measures to mitigate the potentially significant
adverse environmental and social impacts will be
included in the ESMF. This will be followed by the
preparation of site specific Environmental and Social
Impact Assessment (ESIA) and an Environmental
and Social Management Plan (ESMP) with dedicated
sections and annexures on protection of forests
including the creation of biodiversity offsets as might
be required.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No          This project will not finance the procurement and/or
a                                               use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes         Some of the project activities would involve
OP/BP 4.11                               excavation and social and cultural artifact could be
impacted. For this reason, the ESMF and subsequent
site specific ESIAs and ESMPs will have a section
dedicated to chance find procedures.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No          There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area..
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes       NETAP will finance Transmission Network
BP 4.12                                 Expansion and new transmission and sub-
transmission lines as well as sub-stations. The
location of transmission sub-stations and the
transmission lines would involve land acquisition.
There are no unprecedented or substantial


﻿involuntary resettlement of people is envisaged at
this point. The exact routing of the transmission lines
is not known at this time. The proponent will prepare
a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) depicting
the processes and procedures that would be followed
in preparing Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) when
the specific locations of the proposed project
locations are known. The RPF will be prepared,
consulted upon and disclosed prior to appraisa.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No            The implementation of the project will not entail the
construction of new dam neither will any of the
project activities rely on the performance of an
existing dam or a dam under construction (DUC) that
draw directly from a reservoir controlled by an
existing dam or a DUC; diversion dams or hydraulic
structures downstream from an existing dam or a
DUC where failure of the upstream dam could cause
extensive damage to or failure of the new Bank-
funded structure.
Projects on International     No           This project will not involve extraction of water from
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       any international waterways (any river, canal, lake or
similar body of water that forms a boundary between
or any river or body of surface water that flows
through two or more states, whether Bank members
or not). In addition, the SCPZ will not impact any
tributary or other body of surface water that is a
component of any waterway described above.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No          The project will not be located in disputed areas as
BP 7.60                                    defined by OP/BP 7.60.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 26-Feb-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The framework approach will be applied in this project as the scope and exact locations of all
project activities, including the routing of new transmission lines and ancillary sub-stations are not
known enough at this time. Accordingly, an Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared and disclosed prior to
appraisal, depicting the procedures and process that would be followed in preparing site specific
safeguard instruments (RAPs and ESIAs and/or ESMPs) as soon as the exact locations and scope
of sub-project activities are known. However, for any activities whose locations are known prior to
appraisal, site specific ESIAs, ESMPs and RAPs will be prepared as appropriate and disclosed
prior to appraisal.
The framework documents of Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared by June 2015. Subsequently site specific
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿safeguards instrument such as ESIAs, Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for project defined in advance of appraisal will prepared prior
to appraisal. All the above referenced documents (ESMF, RPF, ESIAs, ESMPs, RAPs) will be
disclosed prior to Appraisal and 120 days in advance of the date for Board approval.
8 IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Erik Magnus Fernstrom,Rahul Kitchlu
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards   Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)            Date: 22-Apr-2015
Advisor:
Practice Manager/     Name: Meike van Ginneken (PMGR)              Date: 27-Apr-2015
Manager:


