INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC13375
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-May-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Zambia                     Project ID:   P154683
Project Name:   Zambia - Mining and Environmental Remediation and Improvement Project
(P154683)
Task Team       Sanjay Srivastava
Leader(s):
Estimated        19-Feb-2016               Estimated     27-May-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GENDR                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Health (30%), Other Mining and Extractive Industries (50%), Solid waste
management (10%), Law and justice (10%)
Theme(s):       Pollution management and environmental health (60%), Environmental policies
and institutions (20%), Regulation and competition polic y (10%), Participation
and civic engagement (10%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      60.00            Total Bank Financing:   50.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              10.00
International Development Association (IDA)                     50.00
Total                                                           60.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The PDO is to reduce environmental health risks to the local population associated with the mining
sector in critically polluted areas in Kabwe and Copperbelt provinces through improved capacity of
the key institutions.


﻿These objectives will be achieved by:
1)     Optimizing existing financial mechanisms to identify, finance, implement and monitor
O
U       feasible environmental and social measures for prioritized contaminated areas;
2)     Strengthening environmental management in the mining sector through improved regulatory
and institutional capacity of ZEMA, MSD, RPA and the local government; and
3)     Improving job opportunities for affected people, particularly women, through collaborative
partnership with local government and neighboring communities.
C. Project Description
The project will comprise four components:
Component 1 - Remediation of contaminated sites (US$40 million): The component will finance
specific remediation activities in Kabwe and Kitwe areas that would be prioritized based on a
standard set of criteria (social, environment and economic) including assessment of environmental
health risks. A number of potential projects have been identified by GRZ, for which ZCCM-IH
completed detailed scoping studies and early drafts of environmental assessments; such projects
financed as first year investments. This component will also update existing approved Consolidated
Environmental Management Plans (CEMPs) for eligible sites to support identification of priority
issues based on the established criteria of environmental health and risks to affected population. This
component intends to undertake early no-regret investments which can commence in first 2 years of
project implementation, in parallel with developing a long time plan for setting up the appropriate
implementation systems. A simple and straightforward methodology will be supported under the
project for evaluating and comparing sites, assessing environmental health risks and for prioritizing
cost-effective interventions. Opportunities to collaborate with the private mining companies in legacy
clean-up operations will be explored.
Component 2 - Strengthening environmental governance in the mining sector and improving
environmental infrastructure through improved effectiveness of National Environmental Protection
Fund (EPF) and Intermediate Environmental Fund (IEF) (US$10 million). The component will
strengthen operational effectiveness of the existing EPF and IEF, which are mechanisms to identify,
finance, implement and monitor feasible environmental and social measures for prioritized
contaminated hotspots related to past, present and future mining operations. It will be done by
helping EPF to delineate roles and accountability for past, current and future environmental health
risks from mining operations; accounting for financial resources needed to meet government's
obligation to address environmental health risks and liabilities; and clarify the distinction between
government-owned liability versus private sector responsibility to regularly and progressively
address environmental problems by financing the costs of their mitigation. For IEF funding, the
highest priority will be given to measures that address widespread public health problems or damage
to ecological functions, including specific medical and nutritional interventions for the purposes of
treatment of affected people.
The capacity of Mine Safety Department (MSD) would be strengthened particularly to enable the
Department to implement the new Mines and Minerals Development Act that has shifted new
responsibilities to MSD including assessment of environment health risks; providing guidance to
mining companies on mine closure and progressive maintenance of Tailing Dams (TD) so as to
minimize risks to the neighboring communities. The specific assistance may include - strengthening
the capacity of MSD and ZEMA to critically review the Environmental Management Plans as well as


﻿techno-economic feasibility of mining projects; and assist the Ministry of Mines to improve
negotiation with mining companies with respect to environmental and social provisions contained in
subsidiary agreements to the development agreements. The Radiation Protection Agency (RPA)
would be assisted to improve identification and mapping of health risks in residential areas where
O
exposure to radioactive material (i.e. Uranium) may be high. This component will also assist the key
institutions, such as such as Ministry of Environment, Ministry of Mines, Ministry of Health, Civic
Authority and Local Government, to develop testing and monitoring of environmental quality (air,
water, soil quality) and health screening (for lead and copper) in and around known hotspots. The
capacity building will include use of modern information tools and GIS based techniques for
effective inspection and compliance management.
The city councils would be supported in identifying areas where environmental health risks to
residents relate to lack of environmental services, such as solid waste management; access to clean
drinking water; lack of medical interventions for children and women exposed to lead contamination;
and disposal of hazardous waste material. The outreach and capacity of citizen monitoring at the
local level as well as management of public Information, Education and Communication (IEC)
would be strengthened through municipal councils in Central and Copperbelt provinces. This will
include strengthening the capacity of ZEMA, Health department and the delegated authorizing
agencies such as MSD and RPA, to review ESIAs, negotiate (and, when necessary, update) ESMPs
with investors and ZCCM-IH, issue pollution permits, monitor compliance, and collect fees and
fines. The project will also strengthen relevant training institutions, such as the Copperbelt and
Mulungushi Universities, and Kabwe based community-level NGOs to increase national capacity to
address environmental (and social) issues associated with the mining sector.
Component 3: Grassroots Initiative Program (US$6 million). The component is aimed to introduce
income generation opportunities in contaminated areas that would enhance community involvement
in addressing environmental health risks. The Grassroots Initiatives Program (GIP) will use a pre-
agreed set of selection criteria to identify and implement sub-projects, working closely with the
private sector, particularly the mining companies in the project area to identify locally relevant
livelihood activities that would enhance income generation opportunities. The GIP will support the
efforts of intermediaries and pollution affected people in Kabwe and Copperbelt Province in
community-based project implementation and management by providing financial and supervisory
support to enhance their managerial and technical capacities. Specific attention will be given to
a      women and vulnerable community groups in the target areas. The GIP will provide support to
community groups in a form of small grants to organize themselves around productive activities
identified in partnership with the private sector in the area, the nature of which will be determined by
the beneficiaries based on their demand. Given the nature of the Program mandate, all activities will
be relatively small, technically simple, and cost effective. Collaboration with the private sector on
outreach, consultations and community stakeholder engagement will also be explored
Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$4 million): The project is
expected to be coordinated by three key Ministries - Mining; Environment and Finance. The project
will be implemented through the unified Project Coordination Unit (PCU) to be established in
Ministry of Mines. The PCU will work under a Project Steering Committee (P SC) that would be
responsible for reviewing; appraising and approving proposals for financing subprojects in Kabwe
and Copperbelt provinces. The PSC will be chaired by the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Mines,
while Environment; Finance and Mining Ministries will be represented in the Steering Committee.


﻿D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The proposed project will be implemented in Kabwe, Central Province and in selected municipalities
of Copperbelt Province.
Based on the preliminary screening and lessons learned from the Bank supported Copperbelt
Environment Project, the proposed project is anticipated to have high environmental and social risks,
with some large scale and irreversible impacts and therefore it is proposed that the project be
assigned Environmental Assessment Category A.
As majority of the project activities will be identified during implementation, the project will take a
framework approach to safeguards management and prepare a comprehensive Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF) that would provide procedures for site specific
Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and Environmental and Social Management
Plans (ESMPs). During project preparation it will be determined if OP 4.04 - Natural Habitats and
OP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources are triggered, and based on this decision, the ESMF will
include relevant provisions and mitigation measures.
To address potential risks related to involuntary resettlement and compensation under OP 4.12, it is
proposed that a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) is developed prior to project appraisal to
account for any possibility of temporary or permanent relocation during investment works and small-
scale land acquisition.
For those investments that will be undertaken in year one, which will have their designs finalized
during preparation, site-specific ESIAs and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be prepared,
consulted and disclosed before project appraisal. The RAPs and all relevant compensation will be
completed before beginning of civil works on the project sites.Additionally, the project will conduct
a Social Assessment, which will include a comprehensive gender analysis, to identify livelihood
enhancement opportunities and support the community based jobs initiatives.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The target implementing agencies, including the Ministry of Mines, Ministry of Environment and
Ministry of Local Government are familiar with the World Bank safeguards policies, based on their
experience of implementing other World Bank supported projects, including Copperbelt
Environment Project closed in 2011. The proposed project will utilize the safeguards capacity
developed under CEP, including the involvement of environmental and social experts who
previously worked on the CEP project (MISENGE Consulting Company based in Kitwe). In
addition, MERIP will further enhance capacity for safeguards implementation as part of its capacity
building and technical assistance interventions.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Knut Opsal (GSURR)
Svetlana Khvostova (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         Kabwe displays significant effects on health due to
OP/BP 4.01                              lead contamination, primarily in soil and possibly


﻿food. In Copperbelt primary risks include exposure
to sulphur dioxide and particulate emissions in the
towns of Mufulira, Kitwe and Chambishi. Sulphur
dioxide emissions from Mufulira, Nkana, Chambishi
and Luanshya smelters. Lack of management of
contaminated sites leads to stream siltation, leading
to pollution of Kafue river basin. The screening
identified increases in deforestation, vandalism of
mine sites and mine site accidents, with decline in
mine security and localized accidents from
residential access of mine sites. Increased levels of
solid waste being disposed within neighborhoods
causing increased air pollution from burning waste
and breeding grounds for vector diseases.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  TBD          Application of the Natural Habitats policy will be
determined during project preparation.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           No
Pest Management OP 4.09      No
Physical Cultural Resources  TBD          Application of the Physical Cultural Resources
OP/BP 4.11                                policy will be determined during project preparation.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         The policy is triggered due to possible resettlement
BP 4.12                                   of people currently in potentially unsafe areas near or
at the mining sites.
Loss of income generating opportunities based on
using the sites (scavenging or fishing) versus
remedial measures to ensure long-term stability of
these sites and to protect users from potential
hazards. The types of losses could include: loss of
income generating opportunities based on using the
sites (scavenging or fishing) versus remedial
measures to ensure long-term stability of these sites
and to protect users from potential hazards. Some of
the potential resettlement will be temporary whilst
other types may be permanent. The project will also
develop a Social Assessment to identify livelihood
enhancement opportunities and support the
community based jobs initiatives.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No


﻿Projects on International     No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 22-Jan-2016
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The ESMF, RPF and site specific ESIA and/or RAP for year one investments will be prepared,
consulted upon and disclosed in the Bank Infoshop and in Zambia before project appraisal.
Tentative time for completion of safeguards studies is January 2016.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Sanjay Srivastava
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                    Date: 01-Jun-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Magda Lovei (PMGR)                          Date: 06-Jun-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


