                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                                        Report No.:ISDSA21738
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated:                 27-Mar-2017
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed               26-Feb-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                         Western Africa               Project ID:             P147921
    Project Name:                    OMVS - TRANSMISSION EXPANSION PROJECT (P147921)
    Task Team Leader(s):             Pedro E. Sanchez,Pedro E. Sanchez,Thierno Bah,Thierno Bah
    Estimated Appraisal              22-Feb-2017                  Estimated Board         12-May-2017
    Date:                                                         Date:
    Managing Unit:                   GEE07                        Financing               Investment Project
                                                                  Instrument:             Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency                  Recovery) or OP           No
    8.00(Rapid Response to Crises and         Emergencies)?
                                               Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           103.00                       Total Bank Financing: 97.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                       Amount
    BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                          6.00
    International Development Association (IDA)                                                                97.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                               0.00
    Total                                                                                                     103.00
    Environmental Category:          B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?      No

    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The project development objective is to enhance electricity trade among Mali, Mauritania, and Senegal.
    3. Project Description
    the proposed project will finance the construction of a new transmission line and associated substations to
    reinforce and extend the RIMA, the backbone of the OMVS regional power grid. The line will interconnect the
    exiting substation Kayes in Mali to the Tambacounda Substation in Senegal that is part of the expanded WAPP
    system. This line will provide additional capacity required to transmit the additional production in new power
    stations in Mali and Mauritania, creating redundancy in the system to ensure the availability of supply through
    the WAPP system in the event of reduced production in the RIMA system through connection to the OMVG
    network. In addition, the project will finance the implementation of a Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition


                                                    Page 1 of 8
(SCADA) system, and technical assistance for project implementation.

Component 1: RIMA Reinforcement and Expansion (US$91 million, of which IDA US$84 million equivalent).
This component is comprised of the following subcomponents:

• Subcomponent 1.1: Kayes-Tambacounda Transmission Line (US$79 million, of which IDA US$79 million
equivalent). The IDA credit will finance the construction of a new 288 km long 225 kV double-circuit
transmission line from Kayes (Mali) to Tambacounda (Senegal), with an estimated wheeling capacity of 400
MW. The line earth system will be equipped with a fiber optic cable (24 pairs) and the equipment required to
provide electricity access to villages along the route of the line. In order to connect the line to the system, the
IDA credit will also finance two 225 KV bays, one at the existing substation at Kayes and one at the future
substation at Tambacounda. The latter substation in under construction under the Bank co-financed OMVG
Interconnection Project (P146830).

• Subcomponent 1.2: SCADA System (US$12 million, of which IDA US$5 million equivalent and SOGEM
US$7 million). The IDA credit will partially finance the implementation of a SCADA system for joint operation
and coordination between the three OMVS national power utilities EDM, SENELEC, SOMELEC, and the
OMVS Power System Operator by: (i) upgrading communication and data acquisition facilities to enable real-
time information exchange with the load dispatching center at Manantali and the three national power utilities;
and (ii) acquiring the necessary software licenses with relevant training to support optimization and scheduling
of the combined hydro and thermal power generation capacity of the recipients. Currently, the dispatch is being
done manually by the OMVS Power System Operator within SEMAF (the Manantali and Felou Management
Company, subsidiary of SOGEM).

Component 2: Technical Assistance (US$8 million, of which IDA US$8 million equivalent). The project will
finance the contract of a consulting firm that will assist SOGEM in implementing the project, including
assistance in the procurement process and undertaking the supervision of the works included under
Subcomponent 1.1. In addition, this component will finance the implementation of the Environmental and
Social Management Plan.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics                  relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
Landscapes affected between Kayes and Tambacounda and between Manantali and Kati near Bamako are
composed mainly of scarce woody savannah. The identification of the right-of-way included criteria such as
avoidance of protected areas and human settlements, etc. However, 4 protected forest areas in Senegal near
Tambacounda could not be avoided. Forest losses will be compensated to achieve a zero net biodiversity loss
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the                      Team
 Robert A. Robelus( GEN05 )
 Salamata Bal( GSU01 )
6. Safeguard Policies That Might Apply
Safeguard Policies                              Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01             Yes              3. The project is categorized as environmental
                                                                 assessment Category B under the Environmental
                                                                 Assessment policy (OP/BP 4.01). An
                                                                 Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                                                                 (ESIA) has been prepared covering all project
                                                                 components, which has been consulted on and has


                                                   Page 2 of 8
                                             beeen disclosed in-country at the various project
                                             sites and on the Bank’s Website prior to appraisal.
                                             Though the right-of-way of the new transmission
                                             lines are not yet completely delineated, the
                                             landscapes they will cross do not host any sensitive
                                             biophysical features or geographies which deem to
                                             be of particular attention, with the exception of the
                                             passage of the line through 4 protected forest areas
                                             near Tambacounda in Senegal. For this reason, the
                                             Natural Habitats and Forest Policies are triggered.
                                             The lost forest area will be compensated so that
                                             there is zero net loss of biodiversity. Also, lessons
                                             learned from recent transmission line projects in
                                             similar socio-ecological contexts (Mali, Burkina
                                             Faso, Senegal) suggest that the biophysical impacts
                                             may be less significant than initially assessed as
                                             part of the environment analysis. The
                                             environmental impacts of the construction and
                                             operation of the transmission lines is low. Special
                                             care needs to be given to the Health & Safety
                                             aspects during construction. There is no risk of
                                             labor influx and no work camps will be used, since
                                             the construction sites will move fast from site to
                                             site. The main environmental, social, health and
                                             safety risks will occur during construction of the
                                             line. The World Bank Group General
                                             Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines of
                                             April 2007 apply, as well the Electric Power
                                             Transmission and Distribution EHS Guidelines.
                                             SOGEM will establish a Grievance Mechanism for
                                             communities and Contractor employees. Employees
                                             need to sign a Code of Conduct, which will prohibit
                                             misconduct of Contractor employees and which
                                             prohibit employees among others to have sex with
                                             minors (<18 years).
                                             The Contractor will prepare his own Construction
                                             Environmental and Social Management Plan
                                             (CESMP) and a Health and Safety Plan. For this
                                             purpose, the Contractor will employ staff with
                                             international experience to prepare and implement
                                             these plans. The Owner’s Engineer will have the
                                             contractual obligation to supervise the adequate
                                             implementation of the CESMP and H&S Plan and
                                             employs for this purpose internationally
                                             experienced staff.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes            The project passes through 4 protected forest areas
                                             in Senegal, near Tambacounda. These forests are
                                             not critical natural habitats, but natural habitats, this
                                             triggers OP 4.04.


                               Page 3 of 8
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       Yes            The project passes through 4 protected forest areas,
                                                        which was unavoidable. The forest losses will be
                                                        compensated that so that the net result will be a
                                                        zero biodiversity loss.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No             The OP 4.09 is not triggered as the project will not
                                                        use pesticides for the maintenance of the right-of-
                                                        way. The current practices for maintenance of the
                                                        right of way of the transmission line and facilities
                                                        have been reviewed for each country with respect to
                                                        the use of pesticides, and the use of pesticides is not
                                                        practiced.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes            The project site is not located in a known
                                                        archaeological or sacred areas. But, even though
                                                        there will be no important civil works that would
                                                        require the exploitation of new and/or large borrow
                                                        pits, the policy is triggered to prevent any
                                                        accidental loss and damage during construction. A
                                                        comprehensive chance find procedure will be
                                                        included in all Contractor contracts. This
                                                        requirement is part of the ESMP.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No             Communities in the project area in the project
                                                        countries, both within and along the transmission
                                                        lines corridors, do not fall under the definition of
                                                        indigenous people as stated under OP 4.10
                                                        (paragraph 4 in defining indigenous peoples).
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes            The precise locations of the tower spots and
                                                        alignment of the transmission lines are not yet
                                                        determined, but land acquisition will be required for
                                                        clearance of the right-of-ways. Therefore, a
                                                        Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been
                                                        prepared and disclosed in-country and on the
                                                        Bank’s Website before appraisal as required by OP
                                                        4.12. The RPF includes a comprehensive
                                                        consultation process. Once, when precise details of
                                                        transmission line locations (alignment, locations for
                                                        pylons, substations and other structures) are
                                                        identified in the course of project preparation, a
                                                        Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared,
                                                        disclosed and implemented. A socio economic
                                                        study accompanied by a census of project affected
                                                        people (PAPs) and assets will be carried out and
                                                        will identify all adverse impacts associated with
                                                        physical or economic loss and prepare
                                                        compensation packages in compliance with OP
                                                        4.12.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                No             The safety of dam policy is not triggered. The
                                                        project is only financing construction of the
                                                        transmission line infrastructure as well as some

                                          Page 4 of 8
                                                                   communication and data acquisition facilities and
                                                                   software. None of these activities will involve the
                                                                   use or pollution of international waterways.
    Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No                   The Safeguard Policy of Projects on International
    7.50                                                           Waterways is not triggered. The project is only
                                                                   financing construction of the transmission line
                                                                   infrastructure as well as some communication and
                                                                   data acquisition facilities and software. None of
                                                                   these activities will involve the use or potential
                                                                   pollution of international waterways.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No              None of the project components will be located in a
                                                                   disputed area.
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
    any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    Though the right-of-ways of the new transmission line is not yet delineated, the landscapes they will cross do
    not host any sensitive biophysical or geographic features, which deem to be of particular attention, with the
    exception of the 4 protected forest areas in Senegal near Tambacounda. Also, lessons learned from recent
    transmission line projects in similar socio-ecological contexts (Mali, Burkina, Senegal) suggest that negative
    biophysical impacts appeared less significant than feared initially during environment analysis. As a result, the
    project is proposed to be category B.

    An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment study (ESIA) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
    have been prepared to provide a transparent and standard process for the identification and screening of
    environmental and social impacts associated with the transmission line and elaborate mitigation measures to
    manage these impacts.

    The RPF for the project specifies the principles and procedures to be followed in case land acquisition, physical
    involuntary relocation of project affected people (PAPs), loss of assets or access to assets is needed. The ESIA
    and the RPF have been publicly disclosed prior to appraisal in the 3 countries (Mali, Mauritania and Senegal)
    and on the Bank’s Website.
    2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
    project area:
    There are no serious potential indirect or long term impacts caused by the project.
    3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
    The selection of the right-of-way included criteria to avoid sensitive habitat and avoid villages. It was not
    possible to avoid the 4 protected forest areas near Tambacounda. The lost forest area will be compensated so
    that the net result will a zero loss of biodiversity.
    4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
    borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
    The OMVS in Dakar has a Sustainable Development Direction and Social Safeguard Unit, staffed with two
    skillful and experienced personnel, and fairly equipped for the preparation and/ implementation of safeguard
    instruments including those required under the Bank policies. For instance, they have prepared and


                                                     Page 5 of 8
   implemented, in acceptable manner, environmental and social management framework, resettlement policy
   framework, environmental and social impact assessment, resettlement action plan, pest and pesticides
   management plan and environmental audit of several projects funded by the Bank (Felou Hydropower, MWRD1
   and the ongoing MWRD2) and the GEF supported Senegal River Basin Water and Environmental Management
   project. Therefore, the capacity of the Sustainable Development Unit of the OMVS in Dakar has been
   strengthened under these operations. However, this Unit has no capacity to carry out the day to day supervision
   of construction activities. This role should be the responsibility of the Owner’s Engineer.

   In contrast, the capacity of member countries environmental agencies that have the responsibility to oversee the
   implementation of the ESMPs and RAPs is weak. The Project Implementing Entity (SOGEM) will establish an
   Environmental, Social, Health and Safety Unit (ESHSU) composed of qualified experts including the
   Coordinator of the unit (C-ESHSU), the environmental, health and safety specialist (EHS-S) and the social and
   resettlement specialist (SR-S). This team will have the overall responsibility for the environmental, social,
   health and safety aspects during construction and operation. A highly qualified consultant with international
   experience will be recruited to provide support to the SOGEM team. The Bank has approved the Terms of
   Reference for this specialist. In case of a serious accident the Bank needs to be notified within 24 hours

   The RPF and ESIA/ESMP detail the potential risks of adverse environmental, social, health and safety impacts
   associated with the transmission line that will be supported by the project. They provide detailed arrangements
   and modalities to ensure an in-depth screening of activities and mitigation measures.
   5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
   safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
   Stakeholders include those from Local and Central Government in Mali, and Senegal, including Line Ministries
   associated with the project, OMVS National Cells, Civil Society Organization, PAPs, communities, etc.

   As part of the preparation of the safeguard policy instruments (ESIA and RPF) public consultations were carried
   out in the different project areas in compliance with national and World Bank safeguard policies. Preparation of
   the safeguard instruments involved consultation with the relevant stakeholder groups in the public, civil society,
   agriculture groups and affected communities in Tambacounda (Senegal) and Kayes (Mali). A validation
   workshop to discuss the 2 safeguards studies has been organized in Bamako.
   .




B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                             17-Dec-2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                                          30-Jan-2017
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




   Mali                                                                           30-Jan-2017
   Comments:
PHENVCTRY




   Senegal                                                                        30-Jan-2017
   Comments:
   Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
   Date of receipt by the Bank                                          10-Jan-2017
   Date of submission to InfoShop                                       30-Jan-2017
   "In country" Disclosure
PHRESCTRY




   Mali                                                                            30-Jan-2017

                                                    Page 6 of 8
 Comments:
PHRESCTRY




 Senegal                                                                    30-Jan-2017
 Comments:
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [X]   No []       NA          []
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [X]   No []       NA          []
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP                Yes [X]   No []       NA          []
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes []    No [X]      NA          []
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes []    No []       NA          [X]
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
 project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [X]   No []       NA          []
 property?
 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [X]   No []       NA          []
 potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                  Yes [X]   No []       NA          []
 framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
 prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards    Yes [X]   No []       NA          []
 or Practice Manager review the plan?
 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                    Yes []    No []       TBD         [X]
 Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access     Yes []    No []       TBD         [X]
 to assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means
 of livelihoods)
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
 Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional         Yes [X]   No []       NA          []
 issues and constraints been carried out?
 Does the project design include satisfactory measures to         Yes [X]   No []       NA          []
 overcome these constraints?
 Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,       Yes []    No [X]      NA          []
 does it include provisions for certification system?
PHCompliance




 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [X]   No []       NA          []
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a           Yes [X]   No []       NA          []

                                                 Page 7 of 8
          public place in a form and language that are understandable
          and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




          All Safeguard Policies
          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional    Yes [X]     No []       NA         []
          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
          measures related to safeguard policies?
          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been          Yes [X]     No []       NA         []
          included in the project cost?
          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes []      No []       NA         [X]
          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
          related to safeguard policies?
          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [X]     No []       NA         []
          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
          the project legal documents?


         III. Approval
         Task Team Leader(s):                  Name:Pedro E. Sanchez,Pedro E. Sanchez,Thierno Bah,Thierno Bah
         Approved By:
         Safeguards Advisor:                   Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)         Date: 20-Apr-2017
         Practice Manager/Manager:             Name: Manuel Luengo (PMGR)         Date: 10-May-2017




                                                         Page 8 of 8
