INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC 1103
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Dec-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Central Asia               Project ID:   P152346
Project Name:    Central Asia Water Resources Management (CA-WARM) Phase-I Project
(P152346)
Task Team        Nagaraja Rao Harshadeep,Daryl Fields
Leader(s):
Estimated        06-Sep-2016                Estimated      13-Dec-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWA03                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Irrigation and drainage (10%), Public administration- Water, sanitation and
flood protection (10%), Hydropower (10%), General water, sanitation and flood
protection sector (70%)
Theme(s):        Water resource management (85%), Climate change (15%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      90.00             Total Bank Financing:    75.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                5.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development            15.00
International Development Association (IDA)                      50.00
IDA Grant                                                        10.00
Global Environment Facility - Cofinancing Trust Funds            10.00
Total                                                            90.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The proposed Project Development Objective of the Phase-I CA-WaRM project is to increase


﻿accessibility, reliability and analytical capacity to use water resources information for improved
water resources planning, monitoring, and management in selected Central Asia water institutions.
C. Project Description
This support is expected to be packaged in the form of a regional project set in a programmatic
framework as a Series of Projects, combining credit, grant and other World Bank funds at regional
and country levels. The exact financing will evolve based on discussions with the national and
regional institutions of Central Asia, Bank management, and other potential financiers.
o       The proposed project is expected to improve the technical capacity and knowledge platform for water
resources management in Central Asia. Initial areas of focus for the proposed project at regional and
national levels could include:
*      Information: Support to improve water resources monitoring, use of available satellite
products, data management, analysis, forecasting, decision support systems and other modeling tools
to improve water resources planning and operations, access, knowledge products, portals/apps and
other services.
*      Institutions: Modernizing institutions and standards with appropriate policies, training,
capacity-building, internship programs, and professional networking at national and regional levels
to take advantage of new technologies and approaches and strengthening institutional effectiveness
for both national and transboundary levels
* Investments: Improve investments in modern hydro-meteorological and water systems
monitoring and modernizing the institutional infrastructure to access, use, and train staff on these
systems and protocols for extreme events
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
This regional project focuses on the Central Asia Region which includes two IDA-only recipients
(Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan), one blend lower middle-income country (Uzbekistan) and two
upper middle-income countries (Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan), representing a total population of
64.5 million. The region suffers from being geographically isolated with all five republics
landlocked, but is also located at the crossroads of the large economic areas of Europe/Russia, China,
South Asia, and the Middle East. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the cooperation across
the countries of the Central Asia region has waned and has impacted their relationship in a number of
areas including water resources, energy, trade, tourism, etc. The region faces several challenges in
terms of optimizing the development and use of its water resources and being better prepared to face
climate risks.
The project is expected to have minimal impact from a safeguards perspective given that it focuses
on modernizing the knowledge and institutional platform for water resources planning and
management.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The safeguard capacities of the client organizations at regional and national levels will be assessed
during early preparation and appropriate capacity building measures introduced. The types of
physical investments (e.g. monitoring equipment, building refurbishment) being proposed should not
pose a major challenge from a safeguards perspective as it is expected that many issues will also be
addressed in the bid documents for the contractors. Most of the national-level organizations have
recent or ongoing experience implementing Bank-financed projects, but regional-level organizations
will require support for technical, monitoring, and reporting aspects related to safeguards.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


﻿Ekaterina Romanova (GSURR)
John Bryant Collier (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment  Yes         The project is rated Category B because of the nature
OP/BP 4.01                              of its foreseen civil works, which are likely to have a
low impact on the biophysical environment. An
overall Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) for the regional activities and
five individual ESMFs for the five participating
countries will be prepared in order to better reflect
differences in national laws and institutional
structures for implementation. The ESMFs will be
disclosed prior to appraisal as follows - the common
ESMF Template will be disclosed in Russian and
translated along with a brief summary of the aspects
which differ in the five country specific ESMFs,
while the five country-specific ESMF's will be
attached in original Russian but not translated.
These ESMFs will include specific guidance for the
proposed civil works that are expected to comprise
the construction/rehabilitation of buildings and the
upgrading of monitoring networks. During
implementation, site-specific ESIAs/ESMPs will be
prepared by the design consultants and approved by
the Bank for specific works to be undertaken.
Additionally, as the project will likely prepare
identification and pre-feasibility level studies for
future infrastructure investments, the ESMFs will
provide guidance on the safeguard requirements and
instruments expected as part of those studies.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
Pest Management OP 4.09     No
Physical Cultural Resources  TBD        Once sites are identified for the construction/
OP/BP 4.11                              rehabilitation of buildings and upgrading of the
monitoring networks, an assessment will be made to
determine if any structures of cultural and historical
significance are involved.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No          Indigenous peoples as per OP 4.10 are not present in
4.10                                    the project area.


﻿Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes           The project (Component C) is expected to finance
BP 4.12                                      critical physical investments in constructing/
upgrading buildings and monitoring systems (e.g. for
hydro-meteorology, water quality, etc.). The project
will also finance preparation studies for investments
relating to the modernization and hydraulic safety of
water resources infrastructure of regional importance
(e.g. scoping studies for modernizing existing water
conveyance systems and associated water
infrastructure). The nature of the investments and
the works involved will be identified early in project
preparation and appropriate Resettlement Policy
Frameworks (RPF) will be developed and disclosed
similarly to the ESMFs (see above) to provide
guidance in case there are any small land acquisition
needs (e.g. for monitoring equipment installation and
buildings) and resettlement plans developed for
identified investments.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No            Some preparation studies and capacity-building on
hydraulic safety may be included; however, the
project is not expected to be directly involved in the
construction of hydraulic structures that would
trigger this policy.
Projects on International      No            The policy is not triggered as the proposed activities
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                         include surveys, scoping studies for modernizing
water conveyance systems, and possibly preparation
of pre-feasibility studies focused on safety and
modernization of hydraulic infrastructure, but not
feasibility studies or detailed designs. The project is
also in response to the IFAS' Third Aral Sea Basin
Program endorsed by the heads of state of the five
Central Asian countries that emphasizes issues such
as integrated water resources management,
supporting monitoring, modeling, basin plans,
institutional strengthening, etc. In response to the
EC-IFAS request to the Bank, an MoU between the
Executive Committee of IFAS and the World Bank
has been signed that has initiated this project
preparation which will be based on the national and
regional levels working together to define the details
of the proposed activities.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Nov-2015
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The ESMF and RPF as well as site specific studies for known locations for construction/
rehabilitation of buildings and upgrading of the monitoring networks will be completed prior to
Appraisal.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Nagaraja Rao Harshadeep,Daryl Fields
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler (SA)        Date: 11-Dec-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (PMGR)            Date: 15-Dec-2015
Manager:


