                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSR16318
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Mar-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                                        Project ID:           P119071
                            Project Name:       Hubei Xiangyang Urban Transport (P119071)
                            Task Team           Jens Christian Helbech Hede
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           31-Oct-2011                                  Estimated   26-Apr-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GTI02                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:           Urban Transport (95%), Public administration- Transportation (5%)
                            Theme:            City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                              No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:       210.87                 Total Bank Financing:      100.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                                Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                             110.87
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                100.00
                              Total                                                                                                210.87
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve mobility and accessibility within
                           and to the Xiangcheng District of Xiangyang in an integrated, efficient and safe manner. A key focus
                           will be demonstration of the integrated improvements in public transport services, traffic safety



                                                                                  Page 1 of 7
                         conditions (particularly for pedestrians), and traffic management on selected transport corridors in
                         the project area.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve mobility and accessibility within
                         and to the Xiangcheng District of Xiangyang in an integrated, efficient and safe manner. A key focus
                         will be demonstration of the integrated improvements in public transport services, traffic safety
                         conditions (particularly for pedestrians), and traffic management on selected transport corridors in
                         the project area.
                         3. Project Description
                         The project will include the following components:

                          a.     Component 1: Public Transport. This will include investment in (i) bus priority measures at
                         selected junctions; (ii) reconstruction of selected bus bays (including shelters and other facilities)
                         along the Route 13 corridor; (iii) construction of two bus depots; (iv) upgrading of the Railway
                         Station Bus Terminal; (v) procurement of upgraded higher capacity buses; (vi) GPS equipment and
                         ITS applications, e.g., intelligent bus dispatching system, vehicle and crew scheduling, and service
                         planning; and (vii) technical assistance for detailed design and implementation.

                          b.     Component 2: Urban Roads. This will include investment in (i) construction of the east
                         section of the South Ring road, and (ii) construction of selected primary roads (including required
                         bus bays) and secondary roads in the Panggong area of Xiangcheng District; and (iii) technical
                         assistance for detailed design and implementation.

                          c.       Component 3: Traffic Management. This will include investment in (i) traffic facilities, e.g,
                         junction channelization, traffic signs, mid-block crossings, etc. on Route 13 corridor, Tanxi/Xiejie/
                         Dongjie corridor, major junctions on west section of South Ring Road, and project roads in Pangong
                         area; (ii) an ATC system, including traffic signals on the Route 13 corridor, Tanxi/Xiejie/Dongjie
Public Disclosure Copy




                         corridor, major junctions on South Ring Road, and project roads in Pangong area, equipment for an
                         Traffic Command Center, and enforcement and monitoring equipment (E-police, CCTV, VMS); and
                         (iii) a Road User Education (RUE) program; and (iv) technical assistance for detailed design and
                         implementation.

                          d.      Component 4: Institutional and Capacity Development. This will include (i) selected studies
                         on strategic urban transport issues; (ii) training and capacity building for government officials
                         involved in urban transport planning and management; and (iii) training and capacity building for
                         PMO staff.

                         For restructuring

                         The main changes adopted during this project restructuring are: (i) extend the Loan Closing Date by
                         12 months to September 30, 2018; (ii) increase percentage of expenditure to be financed by the Bank
                         for civil works from 75% to 100% (with effect October 22, 2015); (iii) adjust/add activities to the
                         components due to savings in implemented activities and adjust budgets and procurement plan
                         accordingly; and (iv) modify the Results Framework to improve the methodology and measurement
                         of the results indicators as well as revise indicator targets in line with proposed changes.

                         In terms of specific changes to civil works (physical changes) which are relevant to safeguards, these


                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                           include: (i) relocation of one of the bus depots within the Panggong Area (scope unchanged) a few
                           hundred meters from the original site; (ii) relocation of the bus terminal from the older terminal
                           downtown to the new main terminal in front of the existing East Railway Station; (iii) extension of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the Panggong Road Extension by 200 meters; (iv) extension of the Xingguang Road by 1 km; and (v)
                           make provisions for construction of branch roads linking to the primary and secondary roads under
                           component 2 (ii) above.
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Xiangyang, with a population of 1.2 million, is the second largest city in Hubei Province in central
                           China. Located on the plain divided by the Han River, one of the biggest tributaries of Yangzi River,
                           Xiangyang has a temperate climate with annual precipitation around 1000 mm and raining season in
                           June and July.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Xin Ren (GEN02)
                           Zhefu Liu (GSU02)

                            6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental               Yes
                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
                            Pest Management OP 4.09     No
                            Physical Cultural           No
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    Yes
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Similar to other urban transport projects, adverse environmental impacts during construction are
                              mainly noise, dust, waste disposal, workers’ health safety, social and traffic disturbance. These
                              impacts are moderate and mostly of temporary nature with standard measures and engineering
                              code of conduct to mitigate. Major negative impacts during operation include air pollution, noise


                                                                        Page 3 of 7
                           and small amount of sewage from bus depots that will be discharged to sewer system.

                           For restructuring, the environmental impacts are very similar to the original project. The EMP
Public Disclosure Copy




                           measures still apply although the monitoring plan has been amended to reflect the changes.

                           The project has adverse impacts related to the need for land acquisition and involuntary
                           resettlement; though in some cases displaced persons viewed the housing demolition as an
                           opportunity to improve their living conditions significantly. The project will require the
                           acquisition of 898.1 mu of village land (including 388.59 mu of cultivated land). The project
                           would also require the demolition of 132,440m2 of existing structures, including houses,
                           enterprises and private shops. The land acquisition of the project would affect 3079 people in 752
                           households; the house demolition would affect 541 people in 124 households, 592 people from
                           138 households will be affected by both land acquisition and house demolition.

                           For the project restructuring, there will be changes to the locations of the Xianshan bus depot; to
                           the bus terminal; a 1 km extension of Xingguang Avenue; a 200 meters extension of Panggong
                           Road; and construction of selected branch roads. Except the bus terminal to be built on the
                           municipal reserved land next to the new railway station, the bus depot, branch roads and the road
                           extensions will require land acquisition. Based on the agreement reached by both the task team
                           and the PMO, the RAP has been updated and the resettlement policy entitlement will be in
                           consistence to the previous RAP approved by the Bank. The changes will only result in additional
                           land acquisition (no resettlement).
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             More long term and indirect impacts occur during operation, mainly air pollution, noise and
                           vibration caused by traffic on roads built or rehabilitated by the project. Measures to address these
                           negative impacts include strengthening road-side spot check, phase-out of non-compliant polluting
                           vehicles, tightening vehicle testing and maintenance, keeping and increasing tree belt along roads,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and erecting noise barriers or insulation where necessary. Development along new roads will be
                           well planned and effectively controlled by the authority in order not to add new sensitive
                           receptors.

                           Resettlement of residence and relocation of industries due to the project might cause indirect
                           secondary environmental impacts if not managed properly. The Environmental Assessment (EA)
                           provides an inventory detailing people resettled and industries relocation, their amount, nature,
                           potential site contamination and status of municipal service in receiving areas to ensure no new
                           pollution will be transferred as a result.

                           The city has planned to develop Panggong Area into a new city center in the future. A
                           comprehensive land use plan has been developed for the Area based on the overall urban master
                           plan of the city. An environmental impact screening required by Chinese regulations on
                           environmental assessment at the planning stage was conducted, as part of the land use planning
                           process to avoid or minimize negative environment impacts caused by planned land development.
                           Additionally, the Bank team also provided advice to the plan to promote public transport friendly
                           land development which would prevent the Area from becoming a car-dependency city, which in
                           long term, as shown in many American cities, could cause severe local and global environmental
                           problems.



                                                                      Page 4 of 7
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            Sound project design is crucial in avoiding or minimizing negative impacts from the outset.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Alternative analysis of different design options were undertaken including a without project
                           scenario. Different lane configurations including the existing ones were analyzed for most new
                           and rehabilitation of roads. Alternatives with less land occupation and resettlements, wider green
                           belt or that can keep as much as possible existing good quality greenery were recommended.

                           For new roads, comparison was made for different alignments in terms of their impacts on the
                           environment (e.g. green space), resettlement and engineering aspects. A slightly adjusted
                           alignment was recommended to some roads to avoid the loss of existing well-grown street trees
                           and associated social-economic disturbance and cost in felling or removing and replanting. Efforts
                           had been made to minimize resettlement impact during project alignment choosing.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            The Project Management Office (PMO) hired EA unit of the No.4 Chinese Academy of Railway
                           Design, a top-level certified EA institute in the province, which has recent experience of preparing
                           EA for similar Bank projects, e.g. Wuhan Urban Transport-II Project in 2009. The PMO has staffs
                           that have experience with other ongoing or just completed Bank funded projects in the city. They
                           received further training from the Bank team on safeguard requirements and practiced throughout
                           the EA process.

                          To effectively implement the outcomes of the EA process and comply with relevant policy and
                          legal requirements, an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was developed in close
                          collaboration with the PMO. This ensures the EMP’s ownership by Xiangyang, which in turn
                          provides guarantee for its implementation in future.

                          The EMP specifies mitigation measures to address all potential adverse impacts during
Public Disclosure Copy




                          preparation, construction and operation of the proposed investments, based on the past experience
                          and incorporated recommendations from public consultation and social safeguard related work of
                          the project. It also outlines the institutional arrangement and responsibility of each party (PMO,
                          owner, contractor, supervision engineer, operator, regulating government bodies) from design,
                          construction to operation. It details environmental monitoring for construction and operation
                          phases, including parameters to be monitored, sampling methods, locations, frequency, monitoring
                          agency and budget estimate. The EMP also includes budgeted monitoring plan and training plan
                          which are integrated into the overall implementation plan of the project.

                          The environmental monitoring has been integrated and budgeted into the overall monitoring and
                          evaluation of the project. The EMP will also be incorporated into bidding documents and contracts
                          to ensure their implementation. As the result, the EMP will become mandatory to contractors and
                          EMP training is required to be held prior to the commencement of construction.

                          Following the relevant Chinese laws, regulations and World Bank OP 4.12 on Involuntary
                          Resettlement, the Xiangyang Project Office has prepared a RAP. A Resettlement Policy
                          Framework (RPF) was also prepared since the location of some of the roads has not yet been
                          finalized by appraisal. The resettlement planning work was carried out by the line agencies under
                          the guidance of a team from Wuhan University with prior experience in resettlement planning for



                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                           World Bank financed Projects. Planning work included project impact inventory surveys, social
                           economic surveys and consultations over resettlement and livelihood rehabilitation strategies.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Two rounds of Information Disclosure of the EAs were undertaken. The first round took place at
                           the beginning of EA preparation. The second round was carried out after the draft EA was
                           completed. Information about the project, as well as the location and timing for public access to
                           the draft EA was disclosed through major local newspaper, official, websites and bulletins at local
                           communities. The EA and EMP have been posted at the World Bank InfoShop.

                           Public consultation of the EA was undertaken following each round of information disclosure.
                           These consultations took various forms, mainly through questionnaires, interviews and meetings
                           with the public and experts. About 150 people were surveyed and a dozen of organizations were
                           consulted. The majority has expressed strong support for the project which they believe will
                           improve transport and quality of life in Xiangyang. Major concerns raised include social
                           disturbance during construction and noise and automobile emissions during operation. The EA and
                           EMP incorporated counter measures to address these concerns.

                           PAPs were fully consulted during the RAP and RPF preparation. Mitigation measures were agreed
                           by PAPs.

                           For the project restructuring, the PAPs will be consulted fully and the updated RAP has been
                           guided by the RPF. According to the institutional arrangement, the national consulting team who
                           prepared the RAP will be contracted to regularly update the RAP.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      27-Sep-2011
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   30-Sep-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            04-Aug-2011
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      27-Sep-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   29-Sep-2011
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            29-Sep-2011
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             report?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Jens Christian Helbech Hede
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Michel Kerf (PMGR)                               Date: 09-Mar-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                         Page 7 of 7
