INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR16152
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Dec-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        China                      Project ID:  P110632
Project Name: Sichuan Small Towns Development (P110632)
Task Team       Ji You
Leader(s):
Estimated       20-Jul-2010                Estimated    10-May-2011
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSU08                       Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Urban Transport (60%), Flood protection (20%), Water supply (10%),
Wastewater Collection and Transportation (10%)
Theme:          City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (80%), Pollution management and
environmental health (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                  No
Emergencies)?
O
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     145.00            Total Bank Financing:  100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                        45.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development          100.00
Total                                                          145.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
The project development objective is to improve priority infrastructure in participating small towns
in Sichuan Province. This will be achieved by supporting in
Page 1 of 7


﻿frastructure investments in urban roads; water supply networks; storm and sewera
ge drainage networks; canal and river embankments; and wastewater treatment; as
well capacity building activities to ensure the long term sustainability of the
assets created under the project.
0
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
The project development objective is to improve priority infrastructure in participating small towns
in Sichuan Province. This will be achieved by supporting in
a        frastructure investments in urban roads; water supply networks; storm and sewera
ge drainage networks; canal and river embankments; and wastewater treatment; as
well capacity building activities to ensure the long term sustainability of the
assets created under the project.
3. Project Description
The total estimated cost of the project is US$195.76 with IBRD loan of US$100 million. The project
is comprised of two components, which are described below:
Component 1: Small Town Infrastructure Development (US$191.46): Construction of selected
urban roads,water supply networks, storm and sewerage drainage networks, canal and river
embankments and a wastewater treatment facility in the Xinjin, Hongya, Pengshan, Miyi, Daying
and Zizhong Counties, and the Jialing and Shunqing Districts in order to promote local economic
development and improve environmental services.
Component 2: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (US$4.05): Provision of technical
assistance for: (i) project construction management and supervision (including design review,
advisory services, traffic safety audit and engineering supervision), and for traffic management
capacity development; (ii) on-the-job training for staff of the Project Counties/Districts for operation
maintenance and management of their infrastructure investments; (iii) independent monitoring of
EMPs and RAPs.
The proposed restructuring includes: (1) deleting construction of a wastewater treatment facility in
Xinjin and a sewage pump station in Pengshan; (2) using the resulting loan savings of US$17
million to finance additional physical works in (a) Hongchuan Town in Hongya County (including
wastewater interception, moat and embankment improvements), urban roads, storm water
management, water treatment plant (2,500 m3/day) in Liujiang Town in Hongya County; and road
rehabilitation in Penglai Town in Daying County; (3) changing the component costs and financing
plan; (4) increasing the disbursement percentage for civil works from 92% to 100%; (5) reallocating
Loan proceeds among disbursement categories; (6) revising the Results Framework; and (7)
deleting two covenants that are no longer applicable (deleting construction of a wastewater treatment
facility in Xinjin).
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project comprises 8 sub-components in 6 Counties and 2 Districts of Sichuan Province:Xingjin,
Hongya, Pengshan, Daying, Miyi and Zizhong counties, and Jialing and Shunqing districts. Towns
were identified based on their potential for sustainable economic and social development. Within the
county/districts under the project, the subcomponents are among some of the largest infrastructure
investments that these districts/counties have undertaken to date. As such the project aims to
contribute to the Province's own activities by helping to create models "best practices" for sustainable
small town infrastructure service provision, especially in the area of institutional, operational and
financial sustainability. The towns selected for this project have been initially selected through the
province's development strategy screening.
Page 2 of 7


﻿New project components in the restructuring are located in three towns in two counties , one in
Daying and the other two in Hongya. Among three towns, Penglai in Daying County and
Hongchuan in Hongya County are in the original project, and Liujiang Town in Hongya County is
O
U        the newly added project town to the project during project mid-term review. Liujiang Town is
located in hilly area, middle part of Hongya County covering 160 km2, with 19300 population.
O
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
a        Chongwu Sun (GENDR)
Jun Zeng (GSURR)
Meixiang Zhou (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies  Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental          Yes
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36     No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural      Yes
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP   No
4.37
O
U         Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed   No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environment:
The proposed restructuring involves three towns in two project counties with following
subprojects: 1) Penglai Town of Daying County: 3 roads extension and upgrading with total length
2.51 km and associated pipelines, lightning, public transport facilities and landscaping, etc.; 2)
Hongchuan Town of Hongya County: 2.24 km river course dredging, 4.04 km river embankment
construction and rehabilitation with sewer pipes, and about 6.4 ha wetland construction; and 3)
Liujiang Town of Hongya County: 4 new road segment with total length 2.41 km and three
bridges, two for cars and one for pedestrians, construction of a new water works with treatment
capacity 2500 m3/day with associated water intake and 12 km distribution pipes, a new parking lot
Page 3 of 7


﻿covering 0.8 ha. For Penglai and Hongchuan towns, the environmental impacts are similar to the
original project's component on road component, river dredging and embankment and associated
sewer pipes, namely, dust, noise, traffic and business interruption, storage and disposal of spoil
and dredged materials, etc. The new EIA reports prepared for the restructuring covers all these
O
Q)         issues and with the mitigation measures proposed. Therefore, it was agreed with the PMO that the
original Environmental Management Plan (EMP) prepared will still apply to the new subprojects.
And for newly added Liujiang Town, the EIA and EMP were prepared according to national and
Bank??s requirement. There was no large scale, significant and irreversible impacts to be found.
Relevant mitigation measures, implementation arrangement, monitoring and training needs were
identified and included in the EMP report.
The environmental performance for the parent project has been satisfactory. Environmental
management in construction has been carried out largely according to the EMP. The EMP
implementation and environmental monitoring has been included in the semi-annual project
progress report and submitted to the Bank in timely manner.
Social:
While the original RAPs will continue to cover the remaining parts of land acquisition and
resettlement of the project. The restructuring in the above mentioned three towns in Daying and
Hongya counties. But very limited additional land acquisition will be required only in one town
which is Liujiang Town in Hongya County and there will be no house demolition or any physical
resettlement of affected people. The other two towns (Penglai town in Daying and Hongchuan
Town in Hongya) will use existing state-owned land for restructured civil works of the project.
Hongchuan Town Subproject will use the state-owned river shoal and wetland of 324.45. The rest
restructured part of the project in Liujiang Town requires a land of 129.47 mu in total, but only
19.7 mu will be newly acquired which will affect 19 households with 83 affected people in Yang
Village and Lianghe Village of Liujiang Town. This is because 109.7 mu of collective land in
Hongxing Village of Liujiang Town was already acquired in 2013, affecting 67 households and
237 people. A due diligence review of this land acquired from Hongxing Village was done and
confirmed there was no legacy issue. For the land to be acquired in Liujiang Town, a social
assessment and RAP were prepared according to the Chinese and World Bank's requirements.
Relevant mitigation measures for any negative impacts of the land acquisition, implementation
arrangement, monitoring and training needs were identified and included in the RAP.
o          The overall implementation of old RAPs of the parent project has been satisfactory and in
compliance with the requirements of Bank safeguards policy and local government regulations.
The PMO team is very experienced in managing Bank supported project. Implementation of the
RAPs, monitoring and evaluation has been incorporated in the project progress reports and
submitted to the Bank on a regular and timely basis. The new RAP for Hongya County had set
various mitigation measures to compensate affected people and minimize negative impacts on
them and their communities. The new RAP has also been disclosed to the public in project sites
and the Bank InfoShop.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
No indirect negative impacts are expected from the proposed project.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Alternative analysis was not carried out, because of small scale investment for each component
and the scattered locations of the proposed activities.
Page 4 of 7


﻿4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The borrower engaged EA consultants to prepare the EA reports for all proposed new
subprojects, which satisfy the Bank??s requirements for OP.4.01 and Chinese policies and
regulations. The EA & EMP specified appropriate mitigation measures, environmental monitoring
plans, institutional arrangements, training and equipment requirements together with budget
estimates for implementation of the mitigation measures and monitoring plans.
Sichuan PMO has experiences of implementation of World Bank projects, as they are currently
implementing several Bank financed projects, including Wenchuan ERL. An independent
environment monitoring unit was be contracted for project implementation and their service will
be expanded to the new subprojects.
The proposed mitigation measures are described as follows: the adverse impacts during the
construction of the proposed road, water distribution network, wastewater collection system, and
water works include airborne dust, noise, traffic disruption and disposal of spoiled materials.
These impacts are short-term and manageable. Contractors will manage the construction site
properly through watering construction sites during dry and windy seasons, take measures to
mitigate noisy construction activities and avoid/ban night time construction, maintain equipment
in good operating conditions, proper handle and dispose dredged materials, and develop temporary
traffic plans to detour traffic around construction sites.
The PMO is also experienced with strong capacity in implementing safeguards instruments in
Bank financed projects. The PMO has assigned specific responsible staff to take charge of land
acquisition and resettlement in this project. The PMO also hired a local professional consulting
institute to prepare the new RAP. The consulting team is very much experienced in preparing
social safeguards documents and monitoring the implementation of the social safeguards
instruments from a number of previous Bank lending projects.
O
Efforts have been made to minimize the resettlement impacts during project planning and design.
The resettlement impacts have been significantly reduced through optimizing the project design
and implementation arrangements. A range of mitigation measures including adequate
compensation for and meaningful consultation with affected people, monitoring and reporting,
*           complaint handling mechanism have been reflected in the new RAP for the newly added
subproject in Liujiang Town of Hongya County.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public consultations were carried out during the EIA process. The technique used for the public
consultations include surveys using public opinion questionnaires, focused group discussions,
public meetings with key stakeholders and interviews with some project affected persons. The
issues raised during these consultations have been incorporated in the EIAs/EMPs. Furthermore,
feedbacks to the concerns collected in public consultation were provided to the concerned groups
and documented in the EIA documents. The EIA documents and other project related documents
were disclosed locally through various means (e.g., websites, information board of local
community, etc.), as required by national and Bank's policies.
Public consultations have been carried out during RAP preparation. The affected residents and
local governments participated in the census, formulation of compensation package and the
Page 5 of 7


﻿livelihood rehabilitation strategy, monitoring and grievance redress mechanism. The feedback of
stakeholders has been incorporated in determining the compensation rates and livelihood
rehabilitation measures. The RAP contains a list of major consultation sessions. The final RAP
was disclosed locally in PMO agency's official website, and public information points of project
O
towns and villages on 30 July 2015 and also disclosed at the World Bank InfoShop on July 29,
2015.
O
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              18-Aug-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           17-Dec-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                    16-Mar-2014
Comments: An EIA and EMP, satisfactory to the Bank, were prepared for the project financed
infrastructure improvements in Liujiang Town and were disclosed locally on March
16, 2014
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              27-Jul-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           29-Jul-2015
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                    30-Jul-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Page 6 of 7


﻿Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?           Yes [  ] No [X]     TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [ X]  No [  ]  TBD [  ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ji You
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)               Date: 22-Dec-2015
Manager:
Page 7 of 7


