INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA12640
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Apr-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Benin                      Project ID:  P154601
Parent       P113145
Project ID:
Project Name: Benin Emergency Urban Env. 2nd Add. Fin. (P154601)
Parent Project Benin Emergency Urban Env. Project (P113145)
Name:
Task Team       Africa Eshogba Olojoba
Leader(s):
Estimated       26-Mar-2015               Estimated    27-May-2015
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Managing Unit: GENDR                      Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (55%), Solid waste
management (25%), Sub-national government administration (2 0%)
Theme(s):       Natural disaster management (35%), Municipal governance and institution
building (25%), Other urban development (40%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     40.00            Total Bank Financing:   40.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                               40.00
Total                                                                     40.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
Page 1 of 6


﻿2. Project Development Objective(s)
A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
To improve infrastructure and mitigate the negative environmental impact of floods in Cotonou
Agglomeration and to increase Benin level of preparedness for future flooding.
B. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
3. Project Description
The project is defined by the following five components:
Component 1: Drainage improvement and rehabilitation (IDA US$32.0 million equivalent)
The activities planned for this component will benefit additional 95,000 people at least. The activities
include (i) cleaning approximately additional 3.4 km of existing canals in Cotonou; (ii) rehabilitating
and extending approximately additional 8.1 km of substandard and unsound drainage structures,
resurfacing the inner walls of drains in Cotonou, Porto-Novo, and Ouidah; (iii) rehabilitating
shoulders and side ditches along the secondary drainage network that drains into the lagoon in
Cotonou and Porto Novo; and (iv) constructing and expanding additional three storm water retention
ponds, including fencing for both, linking them to a network of canals (some expanded in size) to
drain them into the lagoon. The drainage collectors to be covered in Cotonou are AAc, Pa, and Wd,
covering Fiyegnon, Godomey Akogbato, Houenoussou, Vossa and Dandji. In Ouidah, the areas to be
covered are Azilinon to Musee area. In Seme-Kpodji, it is from Carrefour Abattoir to CEG
Agblangandan, and in Porto-Novo the selected project intervention site is Setto-Gbodje area. All
selected interventions already have their technical, engineering and safeguards studies in place. The
proposed AF will also finance a drainage master plan for Abomey, Bohicon, Ouidah, Abomey-
Calavi, Seme-Podji and Porto-Novo.
Component 2: Municipal solid waste management (IDA US$3.0 million equivalent)
The planned activities complement the efforts in the parent project by:
(i) The construction of additional collection points in Abomey-Calavi and Ouidah
municipalities; construction of transfer stations in Seme-Podji and Abomey-Calavi municipalities;
and purchase of SWM transportation equipment in the participating municipalities to assist in the
transportation of wastes from the collection points/transfer stations to the nearest landfill facility; and
(ii)   Developing a financing study on the SWM chain and Public-Private Partnership (PPP) in
Cotonou, and a harmonized SWM master plan covering the municipalities of Cotonou, Abomey-
Calavi, Ouidah, Seme-Podji and Porto-Novo.
Component 3: Improved Wastewater Management and Sanitation (IDA US$0.0 million equivalent)
This activity is proposed with a view to mitigating the negative environmental impacts and health
hazards resulting from the mix of rain runoff with latrine and septic tank contents during the floods.
The parent project and the first AF are funding technical assistance for wastewater management;
wastewater master plans for Cotonou, Abomey-Calavi, Seme-Podji and Porto-Novo; and wastewater
pilots for sanitation and sewage management. These wastewater pilots will evolve from the master
plans of wastewater under preparation. The second AF does not finance activities under this
component.
Page 2 of 6


﻿Component 4: Flooding and disaster risk preparedness and management (IDA US$ 4.25 million
equivalent)
The proposed second AF will complement the parent project and first AF activities, which are meant
to improve the operational capabilities and management of flood risks in Cotonou and neighboring
municipalities, and institutional strengthening of institutions charged with floods and disaster risk
management at the national, regional and local levels. Planned activities consist of: (i) undertaking
the feasibility and technical study for an operational FEWS, an activity whose cost was originally
underestimated in the initial project design; and (ii) undertaking technical studies for selected sites on
urban coastal management. Using the National Budget and funds from BADEA, the feasibility and
environmental studies are in the process of being prepared. The selected sites are the axis between
Hilla-condji and Grand-Popo and the CAME site; and (iii) communication and sensitization on
coastal contingency plans and emergency preparedness.
Component 5: Project Management (Total IDA: US$0.75 million)
Effective and efficient management support for project implementation, including development and
operationalization of an effective and efficient Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system, and all
fiduciary requirements. The second AF provides effective management support, in particular as the
parent project closing date was extended by 12 months on January 12, 2015.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The proposed emergency operation will cover Cotonou and the nearby municipalities of Porto Novo,
Ouidah, Seme-Podji, and Abomey-Calavi.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Lucienne M. M'Baipor (GSURR)
Maman-Sani Issa (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies  Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental          Yes
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36     No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural      Yes
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP   No
4.37
Page 3 of 6


﻿Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The AF, like the original project, is classified as Category B, signifying that environmental and
social impacts are likely to be of small scale, site-specific and, thus, manageable at an acceptable
level. No new safeguards policies are triggered beyond OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment
and OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. The types of physical investments (drainage
network rehabilitation, and rehabilitation/construction of municipal solid waste infrastructures) are
covered by the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF) of the parent project, prepared and disclosed in-country and at the Info
Shop on May 29, 2012 and June 1, 2012, respectively. For the purpose of this AF, the ESMF and
RPF were re-disclosed in-country and at the Info Shop on March 10, 2015 and March 12, 2015,
respectively. The Recipient will continue to prepare Environmental and Social Impact
Assessments/Environmental Management Plans and Resettlement Action Plans as and when
necessary during implementation. These instruments will be disclosed prior to the commencement
of any works, as currently done under the parent project and the first AF.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The potential environmental and social impacts are likely to be of small scale, site-specific and,
thus, easily mitigated. There are no indirect or long term adverse impacts expected during project
implementation.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The choice of rehabilitation/construction civil works has been selected to minimize displacement
of people and/or property. The overall project design remains the same under the AF.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Safeguards are well mainstreamed into the implementation of the parent project and first AF. All
contracts and bidding documents include environmental and social management clauses in order to
enable contractors to follow up on environmental and social due diligence during civil works. The
capacity of the Recipient to address safeguards is considered adequate: safeguards implementation
of the parent project has been satisfactory, and the environmental and social specialists in the
executing agencies and the PMU have ensured that all physical investments/sub-projects were
screened using the checklist contained in the ESMF. To date, four ESIAs/ESMPs (for the
rehabilitation of drainage channels, a bridge, an access road and opening of a new cell in the
landfill site) and 1 RAP have been prepared by the project, consulted upon, approved, and
disclosed in-country and at the World Bank Info Shop. The Bank has also reviewed and cleared
the ESIA of the solid waste collections points and transfer stations; the ESIA and RAP of the
drainage infrastructure for the first AF are currently being finalized for Bank review. The World
Page 4 of 6


﻿Bank team has been closely monitoring project safeguards aspects, and will continue to ensure that
the executing agencies comply with safeguards requirement under the proposed AF.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
All key stakeholders (relevant ministries, agencies, municipal authorities, local communes, chef du
quartiers, development partners and NGOs) have been and will continue to be consulted regularly.
The AF will continue the dialogue with the key stakeholders and the project will rely on the
rigorous implementation of the ESMF and RPF, in ensuring that the appropriate mitigation
measures are taken into account in accordance with Benin and World Bank's safeguards policies
in active consultation with the key stakeholders. Disclosure of safeguards documents in-country
and the World Bank InfoShop will continue to happen prior to civil works.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                               10-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                            12-Mar-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Benin                                                     10-Mar-2015
Comments: The ESMF of the parent project was updated slightly to incorporate the new
activities and then re-disclosed in-country
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                               1 0-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                            12-Mar-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Benin                                                     10-Mar-2015
Comments: The RPF of the parent project was updated slightly to incorporate the new activities
and then re-disclosed in-country
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
N/A
C Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Page 5 of 6


﻿Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [    ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [    ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X]   No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Africa Eshogba Olojoba
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Benoit Bosquet (PMGR)                 Date: 20-Apr-2015
Manager:
Page 6 of 6


