                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA15263
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Apr-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Uganda                             Project ID:   P133305
                            Project Name:     Uganda Grid Expansion and Reinforcement Project (GERP) (P133305)
                            Task Team         Zayra Luz Gabriela Romo Mercado,Mbuso Gwafila
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         14-Mar-2016                        Estimated   31-May-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEE01                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        127.30                 Total Bank Financing: 100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          27.30
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                100.00
                              Total                                                                                      127.30
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase availability and efficiency of bulk
                           electricity supply in the project areas.
                            3. Project Description
                           A.      Project Components



                                                                      Page 1 of 13
                         1.        The proposed Grid Expansion and Reinforcement Project (GERP) will support the
                         implementation of the Grid Development Program by financing the strategic expansion and upgrade
                         of transmission infrastructure, including a transmission line and associated substations, with a focus
Public Disclosure Copy




                         on enabling electricity access and accommodating the increasing demand for electricity. The
                         strategic investments to be supported by the GERP were selected taking into account (i) areas that are
                         not served by the main electricity network; (ii) areas in greater need of reliable electricity supply
                         based on poverty levels; and (iii) complementary downstream investments being undertaken in the
                         distribution network and funded through the ERT series of projects to increase rural energy access.
                         The project will also finance technical assistance activities to UETCL and other government agencies
                         in the electricity sector to enhance sector planning and operation, support power sector policy
                         development actions in the context of the ongoing review of power sector reforms, mitigation of
                         deforestation impacts through forest restoration activities and help address sector financial risks. In
                         addition, the project will support preparation of new investments and implementation of the GERP.

                         Component A - Construction of the transmission line (estimated cost US$106 million, of which IDA
                         US$80 million equivalent and GoU US$26million).

                         2.       The objective of this component is to provide increased electricity transmission capacity to
                         meet the power supply needs of Northern Uganda and the West Nile region and to interconnect the
                         isolated West Nile distribution network to the main transmission grid. Currently, the power supply
                         for the entire West Nile area is based on one small hydropower plant (3.5 MW Nyagak 1). It is
                         projected that the available excess capacity will soon be exhausted by the connection of a medium-
                         sized industrial load and the expansion of electricity access to households and enterprises through
                         ongoing rural electrification programs supported by the Bank (ERT III Project) and other
                         development partners. The project will also form the basis for future interconnection and energy
                         exchanges between Northern Uganda, West Nile, and the rest of the country.

                         3.       The project will finance the construction of the Lira-Gulu-Nebbi-Arua (LGNA)
                         transmission line composed of: (i) 314 km of 132kV transmission line, on double circuit towers,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         from the existing 132/33kV substation at Lira to Gulu, Nebbi, and Arua; (ii) extension of the existing
                         132kV substation at Lira; (iii) a new 132/33kV substation with two 40 MVA transformers at Gulu;
                         (iv) a new 132/33kV substations with two 20 MVA transformers at Nebbi, (v) a new substation with
                         two 40 MVA transformers at Arua and (vi) a possible 132kV switching station between Lira and
                         Gulu in case of the extension of the existing 132 kV substation at Lira is not required.

                         4.       This component will also include short interconnections from the new substations at Gulu,
                         Nebbi, and Arua to the nearest feasible connection points on the existing 33 kV feeders currently
                         supplying power in these areas. The objective of this component is to ensure that the links to the
                         distribution assets are completed in a timely manner and that there are no delays to the accrual of
                         benefits (increased supply and reliability of electricity) to end-consumers in the project areas.
                         Additionally, the design and construction of the substations at Gulu, Nebbi, and Arua will have
                         enough capacity and spare 33kV feeder panels to allow future distribution network expansion (rural
                         electrification) and access scale up programs.

                         Component B - Project implementation and operational support to UETCL (estimated cost US$11.8
                         million, of which IDA US$11 million equivalent and GoU US$0.8 million).

                         5.     UETCL plays a central role in the electricity sector as the single buyer and transmission
                         system operator. This component is proposed to support UETCL to enhance its project

                                                                      Page 2 of 13
                         implementation capacity, contract administration, and operational effectiveness through technical
                         assistance and modernization of management systems. This component is specifically intended to
                         address the capacity constraints and support the implementation of the GERP. This subcomponent
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will also support UETCL’s efforts in offsetting the deforestation impacts associated with the
                         transmission line.

                         Component C - Sectoral Strengthening Support (estimated cost US$4 million, of which IDA US$3.5
                         million equivalent and GoU US$0.5 million).

                         6.       MEMD has a critical role to fulfill in policy for mulation and strategy, planning and
                         coordination of the growing and increasingly complex electricity sector. This component will thus
                         provide technical assistance to support MEMD in fulfilling its mandate in sector planning and
                         coordination. The component will provide financial support for capacity building and training in
                         order to strengthen sector supervision (including sector finances and monitoring of the resettlement
                         and compensation of project affected persons).

                         B.      Project Financing

                         7.      The lending instrument for the proposed project is Investment Project Financing. The
                         Ministry of Finance will receive an IDA credit in the SDR amount equivalent to US$100 million.
                         The credit will be granted/on-let to UETCL. The total project cost is estimated at US$127.3 million.
                         For component A, cost estimates have been prepared as part of the feasibility study for the proposed
                         LGNA transmission project financed under the ESDP project. The cost estimates are in line with
                         recently signed similar contracts in the East Africa region.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed Lira-Gulu-Nebbi-Arua 132 kV transmission line will connect to the existing grid at the
                         existing Lira substation. The estimated total length of the transmission line is about 314km and is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         expected to improve power supply reliability and availability in the project area which covers six
                         districts namely; Lira, Oyam, Kole, Gulu, Nebbi and Arua. In order to meet the set objectives, the
                         proposed project activities will include the following: (i) construction of a transmission line
                         (approximately 314km) from Lira substation to the proposed three new substations in Gulu, Nebbi,
                         and Arua respectively, (ii) expansion of the Lira substation, and a possible switching station around
                         Lira. For the transmission line, it would be required acquisition and clearing of the wayleave (2x12.5
                         meters wide) and the five meter wide Right of Way (RoW) for the line. Only the five meter of the
                         RoW will be acquired by UETCL. The rest of the wayleave 2x12.5 meters remains available for use
                         by the landowners whose properties the line will traverses but with restrictions including no
                         construction of structures and growing of trees of a height exceeding four meters. The above
                         highlighted project aspects have negative environmental and social impacts that have been assessed
                         in the Environmental and Social Impacts Assessment (ESIA) and the Resettlement Action Plan
                         (RAP). Appropriate mitigation measures have been proposed. The project may also traverse
                         environmentally sensitive areas such as wetlands, some forests reserves, and will pass just outside the
                         Murchison Falls National Park. The transmission line passes through areas, with significant
                         variations in land tenure systems amidst a post conflict environment therefore the valuation and
                         compensation are set in accordance with rates set at district level for crops and non-permanent
                         structures, which are enacted by District Land Boards will require detailed analysis.

                         The field reconnaissance survey concluded the following:


                                                                      Page 3 of 13
                         •        The transmission line will, in a limited, manner traverse parts of wetlands, forest reserves,
                         cross the Nile River and pass close by the Murchison Falls National Park, but no major ecosystems
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and protected/conservation areas would be adversely affected by the proposed transmission line.
                         There are four areas in which minor impacts are expected but adequate mitigation measures have
                         been developed in the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). These include: i) Anaka
                         – Karuma section which fringes partly on the Murchison Falls National Park (clearance for the Line
                         Route has been obtained from the Uganda Wildlife Authority), ii) Koch Awing Air-field, has
                         obtained clearance for the Line Route from the Civil Aviation Authority, iii) Short sections of about
                         6 Forest Reserves that will require conditional clearance by National Forest Authority before
                         commencement of construction activities and potential impacts on the breeding habitat of the
                         globally endangered Grey Crowned Crane, as well as the presence of Crested Cranes at the River
                         Nile crossing that will require appropriate Transmission line alignment/design to mitigate impacts on
                         breeding habitats and bird-collision impacts. The ESIA has recommended use of bird diverters in
                         specific large bird areas.

                         •        The project will involve establishment of new substations in Gulu, Nebbi and Arua towns,
                         and the extension of the existing substation in Lira. The proposed sites for the new substations were
                         found to be open spaces without any structures and/or nearby settlements At the other sites, the
                         project may require only land acquisition without affecting/displacing any houses or other structures.
                         The Transmission line alignment has therefore avoided physical displacement of PAPs as much as
                         possible. The entire wayleave and RoW is 314km long and 30 meters wide. The Uganda Electricity
                         Transmission Company Limited (UETCL) will only acquire 5 meters permanently within the
                         centerline of the transmission line for the tower footprints and access for maintenance, and 12.5
                         meters easement corridor on either side of the Transmission line. This therefore leads to a reduction
                         of the land to be permanently acquired and will significantly reduce the budget for compensation.

                         In conclusion, the potential environmental and social impacts identified above are localized and have
                         been adequately mitigated as elaborated in the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         For the above mentioned reasons, the project has been classified as the Environmental Assessment
                         Category “B”.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Constance Nekessa-Ouma (GSU07)
                         Herbert Oule (GEN01)
                         Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (GSU01)

                         6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental               Yes            Triggered because the project will have limited
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      environmental and social impacts. Even though the
                                                                    transmission line will, in a limited manner, traverse parts
                                                                    of swamps/wetlands, forests reserves, crosses the river
                                                                    Nile and passes close by the Murchison Falls National
                                                                    Park, no major ecosystems and protected/conservation
                                                                    areas would be adversely affected by the proposed
                                                                    Transmission line. There are only four areas on which
                                                                    minor impacts are expected. These impacts have been



                                                                     Page 4 of 13
                         adequately mitigated. These area include: i) Anaka –
                         Karuma section which fringes on, but remains outside the
                         Murchison Falls National Park (clearance has been
Public Disclosure Copy




                         obtained from the UWA), ii) Koch Awing Air-field,
                         which has obtained clearance from Civil Aviation
                         Authority, iii) Short sections of about 6 Forest Reserves
                         that will require conditional clearance by National Forest
                         Authority before commencement of construction works.
                         A reforestation program has been included in the ESMP;
                         and the presence of Crested Crane Birds at the River Nile
                         crossing for which the ESMP has recommended use of
                         bird diverters and already included in the final
                         engineering design.

                         The transmission line may also have environmental,
                         health and safety impacts on the surrounding communities
                         and the general public during construction and operation,
                         for which mitigation measures have been recommended in
                         the ESMP. Adequate mitigation measures have been
                         provided for prevention of child labor and adverse
                         impacts on local communities due to inappropriate
                         worker's behavior.

                         In conclusion, the potential environmental and social
                         impacts identified above are localized and have been
                         adequately assessed and mitigation measures included in
                         the ESMP. The Client has prepared an Environmental and
                         Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) report, which includes
Public Disclosure Copy




                         an analysis of alternatives (three alternative line routes
                         have been analyzed), cumulative impacts have been
                         addressed and the specific and broader environmental and
                         social impacts associated with construction and operation
                         of new transmission line, three new substations, switching
                         station as well as access roads and other supporting
                         facilities and expansion of existing Lira substation.
                         Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for
                         each sub-component, notably the transmission line,
                         substations have been prepared as part of the ESIA. The
                         ESIA has been prepared in a consultative manner. The
                         ESIA has been disclosed at the Infoshop on March 21,
                         2016 and by the client in-country on March 29, 2016
                         through public notice in Daily News Paper and at the
                         UETCL head Office and website http://www.uetcl.com.
                         Before commencement of the construction activities, the
                         Contractor shall be required to develop a Contractor’s
                         ESMP to guide actual implementation of the required
                         mitigation measures and this shall incorporate conditions



                          Page 5 of 13
                                                        of approval granted by the Environment Agency-NEMA
                                                        and any other relevant Regulatory Agency, such as the
                                                        Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        During implementation, Environmental and Social
                                                        Management Plans shall be prepared by UETCL and
                                                        cleared by IDA for activities whose scope was not clearly
                                                        known and/or defined during project preparation and
                                                        these include: switching station around Lira, short
                                                        distribution interconnectors, and forest biodiversity offset
                                                        (forest restoration).
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   This Policy is triggered because the transmission line
                         4.04                           passes through and will affect natural habitats such as
                                                        wetlands, forest reserves, and the Nile River. Assessment
                                                        of the potential impacts on the various natural habitats
                                                        have been included in the ESIA and ESMP of the Project.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes   This Policy is triggered because the project passes
                                                        through and affect forest reserves. Assessment of the
                                                        likely impacts on the various forests has been included in
                                                        the ESIA and ESMP of the Project. A reforestation
                                                        program to offset the losses is included in the ESMP.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     N/A. This is because the project does not envisage
                                                        procurement and/or use of pesticides (herbicides for weed
                                                        control).
                         Physical Cultural        Yes   Triggered because the project associated civil and earth
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           works will encounter both known and unknown Physical
                                                        Cultural Resources (PCRs). A PCR survey and
                                                        assessment has been undertaken as part of the ESIA and a
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        PCRs Management Plan and Chance Finds Procedure
                                                        have been prepared.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No    The listed Project areas of Lira, Gulu, Kole, Nebbi and
                         BP 4.10                        Arua are not inhabited by Indigenous Peoples a as per OP
                                                        4.10.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   OP 4.12 is triggered to address social impacts from
                         OP/BP 4.12                     Component A of the project. Under that component, the
                                                        proposed project will support the construction of a new
                                                        transmission line which will involve acquisition of the
                                                        transmission line corridor over a distance of 314 km.
                                                        Similarly, the construction of three new substations (at
                                                        Gulu, Nebbi and Arua) will require land acquisition.
                                                        Since this land may already be occupied by people and
                                                        their economic activities, there will likely be some limited
                                                        displacement of people and disruption and loss of
                                                        livelihoods and/or loss of assets. The client has prepared a
                                                        Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) in consultation with the
                                                        PAPs and responsible lead agencies. In addition, a section
                                                        on the RPF has been included in the RAP to define



                                                         Page 6 of 13
                                                                     principles that will guide the preparation of an action plan
                                                                     for land acquisition and compensation related to any
                                                                     additional activities or project locations/sites that may be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     required during implementation. The RAP report was
                                                                     disclosed at the Infoshop on March 21, 2016 and by the
                                                                     client in-country on March 29, 2016 through public notice
                                                                     in Daily News Paper and at the UETCL head Office and
                                                                     website http://www.uetcl.com.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No           The Project does not involve construction of dam
                            4.37                                     facilities nor relies on existing dams.
                            Projects on International   No           The project will not involve development of projects on
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                     international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed        No           There are no known areas under dispute in the project
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                         area.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              An analysis of the applicable policy and legal framework was conducted, as well as an
                              institutional framework analysis. The project triggers the following World Bank operational
                              policies: OP4.01 (Environmental Assessment), OP4.04 (Natural Habitats), OP4.11 (Physical
                              Cultural Resources), OP4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement), and OP4.36 (Forests). The ESIA and
                              RAP were prepared in a consultative process accordingly. OP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples) is not
                              triggered due to the absence of indigenous groups in the Project area.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Environment: The project involves construction of a 314 km 132 kV transmission line. The project
                             will have impacts on the biophysical environment that will be the permanent loss of vegetation and
                             wetlands in the ROW and line route crossings through four forest reserves, Laura Central Forest
                             Reserve being the most affected. Other potential impacts that may occur during construction and
                             maintenance works include soil erosion, compaction or contamination, changes in hydrology of
                             wetlands, ground and surface water contamination, temporary air quality deterioration, increase in
                             noise and vibration levels, as well as modification and alteration to wildlife habitats and
                             introduction of invasive alien species. However, proper mitigation measures have been proposed
                             to reduce or compensate for negative impacts. These measures include, among others, restricting
                             removal of vegetation to the minimum required, limiting activities in watercourses or wetlands to
                             the extent possible, restoring as soon as possible any disturbed areas, decommissioning of access
                             roads built for construction in wetlands and conducting construction activities during the dry
                             season.

                             There are four areas in which minor impacts are expected but adequate mitigation measures have
                             been developed in the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). These include: i)
                             Anaka – Karuma section which fringes partly on the Murchison Falls National Park (clearance for
                             the Line Route has been obtained from the Uganda Wildlife Authority), ii) Koch Awing Air-field,
                             has obtained clearance for the Line Route from the Civil Aviation Authority, iii) short sections of
                             about six Forest Reserves that will require conditional clearance by National Forest Authority


                                                                       Page 7 of 13
                           before commencement of construction activities and potential impacts on the breeding habitat of
                           the globally endangered Grey Crowned Crane, as well as the presence of Crested Cranes at the
                           River Nile crossing that will require appropriate transmission line design to mitigate impacts on
Public Disclosure Copy




                           breeding habitats and bird-collision impacts. The ESIA has recommended use of bird diverters in
                           specific large bird areas.

                           Land acquisition: The project’s Component A, which involves the construction of a transmission
                           line (314km) as well as the construction of three new sub-stations at Gulu, Nebbi and Arua towns
                           and a possible 132 kV switching station along the transmission line route between Lira and Gulu.
                           The construction will require land take and may lead to loss of assets and some limited
                           resettlement. In line with the Bank's safeguard policies, the project has put in place mitigation
                           mechanisms acceptable to the World Bank to mitigate these impacts. For impact on potential land
                           take and/or restrictions in access to a Resettlement Action Plan has been prepared and consulted
                           upon across the affected project areas. The T-Line will require a 30m wide width of the wayleave,
                           as per the Electricity Act. To comply with the standards used by UETCL, a 5m wide right-of-way
                           (ROW) will be included along the center of the wayleave, i.e. 2.5m on either side of the center
                           line. The rest of the wayleave will remain under the ownership of the landowners whose land the
                           line will be traversing, but subjected to restrictions of use. This approach reduces the amount of
                           land acquisition and subsequent compensation and/or resettlement of affected people.

                           Adequate mitigation measures have been proposed to reduce or compensate for any negative
                           impacts. These measures include providing compensation measures and resettlement assistance to
                           affected households and landowners, involving traditional leaders in the resettlement process,
                           allowing crop growing and grazing in the wayleave the provided the height any trees or crops
                           grown does not exceed 4 meters, rehabilitating damaged infrastructures after construction.

                           Cultural Heritage: The project will impact some cultural and archaeological heritage elements.
                           Adequate mitigation m easures have been proposed to reduce the expected negative impacts,
                           including notably, implementation of a summary Physical Resources Management Plan including
Public Disclosure Copy




                           a Chance Finds Procedure.

                           Other Social issues: To address concerns and mitigate the associated risks, the following
                           mitigation measures will be included, inter alia, as a part of project implementation: i)
                           strengthening the social safeguard supervision and monitoring capacity of in the PIUs; ii) close
                           monitoring on safeguard issues, especially focusing on labor force management (for example
                           prevention of sexual abuse, and child labor); iii) implementation of a sensitization program on
                           HIV/AIDS for all affected communities, iv) regular consultations with affected communities and
                           stakeholders, v) coordination and collaboration with relevant government agencies, community
                           leaders and other actors, as well as, vi) putting in place an effective grievance redress mechanism.
                           The project is also expected to pose moderate health and safety risks which have been identified
                           and mitigation actions proposed in the ESIA. Adequate environmental and social mitigation
                           measures have been elaborated in the ESMP to mitigate potential adverse impacts on local
                           communities (for example labor force management), natural habitats, sensitive bird species, and
                           worker's health and safety.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           It is expected that the supply of electricity to the towns of Gulu, Nebbi and Arua will stimulate
                           economic activities. There are no indirect and / or long term negative impacts in case all the


                                                                     Page 8 of 13
                           mitigation measures, including the anti-bird collision devices, have been implemented.

                           The new transmission line may also lead to positive opportunities for project affected persons
Public Disclosure Copy




                           (PAPs) and communities, with no indirect and/or long-term negative impact in these areas of
                           operation. One of the most important anticipated benefits to the population is increased availability
                           and reliability of electricity supply. Other positive opportunities may occur in the form of
                           temporary employment and business opportunities during the construction phase, including
                           revenues from the sale of food and other consumable goods to project construction workers.

                           The project stipulates very specific impacts and corresponding measures, which when
                           appropriately implemented will contribute to sustainable development of the area. The project also
                           stipulates that all forests cut down as a result of the project will be compensated and a biodiversity
                           offset established in the same region to restore and minimize the environmental impacts.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Three line routes have been investigated. The line route with the least impact and avoidance of the
                           Murchison Falls National Park, which is option 1, has been selected.

                           The preparation of the ESIA undertook vigorous alternative assessments for the project corridor,
                           taking into account the social and environmental impacts of each alternative. Three line route
                           options were proposed and analyzed using a comparative approach based on valued environmental
                           and social components (VESC). Based on the analysis, one option (Option 1) was recommended
                           over the whole length of the project, because it raised the least environmental and social issues.
                           The projects presents a very well defined ESMP that responds to all environmental and social
                           issues raised in the ESIA. In addition, the RAP also assessed considerable ways to acquire land
                           and ensure that the affected persons are adequately compensated and the vulnerable are given
                           special support.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           To ensure safeguards due diligence during implementation, more expertise will be deployed at
                           agency (including Supervising Consultant) and Contractor levels. The project plans to put in place
                           a structured communication and engagement of affected communities and stakeholders to facilitate
                           full involvement and participation of beneficiary communities throughout implementation. A well
                           detailed RAP has also been prepared to respond to limited land acquisition for the project that is
                           limited in the 30 wide meter corridor for the transmission line. The RAP will be implemented
                           systematically in well-defined three (3) lots (staring with Lira Gulu, Gulu – Nebbi and Nebbi -
                           Arua) along the corridor prior to the commencement of civil works.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           UETCL commissioned preparation of ESIA and RAP for the project. As part of the preparation,
                           the agency held extensive consultations internally and with the mother Ministry (Ministry of
                           Energy and Mineral Development – MEMD) and other relevant stakeholders as well as with the
                           financing agency (World Bank). As part of the preparation of the ESIA and RAP, three (3) public
                           consultation and stakeholder engagement activities were organized to ensure the participation of
                           stakeholders at different stages of the ESIA and RAP processes. Key issues raised during
                           consultations were integrated in the design of the ESMP and RAP for action. The RAP and ESIA
                           defined that UETCL will develop a communication and community engagement plan to facilitate
                           continued participation of the beneficiaries and stakeholders throughout project implementation.



                                                                      Page 9 of 13
                           Through implementation of Electricity Sector Development Project (ESDP), UETCL and Ministry
                           of Energy and Mineral Development (MEMD) have developed substantial safeguards capacity.
                           Both MEMD and UETCL have competent Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                           employed under ESDP. However, the implementation and supervision of the safeguards by both
                           MEMD and UETCL has had some coordination challenges that have been reviewed by the ESIA
                           and capacity building needs described in the ESMP. UETCL shall hire an Environmental
                           Specialist and Social Specialist to guide and supervise implementation of environmental and social
                           aspects of the project. In addition, MEMD and UETCL’s collaborative function with other
                           relevant Government Agencies have been assessed and recommendations made to improve
                           coordination as appropriate, especially with the National Environment Management Authority,
                           Ministry of Gender, Labor and Social Development, Electricity Regulatory Authority, National
                           Forestry Authority, Uganda Wildlife Authority and the respective District Local Governments of
                           Lira, Gulu, Oyam, Kole, Nebbi and Arua.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Public consultation and stakeholder engagement activities were organized in order to ensure the
                           participation of stakeholders at different stages of the ESIA and RAP processes. In total, three
                           consultation rounds have been held, namely consultation round 1 (inception phase) and
                           consultation round 2 (detailed study phase) and consultation round 3 (disclosure of draft ESIA and
                           RAP). Key issues raised during consultations include the need for community sensitizations,
                           protection of cultural and communal properties, access to local jobs and economic benefits,
                           protection of the most vulnerable households, as well as participation of communities in the
                           identification of compensation and resettlement alternatives.

                          Engagement activities were planned according to key stages, or decision moments, throughout the
                          ESIA and RAP studies where the informed participation of stakeholders was likely to make the
                          most significant contribution to the on-going analysis. Target groups for the ESIA and RAP
                          stakeholder engagement process have included the following:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          -       Directly concerned ministries and national agencies; (UETCL, MWE, NEMA, NFA,
                          UWA, CAA, REA, Rift Valley Railways, Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, Ministry
                          of Lands, Housing, & Urban Development, Ministry of Gender, Labour & Social Development;
                          -       Districts’ local government authorities and technical staff; (Arua, Nebbi, Nwoya, Kole,
                          Oyam, Gulu, Lira);
                          -       Customary authorities; (Alur Kingdom);
                          -       Project-affected communities and households
                          -       Project-affected industrial and commercial organizations; and
                          -       Relevant NGOs in the fields of conservation, development and human rights (World
                          Vision, Nature Uganda, Straight Talk Foundation).

                          Engagement activities with affected communities were conducted through informative and
                          consultative meetings with local leaders, along with open public assemblies, in all communities
                          along the entire study corridor. To ensure the inclusion of gender issues, public assemblies were
                          followed by separate meetings with women groups in some communities. In support of the
                          consultation process, a project background information document (BID) was produced and
                          distributed in a brochure format. Communities’ mobilization was mainly done by the chairpersons
                          of the respective villages through telephone calls and public announcements. Local Council
                          leaders were involved in meetings scheduling and selection of venues. In some cases, three to five
                          villages converged at one same and central location. Several local leaders and public servants


                                                                    Page 10 of 13
                           attended these community consultative meetings. All the discussions were opened with a brief
                           introduction of the project, its purpose, the purpose of the ESIA, activities to be involved and the
                           different teams involved. The team then guided the participants to obtain their views. Questions
Public Disclosure Copy




                           from the participants were answered and some misconceptions about the project were clarified.

                           A total of 26 community meetings were held in the seven affected districts, to which attended a
                           total of
                           918 individuals. Overall, 70 percent of community meetings’ participants were males and 30
                           percent were females.

                           As for traditional authorities, a representative of the King of the Alur Kingdom, Launi III, was met
                           individually and provided with first-hand information about the project. Its advice was sought on
                           how to optimize the line’s route and enhance the resettlement process. Finally, along with
                           community-level meetings, a series of consultative meetings were also held at the district and
                           national levels with representatives of local governments, concerned ministries and NGOs for in-
                           depth discussions on specific and critical issues. Detailed information of Stakeholder Consultation
                           can be found in Chapter 5 of the ESIA The RAP and ESIA have been consulted upon, approved by
                           the World Bank, and disclosed at InfoShop on March 21, 2016 and in-country on March 22, 2016.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      30-Oct-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   21-Mar-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Uganda                                                           29-Mar-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      04-Mar-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   21-Mar-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Uganda                                                           29-Mar-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?



                                                                     Page 11 of 13
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                          140 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                          480 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies



                                                                     Page 12 of 13
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Zayra Luz Gabriela Romo Mercado,Mbuso Gwafila
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)            Date: 18-Apr-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Lucio Monari (PMGR)                Date: 18-Apr-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 13 of 13
