INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA1083
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Apr-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Brazil                     Project ID:  P147272
Project Name: BAHIA ROAD REHABILITATION AND MAINTENANCE PROJECT - 2ND
PHASE (P147272)
Task Team       Gregoire Francois Gauthier
Leader(s):
Estimated       02-Mar-2015                Estimated    02-Jul-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (80%), General transportation sector
(20%)
Theme(s):       Export development and competitiveness (60%), Regional integration (20%),
Rural services and infrastructure (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
O
U         Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     300.00            Total Bank Financing:  200.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
a           Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                  100.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     200.00
Total                                                                     300.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to enhance, in a sustainable fashion, road accessibility and
safety in selected regions of the State of Bahia.
Page 1 of 11


﻿3. Project Description
Component 1 - Institutional strengthening (US$25.0 million)
This is component supports the sustainability strand of the Project Development Objective. It
includes the five following subcomponents, covering several sustainability aspects.
Subcomponent 1.1: New options for road financing, including the carrying out of studies on, inter
alia: (i) setting-up a self-standing road maintenance fund; (ii) exploring possibilities for private sector
a        financing of transport infrastructure; and (iii) exploring opportunities of land-value capture stemming
from the valorization of transport infrastructure public right-of-way.
Subcomponent 1.2: Road Asset Management, including, inter alia: (i) operationalizing the
SEINFRA/SIT's Pavement Management System, including surveys of the Bahia's highway
pavement condition and traffic; (ii) designing and building automatic traffic counting stations; (iii)
designing and building a state-wide automatic weighing system for heavy vehicles; (iv) implanting a
state-wide kilometric mark-points system, for more precise location of traffic crashes and other
events; (v) geo-referencing Bahia's right-of-way asset; and (vi) setting up a database of the Bahia's
geological conditions and potential quarries for road construction and rehabilitation.
Subcomponent 1.3: Road administration efficiency, providing support for the setting-up and
operationalization of SEINFRA/SIT, including, inter alia: (i) defining its mission, monitoring
framework, processes and required resources; (ii) training and capacity building for SEINFRA/SIT
technical and administrative staff; and (iii) support Project implementation in specific areas, namely
on road safety, socio-environmental management and engineering.
Subcomponent 1.4: Logistics planning, providing support for carrying out studies and surveys to,
inter alia: (i) update the Bahia's transport and logistics master plan; (ii) promote railway transport in
Bahia; (iii) identify maritime ports development opportunities in Bahia; (iv) analyze the Borrower's
waterway development; and (v) plan urban logistics and mobility in the Itabuna-Ilheus conurbation.
0
Subcomponent 1.5: Transport investment impact assessment, carrying out surveys and studies to
assess the impact of transport infrastructure investment in Bahia including, inter alia: (i) establishing
a tool to inform the decision-making process for transport infrastructure investment; (ii) setting up an
appraisal model aiming at quantifying the wider impact of transport investments and policies in
Bahia; (iii) defining the methodology and undertaking the impact evaluation of local roads
improvement on rural communities focused on the rural areas addressed through Part 3 of the
Project; and (iv) carrying out yearly road users surveys to reach citizen feedback on the Borrower's
highways condition and services.
Component 2 - Performance-based State Highway Rehabilitation and Maintenance (US$199.5
million)
This Component supports the sustainability and road safety dimensions of the Project Development
Objective.
Subcomponent 2.1: CREMA. This subcomponent includes the rehabilitation and maintenance works,
thro ugh CREMA Contracts, on about 1,350 kilometers of identified sections of Bahia's paved
highways, including, inter alia, road rehabilitation and maintenance.
Subcomponent 2.2: CREMA-PPP. This subcomponent includes the rehabilitation and maintenance
Page 2 of 11


﻿works through CREMA-PPP Contracts on about 550 km of identified sections of the Borrower's
paved highways including, inter alia, road rehabilitation and maintenance.
Five-year CREMA contracts typically include: (i) a 6-month initial road recuperation; (ii) a 2-year
O
period for pavement, drainage and road equipment rehabilitation; (iii) a 2 to 3-year routine
maintenance period. Spot infrastructure improvement for road safety will be streamlined in the
CREMA contracts. The "CREMA-PPP" contract will have a 10 to 12-year term and will focus on
BA-052, BA-1 60 and BA-432 State highways; this contract will include similar types of works and
services as CREMA contracts. Subcomponent 2.2 will be fully financed out of counterpart financing:
The State of Bahia shows important commitment to this new contractual instrument, a premiere in
Brazil, as a hybrid between CREMA and concession contracts. Main implementation risks in this
Component stem from the novelty of this "CREMA-PPP". The Infrastructure Secretariat is
contracting the International Finance Corporation to help structuring the contract and define its
detailed specifications.
Component 3 - Feeder Road Improvement (US$60.0 million)
This Component supports the accessibility dimension of the Project Development Objective.
This Component will provide support to improve road accessibility in Bahia, through the carrying
out of works for the elimination of about 1,250 critical spots on selected municipal rural roads in 62
Selected Municipalities (the Municipal Road Subprojects) including, inter alia: (i) improving the
drainage of the platform, including the replacement of existing unsafe wood bridges by concrete
standardized bridges; (ii) the construction and/or reconstruction of culverts and longitudinal
drainage; and (iii) the construction of fords and the elimination of quagmires.
This Component complements the interventions on Bahia's main highway network. Typically under
municipal jurisdiction, rural roads are low traffic but play a key role for rural mobility and small
farmers: removing rural roads are low traffic but for mobility and small farmers: removing critical
points will enable selected roads to be all-season roads. Roads will be selected through a citizen
engagement process at municipal level in the following Intermunicipal consortia: Consorcio Portal
do Sertdo, Consorcio do Sisal, Consorcio do Vale de Paramirim and Consorcio da Bacia do Jacuipe.
The complex logistics required to implement this component, including the citizen engagement
process and managing many scattered small-scale works, is the main risk. Mitigation includes
a detailed procedures described in the Operation Manual.
Component 4 - Road Safety (US$15.0 million)
This Component supports the road safety dimension o f the Project Development Objective, through
institutional strengthening and road safety corridors.
Subcomponent 4.1: Institutional strengthening. This subcomponent will provide support to improve
road safety in Bahia, including, inter alia: (i) defining the Bahia's road safety strategy; (ii) providing
training and capacity building to SEINFRA/SIT on road safety; (iii) creating a traffic accident
database for Bahia; and (iv) supporting the creation of the State a road safety Lead Agency.
Subcomponent 4.2: Road safety corridors. This subcomponent will provide support to establish two
Road Safety Corridors, and carry out the following interventions on those corridors: (i) carrying out
small-scale works and goods for road safety infrastructure improvement; (ii) provision of equipment
for traffic laws enforcement, including non-lethal equipment for crash reporting, speed and drink-
driving enforcement; (iii) carrying out communication campaigns for road safety; and (iv) provision
Page 3 of 11


﻿of training of road police officers for monitoring, reporting and disseminating road safety results on
the Road Safety Corridors.
Improving road safety is complex and requires a strong top-level political commitment. Within the
)         Decade of action of the United Nations for road safety, the State of Bahia has shown strong
ownership on the road safety agenda, in particular the creation of a Lead Agency for road safety. A
cross-department task-force, headed by SEINFRA, will be created; this task-force, which would
prefigure the Lead Agency, will initially work on the State road safety strategy and the traffic
accident database. The task-force will coordinate the key State agencies involved in road safety.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
State highways benefiting from Component 2 are located throughout the state. Component 3 targets
the following Intermunicipal Consortia: Consorcio Portal do Sertdo, Consorcio do Sisal, Consorcio
do Vale de Paramirim and Consorcio da Bacia do Jacuipe; yet, the specific roads to benefit from
Component 3 will be selected through a consultative process at the municipal level.
Direct beneficiaries from the highway rehabilitation (Components 2 and 4) are difficult to identify:
some road users are local while others are international freight truckers. Project highways have
annual average daily traffics ranging from 900 to 4,000 vehicles. It is estimated, based on average
trip distances, that about 60,000 people would benefit daily from the highway improvement.
Project beneficiaries from rural road improvement (Component 3) are easier to identify: the 62
targeted municipalities cover about 12% of the state surface and include about 1.1 million people
(7.5% of the state population). Municipalities are vast and rural roads improvement will address only
a fraction of municipal roads; it is estimated that about 250,000 people would directly from the
Project. Most of the beneficiaries belong to the poorest fringe of the population, these municipalities
being substantially poorer than the Bahia average excluding Salvador. The Project will seek to
identify and build upon synergies with the areas of focus of the Bahia Sustainable Rural
Development Project (P147157), which is expected to benefit approximately 100,000 family farmers,
informal economy entrepreneurs, land reform settlers, indigenous and quilombola communities.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Jason Jacques Paiement (GSURR)
Marcio Cerqueira Batitucci (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          Direct environmental impacts resulting from rehabilitation
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                (on existing State paved roads) works are expected to be
minor, and mostly related to civil works' execution. For
improvements of the municipal roads (the interventions
consisting in the construction of small bridges, quagmire
suppression and culverts allowing water crossing), direct
environmental impacts are also expected to be minor and
related to the construction phase. For these interventions,
frameworks focused on the typologies of planned
interventions establishes restrictions and conditions for
works' environmental management.
Page 4 of 11


﻿For the rehabilitation works, an environmental
management plan establishing specific environmental
programs was prepared by the Borrower, and reviewed by
the Bank. Its implementation will be monitored by
specific environmental supervision and Bank's team field
visits.
An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)
was prepared during Project preparation to evaluate
potential impacts and propose mitigation measures. In
accordance with the potential impacts, adequate
mitigation and monitoring measures were established
based on specific EMP for the component activities and
sub-projects. For all road segments identified during
Project preparation as part of the set to be improved
during project implementation, specific EA and EMP
were prepared, consulted, and will be disclosed before
Project appraisal.
The elaboration of the ESIA was contracted to specialized
consulting firm, through Terms of Reference agreed upon
by the Bank. The ESIA contains: (i) the environmental
and social impact assessment for the identified road
segments; and (ii) an Environmental Management Plan
and an Environmental and Social Framework focused on
the typologies of planned interventions on dirty roads;(iii)
mitigation measures, institutional capacity building
measures, and monitoring and evaluation arrangements as
necessary.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes          While the works on paved and feeder roads may affect
0         4.04                                 riparian vegetation in water crossings on a very marginal
fashion, the Project may result in indirect or induced
impacts. Also considering that the specific dirty road
segments and their locations have not yet been identified,
the safeguard has been triggered, and the ESIA identified
the presence of natural habitats, assessed potential
impacts, and determined appropriate measures to avoid,
mitigate, or compensate for any possible direct or indirect
impacts.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           The Project will not directly involve forest management
or activities in forest areas. In accordance with OP/BP
4.01, Environmental Assessment, the Project's ESIA
assessed the potential impact of the Project on forests and/
or the rights and welfare of local communities.
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes          Although the Project will not finance the manufacture,
use, or disposal of environmentally significant quantities
of pest control products, this policy is triggered in a
precautionary basis, as there is a potential for future use of
pesticides/ herbicides outside of the project timeline. The
Page 5 of 11


﻿Project Operational Manual and Catalogue for contractors
will explicitly prohibit the use of pesticides/herbicides for
works and services financed by the Project.
Physical Cultural       Yes          Negative impacts on physical cultural resources are not
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 expected during project implementation, as the Project's
civil works will normally be located within the existing
right-of-ways of road sections. However, "chance
findings" during works are possible, and to handle such
findings, Brazil has a well-developed legislative and
normative framework, which is under the oversight of the
National Institute for Protection of Historical and
Archeological Sites (IPHAN). These procedures are
described in the ESIA mentioned above and a physical
cultural resources management framework that includes
measures for avoiding or mitigating any adverse impacts
on physical cultural resources and provisions for
managing chance finds was prepared. Provisions for
proper handling of the issue by contractor will be part of
bidding documents and works contracts.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes          The ESIA identified 41 indigenous and quilombola
BP 4.10                              communities within the area of influence (10km radius) of
the pre-selected roads to be rehabilitated under
Component no.2. The borrower has prepared an
Indigenous Peoples Plan consistent with OP 4.10 for the
interested communities. Key elements of this Plan include
measures to ensure free, prior and informed consultations
to design appropriate social and economic benefits for
these communities. Another core component of the ESIA
is the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF).
Given that the 62 municipalities eligible for Component
no. 3 include much of the northern, eastern and central
parts of the state, several of the state's estimated 11,000
indigenous peoples and hundreds of quilombola
communities may potentially benefit. The IPPF will assist
the executing agencies to determine whether indigenous
peoples or quilombola communities are present in the
project area, and if so, to ensure that the interested
communities support the proposed activities as well as
any additional measures required to maximize their
culturally appropriate benefits and/or avoid potentially
adverse effects. The IPPF was reviewed and adapted
during public consultations on April 17, 2015.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         The project is not expected to require any land
OP/BP 4.12                           acquisition; however, because the exact location and
design specifications for many of the proposed road
works will only be determined during Project
implementation, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
Page 6 of 11


﻿was prepared. The Resettlement Policy Framework
clarifies resettlement principles, organizational
arrangements, and screening and design criteria to be
applied to subprojects prepared during project
implementation. The Resettlement Policy Framework is
an integral product of the ESIA process, and as such was
reviewed and adapted during public consultations on
April 17, 2015. The ESIA concluded that no Process
Framework was required.
Safety of Dams OP/BP     No           Not applicable. The Project will not finance the
4.37                                  construction of a new dam, rely on the performance of an
existing dam or a dam under construction, nor require
increases in the capacity of an existing dam, nor changes
in the characteristics of the impounded materials of the
dam.
Projects on International  No         Not applicable. None of the Project activities are located
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                  in any international waterways and there are no other
riparian impacted by the Project.
Projects in Disputed     No           Not applicable, because the activities financed by the
Areas OP/BP 7.60                      Project are not located in disputed areas.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed investments in roads are well aligned with a number of the state's most pressing
challenges, namely reducing poverty and regional disparities and enhancing environmental
U           sustainability. For these reasons, the overwhelming majority of the proposed project's social
impacts are expected to be positive.
Nonetheless, several of the proposed activities are socially complex and will operate in sensitive
social contexts. For instance, support for feeder roads will require considerable public
consultations to reach decisions regarding priority investments. For municipal feeder roads,
approval of road improvement activities will be subject to presentation of evidence of
stakeholders' participation in the definition of the priority road sections and related improvement
activities.
During implementation, the Project is not expected to cause any large scale, significant and/or
irreversible negative environmental impacts. As it supports a number of site specific investments
on existing road infrastructure, the environmental impacts resulting from construction work are
expected to be limited in spatial extent and time, mainly during the execution of civil works.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Rehabilitation and upgrading of the Borrower's transport networks is expected to generate
significant positive social impacts. In addition to reduced transportation costs and increased
accessibility to markets and public services, the Project is expected to improve road safety
Page 7 of 11


﻿conditions, generate positive impacts on land values, create jobs, and raise incomes throughout the
state. By improving the efficiency of the State's logistics, the Project is expected to strengthen
agriculture industry in the State and beyond, which in turn, might increase pressure to adopt higher
value land use practices.
O
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
O
Not applicable.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower has satisfactory capacity for safeguard policies implementation. It has a thorough
legal framework and has demonstrated adequate institutional capacity (including staffing and
budget) for identifying, avoiding and mitigating social and environmental impacts of its programs
and projects. The proposed Project will adopt similar institutional arrangements as those designed
for the Bahia Integrated State Highway Management Project (P095460). This means that the
technical responsibility for preparation, supervision, monitoring and evaluation of Project
activities and results - including safeguards - are expected to remain with the Borrower's
Infrastructure Secretariat under the coordination of the Project Management Unit. This unit will be
strengthened by contracting a Social Specialist to complement existing environmental capacity.
Contracted-out consultancies, focusing specifically on supervision of environmental / social
impacts and mitigation measures, will help GERAM monitor and report on safeguards compliance.
With a proposed allocation of US$ 25 million under its Institutional Strengthening component, the
proposed Project will continue strengthening social and environmental impact management in
Bahia. Under the proposed set of activities, improvement in the monitoring of safeguard
application outcomes will be sought through the strengthening of the State government's capacity
to monitor and mitigate social and environmental impacts.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
O
The Borrower contracted an integrated Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) of
the proposed project activities that was designed to be conducted in close consultation with a range
of stakeholders including local residents and municipal authorities, private sector producers, public
service providers, NGOs , etc. To reinforce and sustain these positive impacts, the Environmental
and Social Impact Assessment includes specific recommendations intended to strengthen the
social communication, community participation, and Citizen Engagement aspects of the Project.
The nature and scope of these activities will be measured through gender and ethnicity
disaggregated monitoring and evaluation mechanisms. SEINFRA/SIT will support implementation
of a Citizen Engagement framework. The outcomes of mainstreaming Citizen Engagement
activities will be monitored and reported systematically and consistently.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              06-Apr-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           26-Apr-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Page 8 of 11


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Brazil                                                   10-Apr-2015
Comments: Public consultation in Salvador on April 17, 2015
O
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              06-Apr-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           26-Apr-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Brazil                                                   10-Apr-2015
Comments: Public consultation in Salvador on April 17, 2015
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              06-Apr-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           26-Apr-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Brazil                                                   10-Apr-2015
Comments: Public consultation in Salvador on April 17, 2015
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           NA
Date of receipt by the Bank                              06-Apr-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           26-Apr-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Brazil                                                   10-Apr-2015
Comments: Public consultation in Salvador on April 17, 2015
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
C.        Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
0
a        C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
Page 9 of 11


﻿OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Is a separate PMP required?                             Yes[   ] No[X]       NA [   ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a     Yes [  ] No [    ]   NA [ X ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [X] No [  ]   NA [   ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
Page 10 of 1I


﻿III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Gregoire Francois Gauthier
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Eric R. Lancelot (PMGR)            Date: 27-Apr-2015
Manager:
Page 11 of 11


