                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC16257

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Feb-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:              Guinea                          Project ID:       P158579
                            Project Name:         GN- Post Ebola Support Project, Mamou
                            Team Leader(s):       Ibrahim Magazi,Christopher H. Herbst
                            Estimated Date        30-Mar-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:        GHN07                           Lending           Lending Instrument
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):            Health (100%)
                            Theme(s):             Child health (30%), Other communicable diseases (30%), Health system
                                                  performance (40%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 4.35                            Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                             Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Ebola Recovery and Reconstruction MPF                                                          4.35
                            Environment        B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The PDO is to: Provide critical inputs to support essential maternal and child health services at
                           primary level in the Mamou Region.

                           On the demand side, these inputs include the training and recruitment of community health workers,
                           to generate demand for health services at health post and health center level. And on the supply side,
                           the project will support training and recruitment of health center staff, increase the availability of
                           critical supplies and medicines at the primary level, and equip key health facilities with running
                           water.
                           C. Project Description
                           While the PDO will be achieved within 2.5 years (the duration of the project), and the results will
                           largely be tracked via process indicators, the inputs provided under the project will contribute
                           towards a larger 5 year strategy to increase the utilization of maternal and child health services at
                           primary level in Mamou Region, with continuity ensured by the German Cooperation (GIZ)
                           following the end of the grant period.
                         The proposed interventions to be implemented in the Mamou Region will be organized around three
                         complementary components: (1) improve availability of Commodities, pharmaceuticals and supplies,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (2) Improve availability of trained human resources for MCHN services at primary and community
                         level. (3) Strengthen capacity to monitor and supervise services: This component will focus on
                         strengthening supervision capacity at the district level.

                         Component 1: Improve availability of Commodities, pharmaceuticals and Supplies (US$2.0 million)

                         Funding under the component will focus on (1) improving the availability of MNCH commodities
                         and supplies required to implement neglected maternal and child health programs of the Ministry
                         (sub-component 1.1), and (2) enhancing the numbers of health centers with available running water,
                         critical for health service delivery.

                         Sub-component 1.1: Strengthen the availability of maternal and child health commodities and
                         supplies at primary health level (US$1.0 million). Already before Ebola, stock outs of essential
                         medicines were a major constraint to service delivery, particularly at smaller facilities. With the
                         Ebola crisis, health facilities are experiencing shortages as never before, as most donor as well as
                         government funding is used for Ebola services, demand for services is low because of lack of trust,
                         and income generating opportunity to replenish stock is affected accordingly. The sub-component
                         will seek to improve the availability of medicines, essential supplies and equipment to support
                         maternal and child health at the health post and health center level. It will act as a seed fund with a
                         broader aim to revive currently non functioning drug revolving funds at facility level. Support will be
                         provided to initially replenish the stocks of medicines and supplies for health facilities in the targeted
                         areas. This will help invigorate the revolving drug fund within the health facilities, but serve its
                         primary objective to replenish the availability of critical MNCH supplies and commodities at the
                         health centers in the Mamou region. The sub-component will fund and rely mainly on the national
                         central medical store for procurement and distribution of essential generic medicines (and the
                         provision of basic facility training on drug management to health facilities) and on development
Public Disclosure Copy




                         partners (MSH, Global Fund, UNICEF, UNFPA) which will provide key commodities and supplies
                         for immunization, family planning, treatment of malaria. GIZ will coordninate this effort, in close
                         consultations with the PCU/MOH.

                         Sub-component 1.2: Improve the availability of health centers with access to water (US$1.0million).
                         This sub-component would finance a critical bottleneck to service delivery in many primary health
                         facilities in Mamou, namely the lack of running water at health center level. Drawing on the
                         experience of the Ebola response support, this sub-component will finance water wells at primary
                         health facilities, significantly improving a basic need in many of the facilities.

                         Component 2: Improve availability of trained Human Resources for Health (US$2.0 million)

                         Sub-component 2.1: Strengthen the availability of health workers at primary level (US$1.0 million).
                         Whereas nurses, midwives and doctors largely staff higher level facilities in urban areas, the rural
                         area mainly rely on nursing assistants (agent technique de santé - ATS) to deliver maternal and child
                         services. ATSs are trained (over a period of three years) in primary health care provision in
                         decentralized community schools, for specific deployment at the community and primary level (not
                         the case with nurses and midwives). Ebola has reduced the number working on MCHN however, and
                         those that remain and any new recruits could benefit from continuous training and supervision to
                         maximize their service delivery potential (particularly in maternal health – insufficiently addressed in
                         their pre-service education). Whilst long term strategies should address the need to deploy more
                         nurses and midwives to the health center level (which will require comprehensive training, fiscal and
                         management reform), investments under this sub-component will address immediate need for HRH
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in target areas. The Regional Health Administration (Direction Régionalde la Santé (DRS)) will be
                         supported in (a) the recruitment of unemployed ATSs for deployment at the health center and health
                         post level and (b) providing training and continuous mentoring to ATSs and other health workers that
                         are present. GIZ will provide full suppoprt towards ideveloping the receuitment strategy as well as
                         the development of appriopriate training programs, curricula and the trainig of trainers. A Human
                         Resource Officer moreover will be situated (and funded) at the DRS in Mamou to support the DRS
                         in the recruitment and the follow-up and training corodination of the ATS. In view of the aim of the
                         MOH to increase the number of ATS in health structures, it is expected that the ATS employed
                         within the framework of this project will be fully absorbed by the government and into the civil
                         service upon project end.

                         Sub-Component 2.2: Training and deployment of community health workers to generate demand
                         and deliver basic services in maternal and child health (US$1.0 million). This would involve the
                         engagement of community health workers, including partly those mobilized during the Ebola
                         response effort, in demand generation activities alongside basic service delivery functions. The grant
                         would support the development and institutionalization of standardized maternal and child health
                         training programs for community health workers, building capacity of the District Health Team to
                         deliver new short programs for community health workers as guided by WHO standards on task
                         shifting and supported directly by GIZ. This would allow Guinea to move away from the sporadic,
                         non-standardized and vertical training programs currently provided by different NGOs, and
                         institutionalize the horizontal training of community lay workers in MCHN promotion and basic
                         service delivery at the community level. Within the framework of strengthening the capacities of the
                         health system, the component will support the health administrations on Regional (DRS) and district
                         (Direction préfectoral de santé (DPS)) level in recruiting, training and supervising CHWs. There is
                         emerging evidence on the importance of linking the training of clinical health professionals with
                         community health workers, so that they will learn to work together as a team. The proposed training
Public Disclosure Copy




                         program is envisioned to include this team-building aspect of the community-based primary health
                         care teams.

                         Component 3: Strengthen government capacity to supervise services (US$0.35 million)

                         This component would ensure that the above inputs translate into actual services delivered, largely
                         by (1) strengthening supportive supervision at district level and below.

                         Sub-Component 3.1: Strengthen capacity to carry out district level supportive supervision of health
                         centers and posts in target regions (US$0.35 million). Support will be provided to District Health
                         Directorates to strengthen their supportive supervision and monitoring of health centers and health
                         posts (within their broader mandate of responsibility). The DPS will receive financial as well as
                         technical support in planning and implementing supervision visits to improve the performance of
                         personnel and quality of services in the health centers. The districts will rely on supportive
                         supervision methods including the use of quality checklists for supervision and mentorship. Funding
                         will include development of the supportive supervision strategies, training of district health teams,
                         and key costs linked to carrying out the supervision. The support to the DPS to plan and implement
                         supervision visits will include a provision for fuel and other expenses.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will be implemented in the Mamou Region
Public Disclosure Copy




                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Ministry of Public Health and Hygiene which will be responsible of the implementation of the
                           project has experience with Bank safeguard policies and procedures for having chance to implement
                           projects financed by the World Bank. This experience constitutes an advantage to ensure adequately
                           the implementation of the project even if it will not induce notable environmental and social adverse
                           impacts as well as no significant civil works are expected to be undertaken under the project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Abdoulaye Gadiere (GEN07)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              This policy is triggered by the project because it
                           BP 4.01                                              intends to finance water wells at primary health
                                                                                facilities (sub-component1.2). As up to now the
                                                                                exact location of these facilities are unknown,
                                                                                an Environmental and Social Management
                                                                                Framework (ESMF) will be developed.
                                                                                However, the project overlaps the Ebola
                                                                                Emergency Response Project (P) for which an
                                                                                ESMF was prepared and disclosed in last June
                                                                                2015. Consequently, that ESMF will be updated
                                                                                to serve as a guidance for the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                Furthermore, a National Health Care Medical
                                                                                Waste Management Strategy was prepared and
                                                                                disclosed this last September. This document
                                                                                will serve as a guidance for Medical Waste
                                                                                Management. Once the ESMF updated, it will
                                                                                be reviewed, consulted upon and disclosed in
                                                                                the Republic of Guinea and at the Infoshop prior
                                                                                the appraisal.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               The project does not involve or affect natural
                                                                                habitats
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No               The project does not involve or affect forests.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No               The project does not involve pest management.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No               The project will not undertake any investments
                           BP 4.11                                              that may impact on Physical Cultural Resources
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No               Not relevant for the Guinea
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No               The project will not finance activity that induce
                           4.12                                                 acquisition of land, loss of economic
                                                                                opportunity or restriction to land.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No                   The project will not finance dams nor rely on
                                                                                             dams.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Projects on International        No                               The project is not expected to affect
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                              international waterways.
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                               The project will not be located in a Disputed
                           7.60                                                              Area.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                           A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?: Yes
                               i. Explanation
                                  The project will mostly fund consulting, communications costs, training servces as well as drug
                               ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
                                  05-Jan-2016
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.


                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Ibrahim Magazi,Christopher H. Herbst
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                                     Date: 01-Mar-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Trina S. Haque (PMGR)                                        Date: 03-Mar-2016
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
