INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
0                                                Report No.: ISDSC14551
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Jul-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:           Guinea                     Project ID:   P156557
Project Name:      RURAL ROADS EMERGENCY INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECT
Team Leader(s): Kulwinder Singh Rao,Tojoarofenitra Ramanankirahina
Estimated Date     20-Oct-2015
of Approval:
Managing Unit:     GTIDR                      Lending       Lending Instrument
Instrument:
Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
Theme(s):          Other social protection and risk management (70%), Rural services and
infrastructure (30%)
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:   3                     Total Bank Financing: 0
Financing Gap:        0
Financing Source                                                             Amount
Ebola Recovery and Reconstruction MPF                                              3
-       Environment        B - Partial Assessment
Category:
0
B. Project Development Objective(s)
The project development objective is to improve accessibility of local communities to health services
and Ebola treatment facilities in the targeted area by mitigating key bottlenecks along selected rural
roads.
C. Project Description
The project will primarily focus on minor bridges and structures and will do limited earth works to
take into account the lack of appropriate maintenance in Guinea. In fact, bridges and structures are
more sustainable as they require less frequent maintenance than earth works. Thus, eligible roads
would be those which do not require major earth works (i.e. the surface conditions are not i too poor)
but with missing/defective bridges/structures. By improving these bridges/structures, accessibility
through the roads would be substantially better.
The project will repair localized bad spots on rural roads which constitutes real bottlenecks on
regular basis especially during rainy season. A long list of 14 road sections in the total length of 115
km in the region of Gu6ck6dou and Macenta has been proposed by the DNPR. 6 bridges in the total


﻿length of 62 meters and 36 box culverts are among the rural roads. According to the DNPR, these
rural roads do not require much earth works but in need of bridges, structures, and localized bad
spots improvements. A simplified multi criteria selection process will be used to prioritize project
interventions along the selected corridors.
o
The project will use innovative approach to quicken implementation. The innovative approach
includes the use of Bailey bridges and timber road sections. Bailey bridges are demountable metallic
bridges which can be set up rapidly after the abutments and piers are in place. In addition, Bailey
bridges can be moved without major difficulty from one place to another. Timber roads are
demountable road structure which can be set up fast using labor based technique. Timber roads will
be used on the localized bad spots. They also can be moved without major difficulty from one place
to another. Since these approaches are new in Guinea, the cumulative length of timber roads will be
about 0.5km. In-depth comparison of the classic approach (concrete bridge / gravel road) versus the
new approach (Bailey bridge / timber road) will be undertaken during project preparation to make a
final decision on the most appropriate solution.
The project area will be near the border with Liberia and Sierra Leone and the works are likely to be
implemented during the coming dry season. It is in that area that the accessibility problems between
the population and any Ebola Treatment Center are the most serious. This is why the rural roads
proposed by the DNPR are either in the region of Gu6ck6dou or Macenta. In addition, preparation
and implementation would be planned to have the works getting started and completed during the dry
season between November and April. To enable rapid deployment of resources, the team proposes to
invoke Paragraph 12 of OP 10.0, Projects in Cases of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity
Constraints and defer preparation of Safeguards documents to the implementation period.
Taking into account the above mentioned concept and the encountered challenges, the project will
have three main components. The first component is the rehabilitation/reconstruction of bridges and
structures which include the set-up of Bailey bridges. The second component is the spot
improvement of rural roads which includes the set-up of pilot timber roads. The third component is
capacity building which would support the DNPR to implement the project. The allocation of
resources among these three components and the eventual contingencies will be defined during
project preparation. The project as envisaged will be implemented quickly using proprietary products
which require direct contracting. However, all contracts will be prior reviewed by the Bank.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will intervene in the region of Gu6ck6dou or Macenta near Liberia and Sierra Leone
borders. About Six (06) bridges would be built/rehabilitated using innovative technologies (Bailey
bridge) requiring a heed to site-specific ecologies and safety issues during work. Also, the region is
in an equatorial climatic zone where heavy humidity or run-off can impact the sustainability of the
investments depending on the adequacy of materials or technologies. Biophysical aspects will there
be on scrutiny during project preparation. It is expected that the project would be a category B project
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The government capacity in handling environmental and social safeguard is still weak, but the DNPR
has a fairly good track record in handling the environmental and social safeguards. As per the ICR,
no major issue occurred during the implementation of the Guinea Second National Rural
Infrastructure Project which was a category A project. The implementation of the safeguard aspects


﻿was done satisfactorily. During preparation, assessment will be done to check whether DNPR has
kept its capacity.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Maman-Sani Issa (GENDR)
Yacouba Konate (GSURR)
o
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
afeguard Policies           Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/  Yes           Though project activities are along existing
BP 4.01                                     roads and do not expand the existing right of
way, some environmental and social are
susceptible to occur; there are however expected
to be of low to moderate magnitude. Because,
the specific road sections are not yet chosen, an
environmental and social management
framework (ESMF) will be prepared, consulted
upon and disclosed in the country and at the
Bank Infoshop, not later than 3 months after the
project becomes effective.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD           This needs to be confirmed during preparation
because of the project area which is located in a
forest zone
Forests OP/BP 4.36            TBD           This needs to be confirmed during preparation
because of the project area which is located in a
forest zone
Pest Management OP 4.09       No            The project will not finance acquisition, storage,
transport, distribution or use of chemical and
pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  Yes        This policy is triggered because of the use of
BP 4.11                                     borrow pit and excavation in road works. A
chance find procedure will be described in the
ESMF and later on slotted in the enterprise
contracts to safeguard any uncovered
underground artefacts.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10  No           There are no indigenous people in the project
intervention area
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  Yes         The project activities are along existing roads
4.12                                        and do not expand the existing right of way.
Therefore, it is expected to have minimal
resettlement implication. A Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) will be prepared, consulted
upon and disclosed in the country and at the
Bank Infoshop, not later than 3 months after the
project becomes effective.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     No            The project will not finance dam construction,


﻿rehabilitation, maintenance or any activity
linked to existing dam, or downstream section
of existing dam's influence area.
Projects on International        No             The project activities will not impact such a
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                            watercourse.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No             The project will no finance activities in disputed
7.60                                            areas.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?: Yes
i. Explanation
The proposed operation includes works that impact the physical environment and have the poten
ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
20-Sep-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.
All environmental plans will be completed within three months of the approval.
IV. APPROVALS
Team Leader(s):         Name: Kulwinder Singh Rao,Tojoarofenitra Ramanankirahina
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name:                                            Date:
Practice Manager/       Name:                                            Date:
Manager:
0
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.


