                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC18032

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Apr-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-May-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Afghanistan                     Project ID:      P155497
                            Project Name:      Citizens Charter Elements (P155497)
                            Task Team          Susan Wong
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          10-Jun-2016                     Estimated        15-Sep-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSU06                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Irrigation and drainage (20%), General water, sanitation and flood protection
                                               sector (20%), Sub-national government administration ( 20%), General
                                               education sector (20%), Health (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Participation and civic engagement (60%), Rural services and infrastructure
                                               (20%), Other public sector governance (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    490.00                     Total Bank Financing:          0.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund                                       490.00
                              Total                                                                       490.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           6.      The proposed Project Development Objective is to improve service delivery through
                           strengthened Community Development Councils and Clusters. This objective will contribute to the
                           Government’s long-term goals of reducing poverty, breaking the cycle of fragility and violence, and
                         deepening the legitimacy of the state. The Citizen’s Charter will work through CDCs to promote
                         inclusive development and ensure the rights of vulnerable persons such as women and the poor.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         8. The Citizen’s Charter National Priority Program (CCNPP) is a compact between the population
                         and the government. CCNPP will set a threshold of core infrastructure and services that the
                         government will provide to all communities over the next ten years. Some of the critical services
                         include: basic education and health services; safe drinking water; access to roads, irrigation, and
                         energy/electricity. It builds upon the community platform already developed with CDCs throughout
                         the country to improve service delivery and monitoring. The Charter is not only about the delivery of
                         services but the standards of service delivery citizens can expect. Over time, as capacity develops,
                         other services such as disaster relief, refugee integration and local-level dispute resolution can be
                         brought into the Citizen’s Charter umbrella. Furthermore, the CCNPP will coordinate closely with
                         the government’s National Priority program for Economic Empowerment of Women to ensure that
                         assistance is coordinated and reaching poor women. The exact service standards will be finalized
                         during pre-appraisal with an eye towards budget realism, implementation feasibility, and clarity in
                         communicating standards to citizens.

                         9. The CCNPP is an evolution of the National Solidarity Program (NSP), aiming to work more
                         closely with other ministries to deliver services more effectively to citizens. Begun in 2003, NSP has
                         been a massive effort by the government to reach rural communities across Afghanistan and address
                         their needs using participatory approaches. NSP has funded some 88,000 subprojects to improve
                         access to transport, water supply and sanitation, irrigation, electricity and schools in 35,000
                         communities in all 34 provinces. Over one-third of CDC members are women. Given decreasing
                         financial resources and the need to gain efficiencies in service delivery across the government
                         however, NSP needs to evolve to allow CDCs to have a broader mandate and be responsible for
                         whole-of-government development and governance in their communities. This transition means that
                         CDCs will focus much more in the future on monitoring and leveraging services from the various
                         line ministry programs and other national priority programs. In the past under NSP, there has been
Public Disclosure Copy




                         some incremental progress in using CDCs to coordinate service delivery across various sectors,
                         especially given the difficulties of line ministries’ reach down to communities. Past studies
                         highlight the advantages of working through CDCs for geographical and social outreach (to remote
                         and insecure areas as well as to the most vulnerable groups). However those efforts have been ad
                         hoc and non-systematic. Thus, the Citizen’s Charter builds upon the community platform created
                         through NSP over the past 13 years, and strengthens the partnership between government and
                         communities. CDCs/Councils will be the means by which citizens can demand services, hold line
                         agencies accountable, and ensure that the poorest and most vulnerable can access services.

                         10.     The core features of the Citizen’s Charter Program include:

                         •        The Citizen’s Charter will provide a framework for local service delivery, using a
                         programmatic, multi-sectoral approach. This will be the first inter-ministerial National Priority
                         program, where Ministries will collaborate on a single program.
                         •        The CCNPP will strengthen CDCs to represent the community and ensure service delivery
                         and inclusive development at the community level.
                         •        CDCs/Clusters will become the central body for community development overseeing
                         sectoral shuras as subcommittees; and,
                         •        CDCs will monitor and report upon service delivery at the community level from
                         government and NGOs (e.g. monitoring teacher attendance, textbook delivery, health clinic hours,
                         provision of water points, etc). Citizens will monitor and report upon services that communities
                         should be receiving under existing programs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         11.      The Citizen’s Charter Elements Program (CCEP) is one slice of the larger national priority
                         program, CCNPP, to be supported through the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF) and
                         the World Bank. Under its first four-year phase, the CCEP aims to cover all provinces and one-third
                         of districts in each province, albeit coverage will be highly dependent upon security considerations.
                         Criteria for district selection will include security accessibility considerations, poverty and service
                         delivery indicators, commitment of provincial and district governors, and presence of other
                         development programs. CCEP will have the following program components:

                         Component One: Block Grants. CDCs/Clusters are the linchpin of the Citizen’s Charter strategy.
                         This component will support two types of block grants to CDCs:

                         (i)      Rural Areas Service Delivery Grants - Funds are set aside for MRRD to provide water
                         supply, and a choice of basic road access, basic electricity (only in areas that cannot be reached by
                         the grid) and small-scale irrigation. In addition, this window will include service delivery grants
                         which will be transferred from line ministries for CDCs to implement community-level or cluster-
                         level infrastructure projects, as agreed upon through MOUs. For example, should the Ministries of
                         Education or Health wish to provide funds to CDCs to build schools or clinics, they will transfer
                         funds to these accounts.

                         (ii) Urban Areas Service Delivery Grants – Through NSP and other programs, approximately
                         1,800 peri-urban and urban CDCs have been formed. To be phased in over time, this sub-component
                         supports grants to several urban CDCs in a select number of major cities (Kabul, Herat, Mazar,
                         Jalalabad) to fund small infrastructure works in urban settings. These include: green space parks,
                         street lighting, water and sanitation; and waste management. This urban sub-component, to be
                         implemented through the Independent Directorate of Local Governance (IDLG) will support service
                         delivery linkages between the CDC, Cluster/Gozar, urban district and municipal levels. Rural-urban
Public Disclosure Copy




                         linkages for local economic development will also be explored.

                         Component 2: Institution Building – This component will support capacity building and facilitation
                         of CDCs & CCDCs; the out-sourcing of private sector/ facilitating partner contracts; and support to
                         the local government structure in rural and urban areas to monitor and support CDCs.

                         Component 3: Monitoring and Knowledge Learning – This component includes learning activities
                         from village to national levels and will support thematic studies and evaluations. For example, the
                         program will work on the basis of continuous learning and fund learning pilots, gender analyses,
                         community report cards for service delivery, studies on social inclusion and social accountability,
                         and technical quality audits. The Project will also explore the possibility of an evaluation to examine
                         the nexus between quality of service delivery and social cohesion, an under-researched area in the
                         global conflict literature. Lastly, this component will support ways to strengthen a coordinated
                         approach across line ministries’ monitoring and evaluation mechanisms including at the community
                         level, within government and with third party monitors.

                         Component 4: Project Implementation and Management. This component will support the
                         management and oversight structure of CCEP at the central, provincial and district levels. The
                         management structure will carry out the following functions: policy and operational planning;
                         operations manual development; capacity building; management information and reporting systems;
                         grievance redress mechanisms, human resource management; communications; donor and field
                         coordination, quality assurance on financial management; procurement and safeguards; as well as
                         engineering support.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Should the Government raise additional fund for the CCNPP, those funds can be used to expand the
                         program geographically, provide recurrent and maintenance grants to sustain CDCs in other parts of
                         the country, and/or deepen the core service delivery package. During the first phase however, the
                         emphasis will be upon optimizing existing funding and coordinating with other national priority
                         programs.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented throughout Afghanistan in a phased approach, which will cover
                         both rural and urban areas in various sectors such as education, health, agriculture etc. A wide range
                         of sub-projects will be supported including basic road access, health and education service delivery,
                         micro-hydro, water and sanitation facilities and agricultural support.
                         The environmental and social adverse impacts will be insignificant, minor and reversible in nature.
                         While both environmental and social safeguards issues will be managed through a framework
                         approach, the framework will be further spelled out with additional safeguards tools which will be
                         used throughout the project life.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development (MRRD) and other sectoral ministries
                         including the Ministry of Public Health, Ministry of Education, and Ministry of Agriculture,
                         Irrigation and Livestock (MAIL) have over the years implemented World Bank-funded projects and
                         gained considerable experience with an improved capacity in managing, implementing, supervising
                         and monitoring of environmental and social safeguards frameworks and other instruments as well as
                         citizen engagement components. While MRRD and MAIL have shown a moderately satisfactory to
                         satisfactory compliance with the World Bank’s safeguards policies, there is a need for both MoE and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         MoPH to build their capacity in the areas of environmental and social safeguards and citizen
                         engagement in the development process. All the above mentioned Ministries have been
                         implementing several World Bank funded projects such as NSP III, System Enhancement for Health
                         Access in Transition (SEHAT), Afghanistan Rural Access Project (ARAP), National Horticulture
                         and Livestock Project (NHLP), Education Quality Improvement Program II (EQUIP II), and On-
                         Farm Water Management Project (OFWMP) to name a few. Most of these Government agencies
                         have demonstrated improved capacity to address social and environmental safeguards issues as well
                         as citizen engagement during the implementation of their respective projects. It is important to
                         mention that even though MRRD will take the leading role in developing the ESMF for the CCEP,
                         priority will need to be given to ensuring that other ministries will collaborate in the process of
                         preparing the ESMF, which will ultimately lead to greater ownership and smooth implementation of
                         the framework.
                         There are separate safeguards units established in almost all ministries for World Bank-funded
                         projects, which consist of qualified social and environment safeguards specialists. Ministry and
                         project staff have been trained to manage the environmental and social concerns from both the
                         managerial and technical perspectives. To some extent, there is coordination between the
                         environmental and social safeguards staff of the ministries. However, this coordination and
                         collaboration needs to be strengthened as the CCEP moves forward. Continued efforts will be needed
                         to further enhance the capacity of the environmental and social safeguards teams in the line
                         ministries to enable them to handle the environmental and social issues more efficiently and
                           effectively. The project will prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                           and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The project will be an Environmental Category B, and the Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) and
                           Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) will be triggered
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment       Yes           Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 is triggered.
                           OP/BP 4.01                                   The service delivery grants under component one
                                                                        may cause adverse environmental and social impacts
                                                                        including occupational health and safety issues. A
                                                                        framework approach will be adopted as the specific
                                                                        location of activities will only be determined by the
                                                                        Borrower during project implementation. The
                                                                        Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                                        (ESMF) prescribes guidelines and procedures that
                                                                        would avoid, mitigate, or minimize adverse
                                                                        environmental and social impacts as well as spell out
                                                                        the policy, guidelines and procedures to minimize
                                                                        and mitigate the likelihood of the any negative
                                                                        impacts.
                                                                        The ESMF and the required mitigation plans for sub-
                                                                        project under CCEP, identified during first year of
                                                                        implementation will be prepared, cleared and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        disclosed accordingly.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    TBD           At this concept stage it is not known if the policy
                                                                        needs to be triggered or not. Discussions on OP/BP
                                                                        4.04 will continue as the project moves forward to
                                                                        the next stages until the list of the intervention areas
                                                                        are finalized.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36             TBD           At this concept stage it is not known if the policy
                                                                        needs to be triggered or not. Discussions on OP/BP
                                                                        4.36 will continue as the project determines the list
                                                                        of the intervention areas.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09        No            OP 4.09 (Pest Management) policy is not triggered
                                                                        because Project activities will not involve purchase,
                                                                        use or storage of pesticides, nor will it support the
                                                                        procurement, or use of, or lead to the increased use
                                                                        of other agricultural chemicals.
                           Physical Cultural Resources    TBD           At this concept stage it is not known if the policy
                           OP/BP 4.11                                   needs to be triggered or not. Discussions on OP/BP
                                                                        4.11 will continue as the project moves forward to
                                                                        the next stages until the list of the intervention areas
                                                              are finalized. The probability of triggering this policy
                                                              is considered to be high given that some of the
                                                              villages in the intervention area will likely have
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              historical or cultural resources. If potential impacts
                                                              are identified, the associated ESMF will include
                                                              screening provisions for evaluating potential impacts
                                                              and provide specific guidance.
                                                              The ESMF will also comprise guidelines for Chance
                                                              Find Procedures according to national laws.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No    This policy is not triggered as there are no
                         4.10                                 Indigenous Peoples that meet the criteria of OP/BP
                                                              4.10 within the project area that could potentially
                                                              benefit or be adversely affected by the Project’s
                                                              activities.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   No involuntary land acquisition is expected under the
                         BP 4.12                              CCEP. However, the World Bank’s operational
                                                              policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) is
                                                              triggered since the project will support irrigation,
                                                              road, water supply, green space parks, water and
                                                              sanitation and waste management sub-projects. In
                                                              case the requirement for land is unavoidable, all land
                                                              transactions will be based on willing buyer-willing
                                                              seller, voluntary land donation provided that there
                                                              are no structures or assets on the land and the
                                                              livelihood impact of the donation on the owner is
                                                              less than 10 percent of an individual’s holdings. The
                                                              voluntary nature of the land donation and ownership
                                                              of the land shall be fully documented and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              independently verified. The sub-projects shall also be
                                                              screened for land and water disputes in order to
                                                              avoid situations where investments on such projects
                                                              would fuel the disputes. In exceptional cases, minor
                                                              land acquisition may occur in certain sub-projects.
                                                              Since final site identification for CCEP activities
                                                              cannot be identified before project appraisal, a
                                                              framework approach will be used. An ESMF and a
                                                              Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared to
                                                              guide preparation of RAP (where needed). The RPF
                                                              will be in compliance with OP 4.12 and will be
                                                              applied to all project components where it is not
                                                              feasible to avoid land acquisition. A satisfactory
                                                              settlement of the land acquisition issues is a
                                                              precondition for sub-project implementation and any
                                                              form of land acquisition must be fully documented.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No    The Project does not have any activity involving
                                                              dams.
                                 Projects on International      No                                                      The Project does not have any activity involving
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   international waterways.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The Project does not involve any activity in any
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                know disputed area.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 10-Jun-2016
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      No additional safeguards related studies are sought at concept stage, the project ESMF will
                                      contain measures to avoid, minimize and/or mitigate any environmental and/ or social adverse
                                      impact due to sub-project implementation.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Susan Wong
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                                                                                                Date: 18-May-2016
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: David Seth Warren (PMGR)                                                                                               Date: 24-May-2016
                                 Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
