The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
CN: Beijing Rooftop Solar Photovoltaic Scale-Up (Sunshine Schools) Project (P125022)




                        Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                    Restructuring Stage


        Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Mar-2017| Report No: ISDSR21709




                        Regional Vice President:    Victoria Kwakwa
                               Country Director:    Bert Hofman
                 Senior Global Practice Director:   Riccardo Puliti
                    Practice Manager/Manager:       Jie Tang
                             Task Team Leader:      Yanqin Song
           The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           CN: Beijing Rooftop Solar Photovoltaic Scale-Up (Sunshine Schools) Project (P125022)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

I. BASIC INFORMATION

1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

Project ID                                                     Project Name
                                                               CN: Beijing Rooftop Solar Photovoltaic Scale-Up
P125022
                                                               (Sunshine Schools) Project
Task Team Leader(s)                                            Country
Yanqin Song                                                    China
Approval Date                                                  Environmental Category
20-Mar-2013                                                    Partial Assessment (B)
Managing Unit                                                  Is this a Repeater project?
GEE09

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

Total Project Cost                                             Total Financing
239,700,000.00                                                 239,700,000.00
Financing Gap
    0.00

Financing Source                                                                                           Amount
Counterpart Funding                                                                                 119,700,000.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                        120,000,000.00
Total                                                                                               239,700,000.00

2. PROJECT INFORMATION
          The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          CN: Beijing Rooftop Solar Photovoltaic Scale-Up (Sunshine Schools) Project (P125022)



    Current Project Development Objective
    To increase the share of clean energy in electricity consumption and to demonstrate the viability of the renewable
    energy service company model for scaling up the deployment of rooftop solar photo-voltaic systems in schools and
    other educational institutions in Beijing Municipality.


    Proposed New PDO
    Increase electricity generated from distributed solar photovoltaic systems, and demonstrate the viability of the
    renewable energy service company model for scaling up the deployment of such systems, in various sectors in Beijing
    Municipality.
.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


1. PROJECT DESCRIPTION
      The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
      CN: Beijing Rooftop Solar Photovoltaic Scale-Up (Sunshine Schools) Project (P125022)



The proposed project will be implemented over six years and consists of two main components: (a) the Sunshine
Schools Program - installation of 100MW rooftop solar PV systems in about 1000 public schools and collages; and (b)
technical assistance (TA) to develop local capacity for scaling up solar energy deployment, project implementation, and
other priority energy policy initiatives of the BMG.

Component 1: Sunshine Schools Program Support – Scaling up Rooftop Solar PV Systems in Beijing

(estimated cost: $226.0 million; $110.7 million IBRD financing). The proposed component will install 100 MW of
distributed rooftop PV systems in about 1000 public schools and colleges in Beijing under the Renewable Energy Service
Company (RESCO) business model for large-scale rooftop solar PV deployment. Similar to the ESCO business model
adopted by the central Government as a key market mechanism to scale up energy efficiency investments, the RESCO
will take the performance and financial risk of the investment by signing an energy service performance contract (ESPC)
with each school/university, which will pay the RESCO only for the solar PV electricity it consumes. The RESCO will
install, maintain and operate the rooftop solar PV installations during the period of the ESPC, and thereafter hand over
the installation to the school/ university, which themselves pay no up-front capital for the investment. Capital subsidies
will be provided by the Golden Sun Program on a graduated scale (RMB8.0/Wp for the first 5 MW and RMB5.5/Wp for
the remaining 95 MW). BMG will provide an additional RMB1.0/Wp per year as subsidy limited to the first three years.
The Bank loan will be on-lent to the RESCO through the Beijing Municipality.

Given that there will be about 1000 schools under this component, a programmatic approach will be adopted for
project implementation. Yuanshen (Project Company) has developed a Project Implementation and Operations Manual
acceptable to BMG and the Bank, that outlines schools selection criteria, school survey information, technical design
and evaluation requirements, environmental management and safety requirements, and procurement and financial
management frameworks that are consistent with the World Bank and the GOC rules and procedures. During project
implementation, the related Beijing government agencies and stakeholders, e.g., Beijing Development and Reform
Commission (BDRC), Beijing Education Commission (BEC), Beijing Finance Bureau (BFB) and the PMO will assist
Yuanshen with school selection and to supervise project implementation.

Component 2: Technical assistance for developing local capacity for scaling up solar energy deployment, project
implementation, and other priority energy policy initiatives of the BMG (estimated cost: US$4.0 million). The proposed
TA activities include development of local capacity for scaling up commercially viable solar energy deployment; and
engineering and technical support to Yuanshen for the design, procurement, construction supervision and project
management of the PV systems.

As of June 2017, the project is restructured by changing in Component 1 to expand the sectors in which 100MW of
distributed solar PV will be installed, to include educational institutions, commercial, industrial, agricultural and other
sectors. Component 2 is dropped since it is managed and reported under an on-going GEF-supported project.
          The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          CN: Beijing Rooftop Solar Photovoltaic Scale-Up (Sunshine Schools) Project (P125022)



.

3. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
   KNOWN)
The Project supports the installation of 100 MW PV systems on the rooftops and open spaces of several
hundred sites within the jurisdiction of Beijing Municipality, including education institutions, farms,
commercial property, industrial sites and public infrastructure sites.



4. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


Name                                                          Unit
Peishen Wang                                                  GEN2A
Jun Zeng                                                      GSU06
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
5. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED


    Safeguard Policies                       Triggered               Explanation

                                                                     The potential environmental impacts are mainly
                                                                     health and safety concerns such as potential
                                                                     nuisance of noise/dust/waste, disturbance of
                                                                     school activities and safety during construction,
                                                                     for example. Given the limited and generic
                                                                     environmental impacts of the project, the
                                                                     borrower will prepare an EMP or Environmental
                                                                     Code of Practice (ECOP) prior to appraisal for
                                                                     different typologies of investments. The EMP will
                                                                     include description of circumstances where
                                                                     additional mitigation/management measures may
    Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes                      need to be developed during implementation, and
                                                                     provisions of review and approval of these
                                                                     additional mitigation measures. In addition the
                                                                     EMP/ECOP will also ensure that the EHS guidelines
                                                                     on Occupational Health and Safety are
                                                                     incorporated.The project restructuring expands
                                                                     the solar PV system installations to buildings not
                                                                     only in schools, but also buildings and open green
                                                                     spaces in other sectors. While, the installation
                                                                     activity is similar type of activity as for schools,
                                                                     which presents limited or no environmental
                                                                     impacts.
       The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       CN: Beijing Rooftop Solar Photovoltaic Scale-Up (Sunshine Schools) Project (P125022)




                                                                This policy is not triggered. There are no natural
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            No
                                                                habitats involved.


                                                                This policy is not triggered. The project will not
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     No
                                                                involve any forests.

                                                                This policy is not triggered. The project is not
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  No                   expected to procure pesticides or impact on pest
                                                                management practice.
                                                                This policy is not triggered. There is no physical
                                                                cultural resource to be involved. However, chance-
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No
                                                                find procedures is included in the ECOP of the
                                                                EMP.
                                                                According to Beijing census data, more than 95%
                                                                of Beijing’s residents belong to the Han Chinese
                                                                majority. Ethnic minority populations include
                                                                Manchu, Hui, Mongols, and Koreans. Most of
                                                                these ethnic minority populations live scattered
                                                                within the territory of Beijing municipality. Some
                                                                Manchu and Hui populations live collectively
                                                                within ethnic minority townships/villages.
                                                                However, these Manchu and Hui groups share
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)          No                   similar economic, social, and political institutions
                                                                than as those of the Han majority. They are not
                                                                collectively attached to geographically distinct
                                                                habitats, or to ancestral territories, or to natural
                                                                resources in their land. Moreover, they do not use
                                                                any indigenous language in their daily lives.
                                                                Therefore, it is agreed that Manchu and Hui
                                                                groups in Beijing are not indigenous people as
                                                                defined in the Bank’s OP4.10, and that this policy
                                                                is not triggered.
                                                                All civil works related to the project will be
                                                                conducted within the selected existing schools and
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)    No
                                                                colleges; therefore no land acquisition will be
                                                                needed. The policy is not triggered.

                                                                The project will not involve impacts to any dams in
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)              No
                                                                the project area. This policy is not triggered.


Projects on International Waterways (OP)                        The project will not involve trans-boundary rivers.
                                           No
(BP 7.50)                                                       The policy is not triggered.
       The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       CN: Beijing Rooftop Solar Photovoltaic Scale-Up (Sunshine Schools) Project (P125022)




                                                                    The project is not located in any disputed areas.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)    No
                                                                    The policy is not triggered.

KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A. SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
   potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
   The project restructuring expands the PV system installations from rooftops of school buildings to rooftops and
   open outdoor spaces of properties in other sectors, including agriculture, commercial, industry and infrastructure.
   Installation and operation of distributed PV systems in this context has limited environmental, safety and health
   impacts. The PV systems will be installed without any land acquisition or resettlement, therefore, only OP 4.01
   Environment Assessment is triggered, as per appraisal. The main potential environmental impacts are health and
   safety concerns such as potential construction nuisances (noise/dust/waste), disturbance of school activities, and
   construction safety, for example. These potential impacts are site-specific and can be readily avoided, minimized,
   and mitigated with good design and sound construction management. The project is a Category B project as per
   OP4.01.The new activity in the restructured project has the same type of rooftop PV system installation work as for
   schools. No new safeguards policy is to be triggered.



 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

   There is no anticipated future activities associated with/or induced from the project in the project area.


 3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.

   N/A


 4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
   capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
   An Environmental Management Plan (EMP), acceptable to the Bank, has been prepared by Beijing Energy and
   Environmental Development Engineering Ltd. The preparation of the EMP followed national requirements, as well
   as Bank’s OP4.01 Environmental Assessment and the International Finance Corporation’s Environment, Health and
   Safety General Guidelines. The EMP includes thorough screening of possible environmental impacts, and a
   management plan to avoid, minimize, and mitigate potential impacts. It also includes a set of standard
   environmental codes of practice (ECOPs) for common environmental and safety issues met during the installation
   and operation stages. The ECOPs will be included in the Project Implementation and Operations Manual as a guiding
   tool for project implementation. The ECOPs will also be incorporated in the bidding documents/contracts for
   implementation.

   Beijing Municipal Government has experience complying with World Bank requirements over two decades. They
   have implemented several World Bank- and ADB-funded infrastructure and environmental improvement projects.
           The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           CN: Beijing Rooftop Solar Photovoltaic Scale-Up (Sunshine Schools) Project (P125022)



       They are thus familiar with Bank’s safeguard policies and requirements.

       Bank environmental and social development experts will provide guidance to the project implementing agency on
       addressing relevant issues that arise during project implementation.

       For the restructuring, the project EMP has been updated to reflect the scope changes, as well as relevant screening
       process requirements for Yuanshen during the implementation of the project.


   5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies,
       with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
       Project schools were consulted extensively during the preparation of the original EMP, which was published on the
       websites of the Beijing Energy Efficiency Center and the project company, and in the World Bank InfoShop, on
       September 6, 2012.

       The updated EMP was published on Yuanshen company’s website, and the World Bank website, on June 1, 2017.

 DISCLOSURE_TABLE
 B. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                   Date of submission for disclosure
01-Jun-2017                                                   01-Jun-2017
 For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


 “In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                         Date of Disclosure
 China                                                           01-Jun-2017
 Comments
 The original Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was published on the websites of the Beijing Energy Efficiency
 Center and the project company, and in the World Bank InfoShop, on September 6, 2012. The updated EMP was
 published on the project company’s website, and the World Bank website, on June 1, 2017.


COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                   Yes
          The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          CN: Beijing Rooftop Solar Photovoltaic Scale-Up (Sunshine Schools) Project (P125022)



If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                 Yes
and approve the EA report?

Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the
                                                                                                 Yes
credit/loan?



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                 Yes
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                   Yes
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                 Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                 Yes
cost?

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
                                                                                                 Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal                             Yes
documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                    Yanqin Song


    Approved By

    Practice Manager/Manager               Jie Tang                                13-Jun-2017

.
      The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
      CN: Beijing Rooftop Solar Photovoltaic Scale-Up (Sunshine Schools) Project (P125022)



Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
