                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC13265

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Jun-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Nov-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Mozambique                      Project ID:      P149620
                            Project Name:      Moz Agriculture and Natural Resources Landscape Management Project
                                               (P149620)
                            Task Team          Mark A. Austin,Andre Rodrigues de Aquino,Pedro Arlindo
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       31-Mar-2016                        Estimated        19-May-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GFA07                               Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (40%), General agriculture, fishing and
                                               forestry sector (40%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and H ighways (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Rural markets (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%), Other rural
                                               development (20%), Land administration and management (20% ), Other
                                               environment and natural resources management (20%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     40.00                     Total Bank Financing:        40.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 40.00
                              Total                                                                       40.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           This proposed project development objective is to increase market production of agriculture and
                           forest products by rural communities, and to reduce net deforestation in project areas.
                           C. Project Description
                         Project approach
                         The project will be structured as Investment Project Financing, funded by an IDA credit, and
                         potential associated Trust Fund financing, including the Nordic Development Fund.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Integrated landscape management approach: The proposed project’s design recognizes the
                         fact that agriculture development, natural resource management, and land administration are
                         inextricably linked, both institutionally and at the local technical level, and that interventions need to
                         be made at scale to have an impact on rural poverty and natural resources sustainability. The
                         proposed operation’s integrated approach aims to achieve rural development impact by combining
                         the promotion of economic activity with the management and conservation of natural resources.
                         Within the agriculture component, a value chain development approach will include a package of
                         complementary measures to promote climate-smart agricultural production. Within the natural
                         resources management component, better management of natural forests, further establishment of
                         planted forests, nature-based tourism and community-based sports hunting will be promoted. In order
                         to enable all of these interventions, security of community land rights, improved capacity of land
                         administration systems, and stronger community rights to natural resources are prerequisites to
                         encourage farmers and communities to make the long-term investments needed for financial
                         sustainability and increased resilience to climatic shocks.
                         •        Value chain approach: As a basis for the project’s activities and selection of geographical
                         areas for agriculture and natural resources-based value chain development, a value chain orientation
                         would be applied with a geographical focus around key agribusiness hubs and their respective
                         existing and potential rural supply catchment areas (or “market-sheds”), as well as key anchor
                         investors in rural areas with their individual out-grower arrangements. The project will work with
                         IFC agribusiness investments and advisory where possible, for example with Portucel and potentially
                         with new agribusinesses that are attracted by the Nacala Corridor railway investment in which IFC
                         may invest.
                         The project aims to maximize the value of agriculture, forests, wildlife and other natural resources to
                         rural communities by developing value chains with the private sector. The project will work closely
                         with agribusiness firms and will support the development and strengthening of linkages between
Public Disclosure Copy




                         processors and traders of cash and food commodities. The project will aim to build linkages to
                         existing private sector investments in forest plantations (Portucel in Zambezia and possibly Green
                         Resources in Nampula). In the wildlife sector, the project would promote nature-based tourism
                         around protected areas and other destinations and sports hunting, with a particular emphasis on
                         promoting private-community partnerships.
                         •        Geographical coverage and the link between market-sheds and watersheds. The project will
                         be implemented primarily in the northern provinces of Cabo Delgado, Nampula, Zambezia, and
                         Niassa, and other potential areas to be identified during project preparation and agreed upon by the
                         GoM and IDA. Annex 3 contains a map of the targeted areas. The above mentioned provinces
                         experience high poverty rates, and have significant potential for agriculture and natural resources-
                         based value chains. Zambezia Province has the highest poverty rate in the country with over 70% of
                         population below the poverty line, and has significant potential for forestry development (both
                         planted forests and management of existing forests). The geographical scope will primarily be a
                         function of existing and potentially scaled up agribusiness activity and linkages with rural producers/
                         suppliers. Agricultural supply catchment areas will be determined during preparation. Within and
                         overlapping these identified agricultural zones a number of watersheds will be the basis for
                         determining the geographical scope of integrated NRM project activities, based on the measures
                         required to conserve and manage natural resources within these watersheds.
                         •        Climate resilient rural development and climate finance: By promoting better management of
                         natural forests, establishment of planted forests and climate-smart agriculture, the project supports
                         Mozambique’s vision towards climate resilient growth and opens possibilities for the country to
                         capture international climate finance. One potential source of financing would be payments for
                         results in terms of reduced emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (forest carbon).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Land administration related activities: The project support on land sector will focus on the
                         following three areas: i) improving community land rights through demand-driven and geographic
                         area-based systematic delimitation process; ii) supporting land use planning. The project would
                         suppor t land use planning at several levels, from a macro strategic planning level to local land use
                         planning (watershed and micro-watershed levels); and iii) strengthening capacity of land
                         administration agency at the national and provincial levels. Address these issues are crucial for
                         establishing an enabling investment environment.
                         •        Community-based natural resources management: The project will place emphasis on
                         strengthening local communities’ and smallholders’ capacity to fully participate in value chains. This
                         include strengthening local-level institutions that manage forests and wildlife and hunting by
                         promoting communities’ rights, land demarcation and village-level land use planning, conflict
                         resolution, capacity building on business management and other skills. This will build on the
                         community-engagement approach currently being pursued by the MozBio project.
                         •        Enabling environment: In addition to concrete investments on the ground, the project will
                         promote policies and regulations to enhance the promotion of responsible private sector investment
                         in agriculture and natural resource value chains. These policies range from incentives for better
                         management of natural forests, to increased law enforcement to address illegal activities, such as
                         illegal logging.. The project would enhance the institutional capacity for evidence-based policy
                         making.
                         •        Link to other partners and WBG operations: The proposed operation will complement and
                         support existing WBG operations, including the PROIRRI program, the community development
                         program of Portucel (supported by IFC), and possible spin-off projects from IFC investments in the
                         Nacala Corridor. The project will also seek to build strong partnerships with and build on ongoing
                         work led by other development partners, NGOs and the private sector, for example the new USAID-
                         funded agribusiness support program.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         To be determined during project preparation.

                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Borrower has long lasting proven experience and expertise in managing World Bank funded
                         operations, both in the agriculture and natural resources management sectors. Ex-MICOA (Ministry
                         for the Coordination of Environmental Affairs) replaced since January 15, 2015 by the new Ministry
                         of Land, Environment and Rural Development (MITADER) has provincial representations
                         throughout the country that work collaboratively with the respective districts on environmental and
                         social including gender screening and monitoring of development projects. Overtime, the World
                         Bank has providing series of social and environmental safeguards training workshop that has helped
                         to improve both the perception of safeguards policies as well as gender and vulnerable groups
                         inclusion and way of adequately implementing them. Nonetheless, the ESMF, IPMP and RPF will
                         specify supplemental training and capacity building needed to accompany MITADER and
                         participating government agencies to adequately implement safeguards measure and so to be in
                         compliance with the binding legal documents between the two parties, including the applicable
                         national environmental requirements. Moreover, social and environmental safeguards management
                         sub-components are being embedded in each component of the project so to ensure a more
                         systematic implementation of safeguards measures. Likewise, two Social and an Environmental
                           Safeguards Focal Points (SESFP) will be hired at the Project Management/Technical Implementation
                           Unit (PMU/PTIU) and work collaboratively with the 2 SESFPs as part of the UT-REDD ( REDD -
                           Technical Implementation Unit) under the overall leadership/mentorship of the World Bank
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguards Specialists. The project two E&S Focal points will work collaboratively with both the
                           Monitoring & Evaluation Specialist and Provincial project coordinators to ensure systematic
                           compliance with both Safeguards, Gender and vulnerability and national regulations. During the
                           implementation of this operation, further steps will be taken to strengthen the Government’s overall
                           technical capacity on safeguards and gender, particularly through technical assistance and training.
                           Since details of the precise nature and location of subproject investments for the beneficiaries will
                           only be determined during project implementation a series of regional training workshops will be
                           gradually organized for all actors involved in the implementation of social and environmental
                           safeguards policy as well as gender and vulnerable groups inclusion at central, provincial, district and
                           local level upon project effectiveness.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSURR)
                           Eden Gabriel Vieira Dava (GSU01)
                           Paulo Jorge Temba Sithoe (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment          Yes            The Agriculture and Natural Resources Management
                           OP/BP 4.01                                       Project is a Category B project, since the potential
                                                                            environmental and social impacts are expected to be
                                                                            minor, site specific and easily manageable. The
                                                                            proposed activities under Component 1 through 5 are
                                                                            likely to lead to some environmental and social
                                                                            impacts that would require due safeguards attention.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            Consequently, OP/BP 4.01 is triggered to set forth
                                                                            the basic principles and prerogatives to be followed
                                                                            to comply with safeguards requirements. Since at this
                                                                            very juncture the detailed description of these
                                                                            activities, along with their footprints is unknown, the
                                                                            project will prepare the Environmental and Social
                                                                            Management Framework (ESMF) to comply with
                                                                            OP/BP 4.01 requirements. The ESMF will include
                                                                            both an environmental and social screening form
                                                                            (ESSF) and a set of Environmental and Social
                                                                            Clauses (ESC) for project implementers. The
                                                                            implementer will also prepare specific ESMPs once
                                                                            the nature of the infrastructure rehabilitation works,
                                                                            under Component 4 are identified. The ESMF/ESMP
                                                                            will be reviewed by both the Social and
                                                                            Environmental Safeguards Specialists, and cleared
                                                                            by the Regional Safeguards Advisor (RSA), and
                                                                            ultimately disclosed both in-country and at the
                                                                            InfoShop prior to appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD   Although no new land will be rehabilitated, the OP/
                                                             BP 4.04 is triggered to safeguard possible
                                                             interventions on land that will benefit from small
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             irrigation schemes. The project will be involved in
                                                             the rehabilitation of small scale irrigation schemes
                                                             for horticulture. The ESMF to be prepared under the
                                                             OP/BP 4.04 will provide additional guidance on the
                                                             adequate measures to be complied with during the
                                                             irrigation rehabilitation activities and best
                                                             management practices applicable to Natural Habitats
                                                             in the unlikely possibility of affecting these
                                                             ecosystems.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   This policy is triggered to some of the proposed
                                                             activities in component 2. The Project will not have
                                                             any direct or indirect impacts on health and quality
                                                             of forests, or the health and safety of people who
                                                             depends on forests. There is no intention to change
                                                             management, protection, or utilization of forests, but
                                                             rather to encourage a sustainable management of
                                                             forest services and products. The EMSF incorporates
                                                             screening for impact on forests and provide
                                                             provisions to prohibit activities that would have a
                                                             long-lasting negative impact on forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes   Provision of improved inputs under Component 1
                                                             and 2 may include the use of pesticides (though at a
                                                             low scale to boost agriculture productivity) which
                                                             cumulative usage could possibly lead to more
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             exposure that could hinder the health and safety
                                                             conditions of beneficiary communities in targeted
                                                             zones. However, to take the necessary measures, this
                                                             policy has been triggered. Borrower will therefore
                                                             prepare an Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP)
                                                             to foster a more collaborative and participatory
                                                             management of pesticides usage. Like the ESMF,
                                                             RPF and the PF, the IPMP will be duely consulted
                                                             upon, reviewed by both Social the Environmental
                                                             safeguards specialists and cleared by the RSA, and
                                                             ultimately disclosed both in-country and at the
                                                             InfoShop prior to appraisal.
                         Physical Cultural Resources   Yes   The policy is triggered due to foreseen major civil
                         OP/BP 4.11                          works that are expected to be supported by the
                                                             Project. To ensure due diligence, Chance Finds
                                                             approaches will be included in the ESMF to provide
                                                             the needful steps to be complied with during project
                                                             implementation. The ESMF will be reviewed by both
                                                             the Social and Environmental Safeguards Specialists,
                                                              and cleared by the Regional Safeguards Advisor
                                                              (RSA), and ultimately disclosed both in-country and
                                                              at the InfoShop prior to appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No    The policy is not triggered simply because it does not
                         4.10                                 apply to Mozambique, as there are no such
                                                              populations/communities that correspond to the
                                                              definition of Indigenous peoples as described per the
                                                              policy.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   The policy is triggered since the project will likely
                         BP 4.12                              finance activities that could necessitate involuntary
                                                              land acquisition resulting in
                                                              •        Involuntary resettlement of people and/or
                                                              loss of (or access to) assets, means of livelihoods or
                                                              resources; and
                                                              •        The involuntary restriction of access to
                                                              legally designated parks and protected areas resulting
                                                              in adverse impacts on the livelihoods of the displaced
                                                              persons.
                                                              To ensure due diligence is done, and since details of
                                                              the project description are unknown at this very
                                                              juncture, the Borrower will prepare both a
                                                              Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to adequately
                                                              deal with issues of land acquisition resulting with
                                                              compensation and/or the physical displacement of
                                                              peoples; as well as a Process Framework (PF) to
                                                              address issues with restrictions to access to legally
                                                              designated protected areas/national parks. Both the
                                                              PF and the RPF would need to be prepared by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              Borrower, reviewed and cleared by the Bank and
                                                              adequately disclosed both in-country and at the
                                                              InfoShop prior to appraisal.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      TBD   This policy is been marked TBD since the current
                                                              Project description provides no sufficient
                                                              information to shed lights on whether or not it is to
                                                              be triggered (i.e. rehabilitation of dikes and drainage
                                                              systems, small water storage and water canals, new
                                                              investments in any major water storage or water
                                                              control structures). The World Bank safeguards
                                                              specialists will further assess these issues during the
                                                              forthcoming identification and/or preparation
                                                              mission.
                         Projects on International      TBD   The policy is been marked as TBD since project
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 proposed activities will not be expected to invest in
                                                              any large scale irrigation activities that would
                                                              adversely affect the quality or quantity of water flow
                                                              within shared waterways. The World Bank
                                                                                                                        safeguards specialists will further assess these issues
                                                                                                                        during the forthcoming identification and/or
                                                                                                                        preparation mission.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      This policy is not triggered. The area in which the
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                Smallholder Agriculture Development and
                                                                                                                        Commercialization Project will be implemented is
                                                                                                                        not known to include any disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 10-Dec-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Likely to be launched by September 15 so as to ensure the preparation of appraisal stage project
                                      and safeguards documents, by late October to early November, 2015.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Mark A. Austin,Andre Rodrigues de Aquino,Pedro Arlindo
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                  Date: 08-Nov-2015
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Magda Lovei (PMGR)                       Date: 30-Nov-2015
                                 Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
