                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA18197
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Dec-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Dec-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                              Project ID:   P153473
                            Project Name:      Three Gorges Modern Logistics Center Infrastructure Project (P153473)
                            Task Team          Hua Tan
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          19-Dec-2016              Estimated     17-Mar-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GTI10                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       446.00           Total Bank Financing:    200.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                                  246.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     200.00
                              Total                                                                                     446.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The PDO is to improve freight transport and logistics services in Yichang.
                            3. Project Description
                           A.      Project Component

                           The Project comprises five components, as outlined below.

                           Component 1: Baiyang Port and Operation Areas (total cost US$123.21 million, IBRD loan US


                                                                       Page 1 of 10
                         $71.18 million, 29% of total project cost). This component will finance the construction of: (i) three
                         container and four bulk cargo berths, and (ii) supporting infrastructure, including cargo and container
                         yards, and the purchase and installation of equipment for loading and unloading. Yichang
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Municipality is currently constructing six berths, which are expected to open for operation at the end
                         of 2016. On completion of the proposed Project, the total number of berths in the Baiyang Port will
                         be 13.

                         Component 2: Baiyang Logistics Park (total cost US$252.37 million, IBRD loan US$92.99 million,
                         60% of total project cost). This component will finance the development of:
                         (a)       Core Commercial Area, to provide logistic services primarily for: (i) urban distribution and
                         logistics services associated with small-size consumer goods that require quick turnaround; (ii)
                         value-added services for containers; and (iii) general services and administration offices.
                         (b)       Logistics Service Area A, to provide logistics services for large-size general cargos such as
                         steel, light manufacturing equipment, construction materials (including glass and home construction
                         materials), and metallurgical products.
                         (c)       Logistics Service Area B, to provide container logistics services for bulk construction
                         materials including specialty wood, manufacturing materials including wires, cables, transformer,
                         and vehicle parts.

                         Component 3: Transport Connection Infrastructure (total cost US$34.25 million, IBRD loan US
                         $24.93 million, 8% of total project cost). This component will finance the construction of: (i) an
                         overpass road connecting Baiyang Port and the Logistics Park to Ziyun Railway➢❨ s Shawan
                         Marshalling Yard; (ii) surrounding roads and underground utilities (power, water, drainage, etc.),
                         including Guihu Road and Songgang Second Road; and (iii) traffic signals, intersection
                         channelization, and other traffic management facilities.

                         Component 4: Baiyang Logistics Information Platform and Facilities (total cost US$11.09 million,
                         IBRD loan US$7.88, 3% of total project cost). This component will finance: (i) computer hardware
                         and equipment purchase and installation in the information center; (ii) an information platform; and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (iii) a business application system. The information platform will collect data and information at
                         various points of the logistics service value chain, while the business application system will conduct
                         big data analysis and provide key information for decision making to users, logistics service
                         providers and enterprises looking to outsource supply chain management.

                         The primary functions of the information center are: (i) inventory management; (ii) vehicle fleet
                         dispatch and location tracking; (iii) urban distribution management; and (iv) information services to
                         logistics service providers and private enterprises. The secondary function of the information center
                         is to manage commercial activities in the logistics park, e.g. maintain a registry of enterprises and
                         associated staff and manage the security system (such as the CCTV network).

                         Component 5: Capacity Building (total cost US$2.95 million, IBRD loan US$2.95 million, 1% of
                         total project cost). This component will finance technical assistance (TA) activities for: (i) plan for
                         developing Yichang as a key transport and logistics hub in the proposed Yichang-Europe land-to-
                         waterway freight corridor ; (ii) develop a detailed business plan to attract businesses to the logistic
                         park, and to develop an operational plan (including drawing up agreement for partnership with other
                         port and logistic park operators); (iii) training and skill development; and (iv) project management
                         support during implementation.




                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is located about 40 km downstream (east) of Yichang city at the northern bank of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Yangzi River, the longest and biggest river in China. Yichang is strategically located at the junction
                         of the upper and middle branches of the river, downstream from the Three Gorges Dam. Yichang is
                         the third largest city in Hubei Province, central-south China, with an urban population of 1.2 million,
                         making Yichang a medium size city in China. It has a hilly geography with lush vegetation and
                         subtropical continental climate. The annual precipitation averages 1,210 mm, mostly falling in
                         summer.

                         The project site is about 3km downstream from the boundary of a provincial nature reserve for
                         Chinese sturgeon, an important migrating species under national level I protection, the highest level
                         in China. Other protected species in the reserve include martens, river dolphin, bleeker, and
                         Dabry➢❨ s sturgeon. The river segment facing the project site is 47km downstream from the Chinese
                         sturgeon spawning ground, just below the Gezhouba Dam near downtown Yichang. The Three
                         Gorges Dam is more than 30 km further upstream from the Gezhouba Dam.

                         All lands needed for the project are collectively-owned by two villages, Yazishan and Guixihu.
                         These two villages are typical rural villages. Most of the labor force are working outside the village
                         as migrant labor. All families have contracted land in the village but they do not rely on land for their
                         livelihood. Their income is mainly salary from working as migrant labor. The acquired land is
                         mainly used for orchards and fish ponds. A small proportion of the land is for residential houses and
                         other structures. Although these two villages are along the Yangtze River, none of the residents in
                         these two villages engage in fishery.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Chaogang Wang (GSU05)
                         Xin Ren (GEN2A)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes            A commercial port and associated logistics park will be
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      built under the proposed project at the upper branches of
                                                                     the Yangzi River located 40 km downstream of Yichang,
                                                                     a medium-sized riverside city. The project also includes
                                                                     construction of an overpass, roads andother facilities
                                                                     inside the logistics park. Given the nature and scale of the
                                                                     project, sensitivity of impacts, and risks involved due to
                                                                     its location along the river, a category A is assigned.

                                                                     Following the requirements of Bank safeguard policies
                                                                     and relevant domestic regulations, an Environmental
                                                                     Assessment (EA) was prepared by a certified EA institute
                                                                     (Hubei Provincial Safety and Environment Academy),
                                                                     which has recent experience with other Bank projects in
                                                                     the province. A social assessment was prepared by social
                                                                     experts and added as a chapter to form the Environmental
                                                                     and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA). The
                                                                     Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) has


                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                                                        been developed with general measures (e.g.,
                                                        Environmental Code of Practice) as well as site-specific
                                                        measures, taking into account the WB/IFC➢❨ s
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines for
                                                        Shipping and EHS Guidelines for Ports, Harbors and
                                                        Terminals.

                                                        The main impacts and risks, mitigation measures and the
                                                        public consultation conducted are summarized in Section
                                                        II A, and provided fully in the ESIA.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   Though the project site is outside the provincial natural
                         4.04                           reserve for Chinese sturgeon, an endangered migrating
                                                        species, it is only a few kilometers downstream from its
                                                        boundary. A description of this natural reserve as well as
                                                        riverine and terrestrial natural habitats has been included
                                                        in the ESIA with mitigation and preventive measures
                                                        specified in the ESMP.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    Policy does not apply as the project will not be
                                                        implemented in any forested areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     Policy is not triggered as the project will not procure any
                                                        pesticides nor will it induce an increase in pesticide use.
                         Physical Cultural        No    A survey was conducted during the EA preparation,
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           which verified that no physical cultural resources, as
                                                        defined by this OP, were found in the area of influence.
                                                        Nonetheless, chance find procedures are included in the
                                                        ESMP in case cultural relics are uncovered during
                                                        implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No    Policy is not triggered as indigenous people as defined in
                         BP 4.10                        the policy are not present in project areas.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   The project will involve permanent acquisition of 2,134
                         OP/BP 4.12                     mu of land affecting 463 households, of which 252
                                                        households (911 persons) will be physically displaced. In
                                                        addition, 6 enterprises and/or public units will also be
                                                        relocated. All land needed for the projectare collective
                                                        land owned by two villages, Yazishan and Guixihu. A
                                                        Resettlement Action Plan was prepared according to Bank
                                                        policy and relevant government laws and regulations. The
                                                        draft RAP was reviewed by the task team and disclosed
                                                        both in country and at the Bank InfoShop.

                                                        As part of project preparation, analysis of linked activities
                                                        (per Paragraph 4 of OP 4.12) was conducted and
                                                        identified the following linked activities: (i) the first phase
                                                        of Baiyang Port, and (ii) about 4 km of the rerouting of
                                                        National Road 318 from Baiyang Port to Taibaochang.
                                                        Construction of both linked activities has been completed.
                                                        A resettlement retroactive review has been carried out for


                                                         Page 4 of 10
                                                                      the land acquisition involved in these two activities and
                                                                      the retroactive review report has been included in the
                                                                      RAP as an Annex. Land acquisition of Baiyang Port
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Phase I affected 65 households with 227 persons and the
                                                                      land acquisition of the rerouting of National Road 318
                                                                      affected 78 households with 275 persons. The retroactive
                                                                      review found that all people affected by the land
                                                                      acquisition of these two linked activities were
                                                                      compensated according to relevant laws and regulation of
                                                                      the government. The affected persons are satisfied with
                                                                      the compensation. The compensation rates of affected
                                                                      assets reflected their replacement costs, which is
                                                                      consistent with the requirements of the Bank Policy OP
                                                                      4.12.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No            Policy is not triggered as the proposed project will not
                            4.37                                      affect or be affected by the dam about 70 km upstream.
                            Projects on International   No            Policy is not triggered as the project will not undertake
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      any activities in the catchment areas of international
                                                                      waterways and shared aquifers.
                            Projects in Disputed        No            Policy is not triggered as project activities will not be
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                          implemented in any disputed areas.
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environment
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Impacts during construction mainly include those on river environment, wastewater discharge,
                             vegetation loss, off-site impacts from borrow and disposal pits on water and soil erosion, noise and
                             dust, heath risks on workers and community, impacts on aquatic species, and safety risks of river
                             front civil work. The radius of civil work impacts of the port structure is estimated at less than
                             10% of the river cross section. Therefore, the impacts during construction on aquatic ecology and
                             species are limited. However, operation of the port and associated logistics park will draw more
                             vessels and increase water traffic on the river segment nearby. Potential impacts associated with
                             operations include those on river hydrology, aquatic ecology, fishery, navigation safety, ship waste
                             management, risks of safety and contamination during loading, fire risks related to ships and
                             resulting oil leakage, wastewater discharge, solid wastes, noise and air emissions, impacts induced
                             by increased traffic once the project is completed, and cumulative impacts of past, present and
                             future development along the river of the Yichang Navigation Hub of which the project is a part.

                             Cumulative impacts analysis (CIA) was carried out and focused on three valuable ecological
                             components (VECs): Chinese sturgeon, water quality, and natural shoreline of the Yichang
                             segment of the Yangtze River. Adult sturgeons, as part of their migration, will be passing through
                             the left bank of the river, where the project is located, which might affect their migration. The CIA
                             followed the six-step methodology of the IFC Good Practice Handbook on Cumulative Impact
                             Assessment and Management. The scope of the CIA covers the whole Yichang Navigation Hub


                                                                       Page 5 of 10
                          consisting of a series of ports, of which the proposed project is the latest one. The CIA shows that
                          cumulative impacts of all development activities on Chinese sturgeon and water quality are
                          expected to be within ecologically safe thresholds. However, the current shoreline of the river
Public Disclosure Copy




                          segment concerned is deemed over-developed (see 2 below for details).

                          Environmental and safety risks for commercial river ports in this part of China are mainly port and
                          vessel related. For port operation, the main accidents include sinking or capsizing due to
                          unbalanced loading, damage or drowning of workers, and fire and explosion caused mainly by the
                          combustion of substandard fuel. For vessels, the most common accidents are stranding and
                          collision, followed by fire risk due to aging electrical circuits, substandard machinery oil or
                          interior material. The main consequence of all the above is oil leakage, a major environmental risk
                          and, thus, the focus of risk assessment and preventive measures. The damage from oil leakage risk
                          is evaluated by multiplying the risk magnitude and probability data. The Safety Assessment
                          Report has been prepared per domestic requirement with a focus on risks during construction, such
                          as lightning, sandstorms, and flood, as well as associated risks on civil work and workers➢❨
                          safety especially for river front construction activities.

                          Social

                          The proposed project will generate broad social benefit. The development of the proposed Baiyang
                          Port will relieve bottlenecks on the Three Gorges Dam ship locks, which have reached their
                          carrying capacity. The proposed modern logistics park will provide e-services on logistics
                          information and integrate IT in its operation. This will improve information access for logistics
                          companies, clients, and operators and help reduce the cost of storage and transportation. The
                          construction of the project will also create job opportunities for local people and stimulate local
                          economic development.

                          The key adverse social impacts of the project are largely related to land acquisition and demolition
                          of structures. The total permanent land acquisition is 2,139 mu of collectively-owned land.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Permanent land acquisition will affect 463 households with 1,616 persons, of which 252
                          households with 911 persons will need to be physically displaced. Six small enterprises and units
                          also will need to be relocated.

                           In addition to the resettlement impacts, the construction and operation of the project may increase
                           traffic passing through the local community, which may increase traffic accidents. The
                           construction of the project may require a relatively large number of construction workers. The
                           large influx of migrant labor may lead to conflict between construction camps and local
                           communities.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Yichang Municipality plans to consolidate different port functions into larger and fewer ports to
                           improve port services and efficiency and limit uncontrolled development on the river shoreline.
                           Sand farming and wharfs will be controlled along the river as the first step of port consolidation
                           and operations. In the long run, most major port operations will be carried out away from urban
                           centers, including in the proposed Baiyang Port, thus freeing up port operations and reducing
                           congestion in downtown areas. It is expected that the new consolidation plan will reduce impacts
                           on the Yangtze River shoreline and the nature reserve for Chinese sturgeon located in the river
                           segment near downtown Yichang.


                                                                     Page 6 of 10
                           Unplanned and over withdrawal of river sand may erode river banks/beds affecting flood control
                           capacity, damage riparian vegetation, and alter turbidity and hydro-dynamics of the river, which,
                           in turn, often deteriorates riverine and aquatic eco-systems. However, shutting down sand farming
Public Disclosure Copy




                           can have negative social impacts if the jobs and livelihood of the owners and workers involved are
                           not properly managed. In order to understand the impacts and develop mitigation measures
                           resulting from port consolidation and future sand farm closures, the proposed project will finance a
                           technical assistance study to develop a social and environmental impact management plan.

                           The ESIA shows that fishery only accounts for 1-2% of GDP in Yichang and is predominantly
                           aquaculture (almost 90%). In the project➢❨ s area of influence, the share of fishery is negligible
                           with most locals engaged in farming and orchard production. Therefore, the project will primarily
                           impact farming, which is addressed in the social assessment.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Various alternatives, including a ➢❨ no project➢❨ scenario, have been identified and compared
                           during the EA process in order to avoid or minimize adverse impacts and optimize the project
                           design. Major available technologies in China for managing wastewater and solid wastes from
                           vessels were analyzed and compared with international good practices embodied in the applicable
                           EHS Guidelines. The guidelines indicate that wastewater and garbage from vessels should either
                           be (i) collected and treated by specialized vessels, as already being practiced in other ports in
                           Yichang, or (ii) sent to port for treatment on shore, in order to maximize treatment efficiency.
                           Different options for handling solid wastes on land (in port and logistics park) are also considered.
                           Different loading technologies for bulk goods are compared and the one with less dust and exhaust
                           emissions are recommended. Different practices for handling rainwater from the port area were
                           compared and the good practice of collecting and treating early rainwater was selected. Two
                           design options for logistic park layout within the same area was compared. The one with shorten
                           travel distance for park vehicles will save energy and generate less emissions over long term thus
                           was recommended. Overall, the recommended options are those environmentally robust, more
Public Disclosure Copy




                           economically viable, and more adapted to local conditions.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           A project management office (PMO) has been established at the Three Gorges Port Authority of
                           Yichang and mainly plays a coordination role among major government bureaus. Under its
                           leadership, a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) has been set up at the Yichang Transport
                           Investment Co., Ltd. The PIU➢❨ s staff in charge of safeguard has been stable, highly dedicated
                           and supportive throughout the safeguard preparation. Although the PMO and PIU are well staffed,
                           they do not have experience in Bank-financed projects and are not familiar with the Bank➢❨ s
                           safeguards policies. During project preparation, the Bank task team provided training to PMO and
                           PIU staff on the Bank➢❨ s safeguards policies. Capacity building in safeguards will be continued
                           throughout the project cycle, as indicated in the budgeted training plan in the Environmental and
                           Social Management Plan (ESMP).

                           The ESMP was developed to effectively address negative impacts and risks. It prescribes common
                           mitigation measures especially during construction and site-specific measures for water front
                           construction and port operation, taking into account applicable World Bank and EHS Guidelines.
                           Examples of site-specific measures for sensitive receptors include the timing of water front civil
                           work in certain months in order to minimize disturbance of the migration route of protected


                                                                     Page 7 of 10
                          species, funding to support the nature reserve in its ongoing effort to artificially reproduce Chinese
                          sturgeon and other protected species, and proposing studies on the ecological threshold for natural
                          shoreline in Yichang and the mechanism for enforcement. The PIU developed an Environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Code of Practice (ECOP) for construction as part of its standard code of conduct. Measures from
                          the Safety Assessment Report are also included in the ESMP to prevent risks during construction
                          and operation. In addition, an emergency preparedness and response plan addresses major
                          environmental risks of oil leakage incidents. The ESMP will be included or referred to in the
                          bidding documents and contracts with all involved parties.

                          The key adverse social impacts of the project are largely related to land acquisition and demolition
                          of structures. The total permanent land acquisition is 2,139 mu of collectively-owned land. The
                          permanent land acquisition will affect 463 households with 1,616 persons, of which 252
                          households with 911 persons will need to be physically displaced. In addition, 6 small enterprises
                          and units will need to be relocated. To mitigate the impacts, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has
                          been prepared following the World Bank policy on Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12 and relevant
                          local laws and regulations. The RAP has been prepared based on a detailed census of the affected
                          people, inventory of affected assets, socioeconomic surveys, and extensive consultations with
                          project-affected people. The RAP provides details on resettlement policy procedures and
                          requirements that will be followed during project implementation, including compensation rates,
                          mitigation measures to restore incomes, institutional and monitoring arrangements, and
                          resettlement budget and fund flow.

                          In addition to resettlement impacts, the project may also have some social risks and adverse social
                          impacts on different social groups. The construction and operation of the project may increase
                          traffic volume on the road that passes through the local community, which may increase the
                          likelihood of traffic accidents. The construction of the project may require a relatively large
                          number of construction workers. A large influx of migrant labor may lead to conflict between
                          construction camps and local communities. To ensure other social impacts and risks are well
                          assessed and mitigated, a social assessment was conducted. The social assessment chapter is
Public Disclosure Copy




                          included in the integrated ESIA and the mitigation measures are integrated into the ESMP.

                           Yichang Municipality➢❨ s plan to consolidate port functio ns and shut down small sand farms
                           may affect logistics and other businesses. These social impacts will be covered by the Technical
                           Assistance (TA) activities financed by the project. For instance, the TA activities would include:
                           (i) policy and strategy development to improve intermodal freight transportation and logistics
                           planning, financing, and operations in Yichang, and (ii) business plan development and market
                           promotion to attract businesses to the logistics park (including drawing up agreement for
                           partnership with other port and logistics park operators). During the project implementation, the
                           task team will review the TOR of relevant studies to ensure the social dimensions are well
                           covered.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Two rounds of public disclosure and consultation were conducted during the EA preparation per
                           the Bank requirement for category A projects. The first round in early November 2015 provided
                           project information, potential impacts, and a description of the EA work on notice boards of
                           affected communities in Yichang and the official website of Hubei Provincial Environmental
                           Protection Bureau. The second round in February-March of 2016 included an announcement in
                           Yichang➢❨ s major local newspaper to solicit public opinion and disclosed the full draft EA/EMP


                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                           on the official PMO website. Public consultation following each round of disclosure was
                           conducted using a combination of questionnaire survey, expert consultation, and meetings. A total
                           of 200 people with a balanced distribution by age, profession and gender were surveyed, and more
Public Disclosure Copy




                           than ten relevant organizations including affected villages, towns, enterprises, and concerned
                           government agencies were consulted. Their concerns and suggestions were incorporated into the
                           final reports. The English version of the ESIA/ESMP were submitted to the InfoShop on July 27,
                           2016.

                           The people affected by land acquisition constitute one group of primary stakeholders. These
                           stakeholders were intensively consulted in the resettlement planning process and RAP preparation
                           through surveys, social impact analysis, and public consultation. Their feedback was incorporated
                           into the RAP and the project interventions. Based on public consultation, the planned measures in
                           the RAP are adequate to mitigate the project impacts due to land acquisition and relocation. The
                           RAP was disclosed in the local newspaper on March 31, 2016 and uploaded to the website of the
                           project entity. The RAP was also disclosed at the World Bank InfoShop on May 14, 2016.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      04-May-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   27-Jul-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            01-Aug-2016
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      01-May-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   14-May-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            21-Mar-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [     ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice     Yes [     ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [     ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?

                                                                    Page 9 of 10
                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                             Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             degradation of critical natural habitats?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                             project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                             1616 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)

                             911 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Hua Tan
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Josefo Tuyor (SA)                                 Date: 13-Dec-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Binyam Reja (PMGR)                               Date: 15-Dec-2016
                            Manager:

                                                                        Page 10 of 10
