                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC15276

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Oct-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Caribbean                       Project ID:       P157484
                            Project Name:        Caribbean Investment Facilitation Project
                            Team Leader(s):      Aun Ali Rahman
                            Estimated Date       10-Dec-2015
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GTCID                           Lending           Lending Instrument
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          SME Finance (100%)
                            Theme(s):           Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (100%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    1.6                    Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:         0
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                         0
Public Disclosure Copy




                              InfoDev                                                                                        1.6
                            Environment       B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           14. The project development objective is to pilot and test an investment facilitation model to enable
                           promising early-stage enterprises to raise capital from private investors, particularly business angel
                           investors.
                           C. Project Description
                           Background and Context

                           18.      As noted earlier, the EPIC Access to Finance agenda focuses on testing and developing
                           solutions that enable promising entrepreneurs in the Caribbean to access non-traditional sources of
                           financing by strengthening the early-stage/SME financing ecosystem in the Caribbean through
                           initiatives on both the demand and supply sides of capital.

                           19.     To date, through bank-executed activities under the EPIC A2F Skills building Project, EPIC
                           has undertaken the following activities to implement this agenda and to serve as a launch-pad for the
                           recipient-executed initiative under CIFP.
                         •       The main focus has been the piloting of formalized group angel investing in the Caribbean:
                         EPIC A2F has provided hands-on coaching and technical assistance to support the development of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the Caribbean’s first three organized angel groups – two in Jamaica (First Angels Jamaica and Alpha
                         Angels) and one in Barbados (Trident).

                         •       Supplementing the supply-side efforts with angel investors, EPIC A2F has engaged the
                         demand side with early-stage entrepreneurs, providing training to entrepreneurs on how to effectively
                         raise capital from angels and early-stage financiers. The curriculum developed for these trainings can
                         be leveraged for training other entrepreneurs in the region.

                         •       In addition to angel investing, EPIC A2F has researched the potential of crowdfunding as
                         another source of non-traditional financing in the Caribbean. An EPIC report on the Caribbean
                         Diaspora Investing has also explored how the Caribbean diaspora can be tapped as a source of
                         financing to support Caribbean enterprises.


                         Project Overview

                         20.       The Caribbean Investment Facilitation Project (CIFP) will be a recipient-executed initiative
                         delivered via a grant from the World Bank (through the EPIC Trust Fund) of $1.6M, whose objective
                         is to pilot and test an investment facilitation model to enable early-stage Caribbean entrepreneurs to
                         raise capital from private investors, particularly business angel investors. The CIFP will be
                         developed and managed by the Caribbean Export Development Agency (CEDA), a regional
                         organization that has the institutional ability and strategic interest to develop and deploy the program
                         across the region.

                         21.      CIFP will involve the provision of investment facilitation grants to entrepreneurs, as well as
                         non-funding activities to stimulate angel investing, and to support the development of deal-flow for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         early-stage investment.

                         22.      Because many features of the CIFP are novel for the Caribbean, the Project will takes an
                         iterative approach to test/pilot what works, and to make appropriate pivots as it is further developed.


                         Key Activity 1 – Investment Facilitation Grants

                         23.      CIFP will pilot investment facilitation grants to start-up and early enterprises in the
                         Caribbean that stimulate private investment into these companies, from angel investors or other
                         relevant financing mechanisms. The CIFP will develop and test two types of facilitation grants. The
                         core success indicator of the grants will be whether they catalyzed private investment, while also
                         providing funding that enables the enterprise to develop and grow its business. The beneficiary
                         entrepreneurs will include enterprises throughout CARICOM countries, except Haiti. The CIFP will
                         allocate $1M to investment facilitation grants, representing the core of the grant award to the
                         recipient.

                         Sub-activity 1.1: Co-Investment Grants
                         24.     Co-investment grants will provide grant funding to enterprises that are able to secure
                         investment from business angels and other approved investors. The purpose of these grants is to
                         incentivize angels to take a bet on promising enterprises that they may otherwise not make– by
                         reducing their investment risk. The intended benefit of the grants will be stimulate angel (and other
                         relevant) investment into the enterprises. The grant contribution would be up-to 50% of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         investor’s contribution up-to a maximum of $100,000 per enterprise and would be made once the
                         entrepreneur has secured the investment. Similar to how co-investment funding schemes operate in
                         other countries, the CIFP co-investment grants will rely on angels and private investors to carry out
                         the bulk of the commercial/business due diligence on the enterprise. However, the CIFP will assess
                         the use of funds and conduct fiduciary diligence on the entrepreneur and investor to ensure that the
                         grant is in compliance with World Bank policies, including environmental and social safeguard
                         policies.

                         Sub-activity 1.2: Pre-investment Grants
                         25.      Pre-investment grants will involve grant funding to start-up and early-stage enterprises that
                         show strong business and investment promise but are still not considered “investment ready” by
                         investors. The purpose of these grants will be to prepare companies for angel or other investments
                         within a short time frame (e.g. 3-9 months) by providing “pre-investment” funding for specified
                         purposes (such as further product development, market testing/validation and early sales, securing
                         intellectual property protection) that improve the prospects for investment. The pre-investment grant
                         funding will be coupled with investment readiness mentoring that the CIFP will provide or arrange.
                         To ensure that these pre-investment grants catalyze rather than crowd out private investment, the
                         model will filter out entrepreneurs looking for “soft money” rather than seeing the grant as a spring-
                         board to leveraging additional capital. Pre-investment grants would be provided to entrepreneurs on
                         the basis of an assessment of the enterprise’s ability to hit key business milestones in the near-term
                         that could attract private investment. Entrepreneurs seeking pre-investment grant funding would be
                         expected to be actively involved in raising capital (for example, are pitching to angel investors) and,
                         when possible, the CIFP team would communicate with investors to confirm interest and to
                         determine business areas investors find high priority. Investors in CIFP’s network will be invited to
                         give input on the pre-investment grant proposals. As with the co-investment grants, the CIFP will
                         assess the use of funds and conduct fiduciary diligence on the entrepreneur to ensure that the grant is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in compliance with World Bank policies.


                         Key Activity 2: Support Activities to Facilitate Investments

                         26.     In addition to the provision of investment facilitation grants, the CIFP will engage in non –
                         financial facilitation activities on both the demand and supply sides to increase the prospects of
                         investments. These activities would principally consists of the following:

                         •        On the supply-side, CIFP will support the development of new angel groups/networks in the
                         Caribbean as well as identify individual angels. This will include: i) conducting angel investing
                         educational events for business leaders and other key stakeholders, ii) identification and cultivation
                         of potential angel investing champions who can serve as anchors for developing individual angel
                         groups, and iii) organizing master classes for angel investors (leveraging the content developed
                         under EPIC’s Access to Finance Skills Building Project). Additionally, CIFP will organize annual
                         regional angel forums where existing and new angel investors (as well as other early-stage
                         financiers) can network with another and also explore possibility for investment syndication
                         (particularly for non-local deals).

                         •       On the demand-side, CIFP will support deal-flow for investment by a) conducting capital
                           raising trainings for entrepreneurs seeking to raise capital and b) sharing the most promising deals as
                           potential investment opportunities with investors participating in the CIFP. To identify relevant
                           enterprises, CIFP will tap into Caribbean incubators, accelerators, business/entrepreneurship support
Public Disclosure Copy




                           organizations (including EPIC enablers Caribbean Climate Innovation Center and Caribbean Mobile
                           Innovation Program, and other World Bank programs such as Start Up Jamaica) as well as from
                           CEDA’s extensive BSO and professional network. CIFP will also publicize its investment facilitation
                           efforts to tap promising entrepreneurs not associated with business enablers.

                           •       To facilitate deal-flow, CIFP will pilot the use of an existing online angel investing platform
                           to connect promising entrepreneurs (including those receiving investment readiness grants) with
                           business angels and other early-stage investors in the CIFP network. The platform will serve as an
                           access point for entrepreneurs across the Caribbean – not just those located on islands with existing
                           angel groups – to apply for investor funding. The CIFP will maintain the site, setting up an
                           application and review process for entrepreneurs. In addition the CIFP will recruit and manage
                           requests from investors to be granted access, as the site will have privacy controls.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The specific location of all project related activities (investment facilitation grants, SME sub-
                           projects) is not known at this time but they could be located in any CARICOM country where the
                           program is being implemented. The scale of the activities is expected to be small at this early stage
                           of development of the recipients’ enterprises; however, by this early incorporation of the elements of
                           sound environmental and social impact planning and management, it is expected that once the
                           businesses are successful and grow, they will continue with the practice of good environmental and
                           social impact management. It is expected that some of the SMEs that will receive sub-grants will
                           already be established in existing light manufacturing facilities, which will be checked for permit
                           status and best management practices during the application and screening process.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The grant recipient, Caribbean Export Development Agency did not have previous World Bank
                           Safeguards Policy experience. But it has extensive experience managing funds and projects
                           sponsored by EU, which also require environmental and social compliance. The Operational Manual
                           of the project will include safeguards management by incorporating screening, inspection, and
                           reporting procedures in an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) to be developed for the
                           project. The Client would be responsible for periodic reporting to ensure compliance with the EMF
                           provisions.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong (GSU04)
                           Ramon E. Anria (GSU04)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The Project is classified as Category B (per OP/
                           BP 4.01                                               BP4.01) given potential impacts associated with
                                                                                 financing of small scale activities by SMEs or
                                                                                 individual entrepreneurs. No Category A sub-
                                                                                 projects will be financed by the Project. The
                                                                 activities to be funded could have potential
                                                                 negative adverse environmental impacts if
                                                                 uncontrolled, particularly as regards to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 emissions to air or water, waste management,
                                                                 labor, safety, or permitting issues; however,
                                                                 with appropriate standard mitigation measures
                                                                 in place, the potential negative impacts would
                                                                 be short-term and not significant. Projects and
                                                                 activities are not yet defined and must be
                                                                 screened as part of the application process, so an
                                                                 Environmental Management Framework (EMF)
                                                                 will be developed to manage the potential
                                                                 associated environmental impacts and risks.
                                                                 Screening and exclusion criteria, consistent with
                                                                 OP/BP 4.01, will be developed to ensure that
                                                                 any other World Bank Safeguard Policies would
                                                                 not be triggered in lending to the SMEs or
                                                                 individual entrepreneurs, and standard
                                                                 checklists for screening, inspection,
                                                                 Environmental Management Plans (EMPs), and
                                                                 reporting would be included in the EMF.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    Screening in the EMF will exclude any project
                                                                 activity which could potentially affect natural
                                                                 habitat.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    Project activities which could potentially affect
                                                                 forests will be excluded.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project screening criteria will exclude
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 procurement or use of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    Screening in the EMF will exclude any project
                         BP 4.11                                 activity which could potentially affect physical
                                                                 cultural resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   CIFP is a Pan-Caribbean project that could be
                                                                 implemented in any of the CARICOM-member
                                                                 countries. Of these there are four where
                                                                 Indigenous Peoples are present, namely: Belize,
                                                                 Guyana, Suriname and Dominica.

                                                                 Due to the nature of the proposed grant
                                                                 activities (raising capital from non-traditional
                                                                 financing sources), and given that the funds/
                                                                 allowable costs under the grant are to be used
                                                                 for business-development in areas such as staff/
                                                                 labor costs, sales and equipment purchases etc.
                                                                 it seems unlikely that Indigenous Peoples will
                                                                 be collectively impacted by the project in the
                                                                 countries with an IP presence.
                                                                                             However, further investigation will be done
                                                                                             during the appraisal stage to determine whether
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             the project willl impact indigenous people in the
                                                                                             relevant countries.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No                   The Project will not support sub-projects which
                           4.12                                                              will lead to any involuntary resettlement.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No                   The Project will not support the construction or
                                                                                             rehabilitation of dams.
                           Projects on International        No                               Project activities which could potentially affect
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                              international waterways will be excluded.
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                               The Project will not involve activities in areas
                           7.60                                                              known to involve disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                           A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?: Yes
                               i. Explanation
                                  The facilitation grants under the Project will be provided to SMEs or entrepreneurs for activities

                                 The RSA recommends that an appraisal stage ISDS be prepared.
                               ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
                                 15-Oct-2015
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Aun Ali Rahman
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)                                      Date: 13-Oct-2015
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Ganesh Rasagam (PMGR)                                        Date: 13-Oct-2015
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
