INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC7545
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Mar-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Belize                     Project ID:   P149522
Project Name:    Energy Resilience for Climate Adaptation (P 149522)
Task Team        Migara Jayawardena
Leader(s):
Estimated        15-May-2015                Estimated     01-Oct-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEEDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
GEF Focal Area:  Climate change
Sector(s):       General energy sector (100%)
Theme(s):        Climate change (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      12.80             Total Bank Financing:     0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                          4.80
Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                 0.00
*          Special Climate Change Fund                                       8.00
Total                                                            12.80
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
15.    The development objective of the proposed Energy Resilience for Climate Adaptation
Project is to enhance resilience of the energy system to adverse weather and climate change impacts.
16.    The proposed will be designed to complement the Climate Resilient Infrastructure Project
(CRIP) that is being financed in parallel by the World Bank, and help reinforce the inclusion of


﻿energy resilience as a key adaptation focus in the comprehensive National Climate Resilient
Investment Plan (NCRIP).
C. Project Description
Climate resilient energy systems are ones that incorporate measures to be able to better withstand the
impacts of extreme weather conditions that result from climate change; and when unavoidable
impacts do occur, it can rebound quickly and efficiently in support of emergency requirement as well
as longer-term sustained economic development. The proposed Energy Resilience for Climate
o       Adaptation Project (ERCAP) will focus on the following critical areas that are in urgent need of
support in order to achieve its development objective including initial indicative costs, which will be
finalized during project preparation taking into account the availability of funding:
Component 1: Mechanisms for Adaptation Planning and Capacity Building ($2.5 million from
SCCF, $1.5 million GoB). Although there is considerable information and analysis available for
global climate trends and impacts, more localized information that is essential for evaluating present
and future vulnerabilities in specific energy systems is often limited, as is the case in Belize.
Therefore, it is paramount to analyze in detail and confirm the vulnerabilities and adaptation
challenges that are specific to the energy sector in Belize including its cross-sectoral linkages; and
develop a risk management approach to allow for identification, quantification and prioritization of
climate change adaptation interventions and investments. The energy vulnerability/adaptation
assessment will need to take a long-term strategic risk management focus given the lengthy designed
life-cycles of most energy infrastructure (often 20-30 years); while identifying short to medium-term
adaptation mechanisms and techniques that can establish a path towards a more resilient energy
system in the face of weather and climate related impacts. It will also provide the GoB with the tools
to systematically and iteratively evaluate climate risks, including changing climatic trends and
increasing climatic variability, and make informed, risk-based decisions regarding adaptation
interventions. To this end, it is just as important to develop the institutional capacity at MESTPU and
other related agencies to perform risk based climate change adaptation needs assessments, build in-
house capabilities to better model and project future impacts of climate change, and to incorporate
planning and design techniques for adaptation. It is foreseen such transfer of knowledge will include
successful international experiences that will be appropriately adapted to be relevant in the Caribbean
context in existing and future energy investments. The capacity at MESTPU will also be critical for
a consultative energy vulnerability/adaptation assessment with input from various stakeholders in
order to facilitate informed decisions including gender related considerations. The energy system
vulnerability assessment, identification of adaption measures, and the strengthened capacity will help
reinforce and mainstream energy sector resilience as a part of the overall NCRIP (in coordination
with parallel World Bank operation - CRIP), which is a dynamic and evolving framework.
Component 2: Development and implementation of a comprehensive set of measures to demonstrate
increase in the resilience of the energy sector ($5 million from SCCF, $3 million estimated from
sources to be determined). A comprehensive resilience program developed around the demonstration
of the following three key pillars, which will transfer knowledge and develop experience that can be
further replicated:
a.     Planning and policy for implementation of energy resilient action. It will be important to
create sufficient incentives, introduce necessary regulatory requirements and enhance the
environment for making investments and taking actions to improve the resilience of the energy
system and adapt it to also to future climate change. Such steps will compel stakeholders to
mainstream climate adaption actions in energy related activities. It could include: (a) incentives for


﻿greater penetration of alternate sources of energy (such as wind, biomass or solar) that will diversify
generation mix and enhance the reliability of electricity supply to off-set impacts on hydro power
availability; and to facilitate grid connection, encourage distributed generation, and mobilize
investments to upgrade transmission and distribution infrastructure to better integrate renewable
O
energy (smart grids), b) introduction of standards, specifications, and codes to meet requirements for
enhanced resilience in energy infrastructure, c) planning and design of the electricity and
transmission distribution system to be more resilient, d) introduction of a bio-energy policy to
increase productivity and scale-up bio-fuel production using different biomass feedstock, and e)
building Belize's capacity to strengthen its position in electricity trade negotiations with Mexico.
b.     Demonstration of design/engineering techniques and investments to strengthen resilience of
the energy system and reduce vulnerability to future climate change impacts. This sub-component
will pilot select small-scale investments and priority activities that will strengthen the resilience of
energy. It will carefully consider measures to ensure resilience to changing climatic trends and
increasing climatic variability, as projected for Belize going forward. It will select urgent priority
interventions and investments that will introduce and incorporate cutting-edge designs and
techniques that, together with the introduction of standards and codes, will enhance the resilience of
new and existing energy infrastructure to better withstand impacts of adverse weather phenomena
and reduce the likelihood of potentially costly damages. The entire energy system value chain
including power generation, transmission, and distribution infrastructure will be considered for
opportunities for resilience strengthening, although decisions will be made through a risk-based
framework that will help prioritize urgent and important energy infrastructure that will have minimal
or no safeguards risks.
c.     Strengthening implementation capacity for response and recovery. One key aspect is to take
steps will be taken to ensure vital energy services can remain operational in the face if unavoidable
extreme weather related events and additional risks posed by climate change, in order to provide vital
multi-sector emergency services (such as the availability of electricity for key hospital and medical
installations, or for operating pumps to relieve flooding). The other area of focus will be to ensure
there is adequate knowledge and capacity for rapid recovery and restoration of energy services when
damage is sustained due to adverse weather related events (such as developing redundancies,
including emergency procedures, or sufficient rapid-response capabilities).
o       Component 3: Project Implementation Support and Dissemination for Knowledge Sharing ($0.5
million from SCCF, $0.3 million from GoB). The component will provide incremental support to the
MESTPU designated staff that are overseeing the proposed project, with additional technical,
fiduciary, safeguards, and project management capacity for successful implementation. It will also
assist with the wider dissemination and sharing of experience and lessons learned through the project
Energy Resilience for Climate Adaptation with stakeholders in regional countries facing similar
circumstances to Belize.
It is expected that the climate change adaptation assessment of the energy sector (Component 1) will
identify considerable investment needs that will require mobilization of public and private funds.
The overall $8 million funding envelope in the proposed Energy Resilience for Climate Adaptation
Project, which is based on the potentially available SCCF financing, will only likely be able to cover
a small sub-set of the urgent priority activities that are most urgent in need and can be piloted to have
a demonstration impact. An initial assessment and preliminary screening will be carried out during
project preparation in order to confirm identified priority areas for support and develop a framework
for investment selection that can be applied during project implementation (incorporating a


﻿corresponding Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to screen for safeguard
risks). However, these initial demonstration pilot investments are expected to catalyze the
mainstreaming of climate resilient energy infrastructure in support of the overall climate adaptation
and development goals of Belize. For example, leveraging a single additional private investment, for
O
U       example, in biomass co-generation, alone could lead to a $40-$50 million in additional investments.
In addition, the CRIP project will parallel finance investments and activities that total $30 million,
where many will be inter-linked complementary infrastructure priorities. The climate change
adaptation assessment of the energy sector is also expected to develop a road-map of investment
prospects that can be progressively implemented by leveraging additional public and private funding
in order to enhance the sector's resilience. S ince the proposed project will be implemented under the
NCRIP framework, the road-map of energy resilience techniques and investme nts will help integrate
and reinforce energy adaptation in the overall planning process in the country.  As such, the
proposed project has a high potential for a transformational impact in terms of planning coordination,
knowledge-transfer, and mobilization of investments.
The proposed project is also expected to have spill-over effects regionally, where a number of
countries face similar circumstances as Belize. Although disaster risk management (DRM) is a
mainstreamed development activity especially in the Caribbean region, which is prone to adverse
weather related impacts, the application and mainstreaming of resilience consideration in the energy
sector is a relatively limited. Despite the crucial role played by energy systems in facilitating
economic development and poverty alleviation as well as its critical need during catastrophic crisis
situations, much of the effort at addressing energy resilience has concentrated on high level
assessments rather than customized local application through practical measures. Therefore, the
demonstrative nature of the proposed Energy Resilience for Climate Adaptation Project in Belize
will serve as a pilot operation providing useful learning and lessons for replication in other countries.
It is expected to be the first in a series of potential future operations in the Caribbean region to
address energy resilience within an overall framework for DRM.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
O
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Ministry of Energy, Science and Technology, and Public Utilities (MESTPU) was established in
2012, for the purposes of better focusing on energy sector development in Belize. There is little
information on MESTPU's capacity for safeguards implementation, which will be further assessed
before appraisal.
During project preparation, safeguards capacity assessments of MESTPU, and both BEL and PUC
(because of their respective roles in project coordination/implementation) would be conducted and
the results of these assessments would briefly be described in the appraisal stage ISDS.
The capacity assessments would be used to define capacity development/strengthening programs to
be included in the project. These capacity development programs would be described in the ESMF.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Bernard Baratz (GFMDR)
Noreen Beg (GENDR)


﻿Norval Stanley Peabody (GEEDR)
Peter F. B. A. Lafere (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment     Yes         Potential adverse environmental impacts on human
OP/BP 4.01                               populations or environmentally important areas are
site-specific, and are related to small-scale
retrofitting or introduction of design features to
strengthen resilience of key energy infrastructure to
demonstrate techniques for greater climate
adaptation. There may also be pilot support to
facilitate projects by the private sector in renewable
energy such as biomass, wind, and solar
installations . Environmental impacts are expected to
be mainly localized, temporary, reversible and
readily manageable with standard codes of good
practice.
The exact location and/or nature of potential small
investments to be financed under this project will be
identified following the vulnerability assessment that
will be carried out during implementation and
potential adaptation measures are determined.
Therefore, an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared to
conform to Government of Belize and World Bank
safeguard policies. The ESMF will be part of a larger
Q)                                                decision making framework that will be applied for
selecting a sub-set of small, priority pilot
investments, and incorporate environmental and
social considerations to assure that potential impacts
are minor, of limited extent, limited duration,
reversible and easily mitigated with standard well-
established codes of good practice. The ESMF will
detail safeguard procedures and documentation
requirements to be followed by the implementing
agencies in the evaluation and preparation of
potential investments. Investments that fall outside
the scope of the World Bank project and/or exceed
the funding available in the project, will be screened
out from participating in the project, and therefore,
will not be required to follow ESMF procedures.
However, MESTPU staff will receive safeguards
training in accordance with international best
practice for environmental assessment, and projects
with issues related to land acquisition/involuntary


﻿resettlement, and indigenous peoples, to provide
them with the safeguard skills they would need to
evaluate these investments.
The ESMF will be designed with appropriate criteria
to assure that only investments offering minimal or
no safeguard risks will be eligible for further
consideration within the proposed project.
The Environmental and Social Management
Framework will include:
i)     the existing environmental and social
baseline conditions of the affected areas
ii)    the location and description of the
interventions
iii)   legal provisions
iv)     screening criteria for the interventions
v)      as applicable, environmental and social
management tools and mitigation measures
necessary during the design, construction and
operation of the interventions. This should include
licensing and permits, as well as health and safety
measures
vi)     the institutional provisions (e.g. roles and
responsibilities of the implementing agency for
preparing and implementing the ESMF). This is
particularly important given the limited
environmental and social management capacity of
MESTPU.
Stakeholder Consultation. The ESMF will include
appropriate information disclosure and consultation
mechanisms that are commensurate with the size and
nature of the interventions. The consultation with
affected groups and NGOs will be undertaken as
early as possible and the results of such public
consultation will be in the draft of the ESMF.
The ESMF will be publicly disclosed prior to Project
Appraisal and will be incorporated into the project
Operations Manual.
The Project is classified as Category B - Partial
Assessment - assigned to projects that are likely to
have limited and reversible environmental impacts,
that can be readily mitigated
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD          Although this project will not support or lead to the
conversion of natural habitats, one component of the
project that should be addressed carefully is the pilot
for proving concept of expansion of biomass to offset


﻿volatility of hydropower availability. A feasibility
analyses has been carried out by 5Cs and the Clinton
Climate Initiative (CCI), which identified Arundo
Donax, an indigenous, thick grass that has a high
heat-content capable of growing in marginal land as
a potential crop that could serve as feedstock for
generating power. A test pilot is proposed in an
existing biomass power plan (BELCOGEN) to
extend the availability beyond the sugar-cane
harvesting season (current feedstock). An analysis
should be undertaken confirming that Arundo Donax
is not an invasive species, and that the area it will be
grown on will neither be located on a critical natural
habitat, or that the nature of the grass will not
encroach on key natural habitats or pose a risk to
local fauna or avifauna.
The ESMF will explicitly forbid any direct or linked
investments in areas supporting critical natural
habitats or inducing significant conversion or
degradation of critical natural habitats.
The ESMF will: i) have appropriate screening
criteria to ensure that no investments which involve
the significant conversion of natural habitats; and/or
ii) have acceptable mitigation measures in place for
those investments likely to affect non-critical natural
habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No           This project will not lead to the destruction of forests
and forest ecosystems. The ESMF will explicitly
forbid any direct or linked investments in areas
supporting destruction or conversion of forests and
forest ecosystems. The ESMF screening will
explicitly forbid direct or linked investment activities
that would lead to the destruction, degradation or
conversion of forests and key forest ecosystems or
which affect the management of forests or the rights
and welfare of forest dependent communities, and to
ensure that any impacts on forests be mitigated
through measures defined as part of the broader
approach on natural habitat protection under OP
4.04.
Screening mechanisms will be incorporated into the
ESMF to ensure that any small scale impacts on
forests are mitigated through measures defined as
part of the broader approach on natural habitats.


﻿Pest Management OP 4.09       TBD          The project will not finance any activities that would
result in procurement or use of pesticides. There will
be no pesticide use in construction or maintenance of
works. Any land clearing in preparation for civil
works and/or maintaining rights-of-way will be
undertaken manually or mechanically.
A feasibility analyses has been carried out by 5Cs
and the Clinton Climate Initiative (CCI), which
identified Arundo Donax, an indigenous, thick grass
that has a high heat-content capable of growing in
marginal land as a potential crop that could serve as
feedstock for generating power. A test pilot is
proposed in an existing biomass power plan
(BELCOGEN) to extend the availability beyond the
sugar-cane harvesting season (current feedstock). It
should be confirmed that no pesticide or herbicide
will be used to either clear land for this activity, or to
grow this crop.
Minor use of pesticides to control pests affecting
workers in construction areas will be addressed in the
ESMF.
Physical Cultural Resources   Yes          The project is not expected to have negative impacts
OP/BP 4.11                                 on cultural property, including movable or
immovable objects, sites, structures, groups of
structures or natural features or landscapes with
archaeological, paleontological, historical,
architectural, religious, aesthetic or other cultural
significance.
The ESMF will include specific screening provisions
for evaluating potential impacts on cultural
resources. During implementation, potential sub-
project direct or linked investments will be assessed
to determine whether or not they will have an impact
on physical cultural properties. If the assessment
indicates possible impact, the investment would not
be financed.
"Chance finds" during implementation of activities
could be possible. The ESMF will provide specific
guidance on chance finds procedures, consistent with
World Bank policy, to be included within the EMP
for use in procurement and contracting documents.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      TBD          It's not been determined whether this policy would
4.10                                       be triggered or not. In the event that activities would


﻿be undertaken in areas where indigenous peoples are
present or when country wide policy advice or
activities would affect indigenous communities, the
MESTPU will prepare or commission the preparation
of a Culturally Appropriate Consultation and
Participation Plan before appraisal. This instrument
will provide guidance on (i) the appropriate
consultation protocols to engage ethnically diverse
stakeholders during the participatory process, which
will in turn, inform the design of Component 1's
energy vulnerability/adaptation assessment; (ii)
identify potential adverse impacts on indigenous
peoples and establish actions (with a detailed budget)
that the MESTPU would implement to mitigate these
impacts; (iii) describe relevant traditional practices
on adaptation measures (as part of Component 1)
identified during the social assessment, that can also
be updated during implementation with the inputs
from the Component 1's participatory process, thus
opening channels for the MESTPU to work with
indigenous peoples in risk-based climate change
adaptation needs-assessment and related
interventions.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         The project is expected to have limited involuntary
BP 4.12                                   resettlement impacts such as easements, temporary
impacts, displacement of houses or businesses with
or without formal titles or small-scale land
acquisition. For sub-projects identified by Appraisal,
a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be developed,
consulted and disclosed prior to Appraisal. As it
might not be possible to identify all sites for
subprojects, an Involuntary Resettlement Framework
will also be prepared, consulted and disclosed prior
to Appraisal to guide the development of
(Abbreviated) Resettlement Action Plans during
project implementation and prior to the start of
works.
In addition, any "subsequent investments" that are
(a) directly and significantly related to the Bank's
project; (b) necessary to achieve its objective; and (c)
carried out or planned contemporaneously with the
project, will also be required to develop Resettlement
Action Plans in accordance with the guidelines
described in the project's Involuntary Resettlement
Policy Framework.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    TBD          The project is not expected to finance or retrofit any


﻿dams, but it will be determined during preparation
whether safety inspections or related activities will
be required for climate adaptation purposes.
Projects on International     No            Potential investments under the project are not
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                        expected to have any adverse effects on the water
quantity or quality of international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ TBD
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Jun-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
N/A
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Migara Jayawardena
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Glenn S. Morgan (SA)                        Date: 10-Apr-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Malcolm Cosgrove-Davies (PMGR)              Date: 22-Apr-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


