                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA19509
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Aug-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Aug-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Cameroon                          Project ID:   P150999
                            Project Name:      Cameroon Transport Sector Development Project (P150999)
                            Task Team          Peter Ngwa Taniform,Marc Marie Francois Navelet Noualhier
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          03-Aug-2016              Estimated     29-Sep-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GTI08                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       206.70           Total Bank Financing:    192.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                                  14.70
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    192.00
                              Total                                                                                    206.70
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The PDO is to: (a) strengthen transport planning; (b) improve transport efficiency and safety on the
                           Babadjou-Bamenda section of the Yaounde - Bamenda transport corridor; and (c) enhance safety and
                           security at selected airports.
                            3. Project Description
                           B. Project Description

                           2.      The proposed project would be structured around three major components, with a fourth


                                                                      Page 1 of 16
                         component to support project implementation, as follows:

                         Component 1: Transport planning and capacity building (estimated costs US$ US$ 10.7)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3.     This component aims at strengthening the capacity of the public sector in the planning,
                         development, management and maintenance of transport infrastructure.

                         Subcomponent 1.1: Training in transport planning, including data collection and management of
                         modeling tools (estimated cost US$ 1.8 million)

                         4.       This subcomponent seeks to develop sustainable capacity within selected Cameroonian
                         institutions responsible for transport planning, with emphasis on concepts and practical management
                         of multimodal transport planning. In order to ensure the sustainability of this capacity building
                         program, the proposed project will support the design of a transport planning course to be offered at
                         one of Cameroon's universities. The content and scope of the course will match international
                         standards and be based on an initial needs assessment of academic and professional capacity
                         available in Cameroon to sustainably manage the course.

                         5.       This subcomponent will support the following deliverables: (a) an assessment of the local
                         context, including capacity to provide a sustainable transport planning program: (b) consultations
                         with key stakeholders; (c) the design and testing of a curriculum that meets international standards;
                         (d) definition of criteria and other conditions to help guide the choice of a local university that would
                         host the transport planning program; and (f) the preparation and delivery of a short term training
                         program to meet the immediate needs of the transport sector. This training program is aimed at
                         addressing the immediate needs of the ministries responsible for the implementation of the IITS and
                         the TPIP.

                         6.      It is expected that the first beneficiaries of the training program will be selected from staff of
                         transport sector institutions responsible for transport planning and from the staff of the institution
Public Disclosure Copy




                         hosting the transport model. The first batch would have the responsibility to lead and manage the
                         planning systems within the sector institutions while the second would form a nucleus of the staff
                         responsible for the management of the transport model.

                         7.      It is expected that the beneficiaries would acquire the following skills that are critical to
                         transport planning:

                         ➯❫       Data collection and processing techniques, including the conception of origin-destination
                         surveys, traffic count surveys, economic analyses, stated preference studies, estimation techniques
                         for modal and multimodal matrices, and induced traffic matrices;
                         ➯❫       Transport networks modeling techniques using standard software and demand allocation
                         algorithms, congestion modeling, choice of itinerary, time value estimation, generalized transport
                         costs, etc.;
                         ➯❫       Concepts and practical cases of strategic transport modeling;
                         ➯❫       Optimization of fares in PPP projects to improve the IRRs and revenues;
                         ➯❫       Planning and optimization of multimodal transport networks;
                         ➯❫       Modeling and forecasting of freight demand;
                         ➯❫       Modeling of air transport demand, the planning of airports, and analysis of the supply of air
                         transport; and


                                                                       Page 2 of 16
                         ➯❫      Techniques and practical management and update of strategic transport planning as part of
                         the country's transport development strategy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent 1.2: Institutional strengthening studies (estimated cost US$ 1.2 million)

                         8.       This subcomponent aims at providing the legal and operational architecture for transport
                         regulation and management to support Cameroon in improving the efficiency and effectiveness of its
                         transport sector. That's because there is a need to clarify the roles and responsibilities of different
                         stakeholders intervening in the transport sector in Cameroon. Similarly, transport corridors require
                         specific institutional arrangements and management structures, taking into consideration their
                         regional/spatial dimensions/impacts. Accordingly, this subcomponent will finance technical
                         assistance/studies for the preparation of legal and operational instruments toward the establishment
                         of: (a) a transport regulatory body; and (b) an inter-regional road corridor management entity, to help
                         contribute to improving the country's domestic and foreign trade and Cameroon's position as a key
                         regional integration player.

                         Subcomponent 1.3: Preparation of the Transport Priority Investment Program (TPIP) (estimated cost
                         US$ 2.9 million)

                         9.       This subcomponent will finance technical assistance/studies to prepare and implement a
                         medium term TPIP programmatic planning tool for the transport sector in Cameroon, covering the
                         priority transport sector investment projects that could be undertaken during the period. It will also
                         serve as a planning tool to help the GoC in mobilizing budgetary resources for targeted transport
                         investments in the transport sector, as well as carrying out the necessary techno-economic and
                         engineering preparatory studies for such investments.

                         10.      The TPIP will be a 'rolling' program based on a list of strategically prioritized transport
                         projects selected from the Integrated Multimodal Transport Master Plan (IMTMP), which is expected
                         to be ready by late 2018. Such priority transport infrastructure projects would be implemented within
Public Disclosure Copy




                         a three to five year period, over a 20-30 year time horizon. For each of the identified priority
                         transport infrastructure projects, the TPIP would: (a) define the preliminary scope; (b) prepare
                         prefeasibility, techno-economic feasibility studies and social and environmental studies; (c) conduct
                         preliminary and detailed engineering studies; (d) define optimal methods of procurement (public,
                         private or PPP); and (e) prepare bid documents. This is to enable the GoC to have a prioritized
                         'shovel ready' transport infrastructure projects for funding by different sources (GoC, development
                         partners and private sector).

                         Subcomponent 1.4: Identification and preparation of pilot transport infrastructure PPP projects
                         (estimated cost US$ 1.7 million)

                         11.      The GoC is preparing proposals for submission to the World Bank by May 2017 of three
                         pilot transport infrastructure PPP projects (two road and one on airport infrastructure) that have
                         reached a high level of maturity (available prefeasibility studies, including studies on potential
                         demand and revenue). Based on these proposals, this subcomponent would finance technical
                         assistance for: (a) screening of the potential PPP projects; (b) detailed feasibility studies, including
                         the financial and "value for money" analysis; (c) structuring of the PPP projects (optimal risk
                         sharing), and preparation of bidding documents; (d) inviting lenders and potential investors to a
                         roundtable on market surveys; (e) finalizing the conception of the PPP projects and bidding
                         documents; and (f) recruitment of transaction consultants (legal, financial and technical) to help the

                                                                       Page 3 of 16
                         Government of Cameroon in launching the requests for proposals, selection, and negotiations of the
                         pilot PPP projects.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent 1.5: Development of a resilience and climate adaptation strategy for land transport
                         (estimated cost US$ 0.7 million)

                         12.     The Government of Cameroon in line with the Paris Declaration Agreement, committed to
                         reduce by 32% the Green House Gas emissions by 2035 through the Nationally Determined
                         Contribution (NDC). The development of a resilience and climate adaptation strategy for land
                         transport within the project will serve as the basis for policy formulation in climate resilience in land
                         transport (rail and road), as well as for climate change mitigation aspects (with emphasis on
                         reduction of greenhouse gas emissions from transport). To ensure ownership, the Ministry in charge
                         of Environment and the National Observatory on Climate Change will be involved at the early stage
                         of the development of this strategy. In addition, the development of this strategy will be in coherence
                         with Cameroon's multi-sectoral Investment Plan on Climate Change and Disaster Risk Management
                         which is under preparation within the framework of IDA 17.

                         Subcomponent 1.6: Strengthening of planning capacity in air transport (estimated cost US$2.4
                         million)

                         13.      This subcomponent will finance technical assistance, equipment, training and studies to
                         assist CCAA in: (a) designing and establishing of an operational air transport data bank; (b)
                         designing and developing of tools/methodologies (including planning tools) for the more efficient
                         supervision of air transport activities; (c) updating of air safety and security regulations and
                         procedures; (d) designing and putting in place a monitoring framework, with tools and training for
                         the effective implementation of Corrective Action Plans (CAPs) of compliance audits; (e) air security
                         standards compliance audits and assistance with implementation of their recommendations; (f)
                         airport safety awareness campaigns; and (g) communication and citizen engagement with
                         stakeholders affected by airport operations.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Road Transport Efficiency Improvement (estimated cost US$ 142.1 million of which
                         World Bank will finance US$132.1 million and GoC will finance US$10 million)

                         14.     This component will help improve physical and safety conditions and road asset
                         management of the most degraded section of the priority road corridor linking the capital city of
                         Yaounde to Bamenda and to the border of Nigeria. It will also support the improvement of secondary
                         roads and basic public infrastructure to rural settlements along the road corridor, to better distribute
                         the socio-economic benefits that the proposed project is expected to generate in the PIA.

                         Subcomponent 2.1: Rehabilitation and reconstruction of the Babadjou-Bamenda road section of the
                         Yaounde-Bamenda road corridor (estimated cost US$ 102.7 million)

                         15.     The sub-component targets the improvement of the high priority road transport corridor,
                         namely the Yaounde - Bafoussam - Bamenda corridor, which requires urgent rehabilitation and
                         upgrade works to provide a strategic link between the country's three key economic hubs (Yaounde,
                         Bamenda and Douala). In addition, the road section forms part of the Trans-African Corridor from
                         Lagos to Mombasa, thus contributing to regional integration. The planned road works are therefore
                         expected to boost trade with neighboring Nigeria, revive the economy of the country's North West
                         and Western regions, and enhance the social and economic cohesion between its Francophone and

                                                                       Page 4 of 16
                         Anglophone parts. .

                         16.     This subcomponent will finance the following critical activities:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         a.      Full reconstruction of the 35 km section of National Road number 6 (RN6) between
                         Babadjou (Western Region) and Bamenda (North-West Region), including the improvement of
                         major accident spots identified on the section;
                         b.      Rehabilitation of 12 km of existing urban roads within Bamenda to link the Bamenda-Enugu
                         (border with Nigeria) and the Bamenda - Yaounde sections of the regional corridor from Nigeria to
                         Cameroon;
                         c.      Construction of the 5.1 km Bamenda hill up station by-pass to connect Bafoussam with
                         Bamenda through the eastern access road;
                         d.      Supervision consultant services to supervise the Babadjou - Bamenda, Bamenda urban roads
                         and Bamenda up station hill bypass.
                         e.      Engineering and supervision consultant services for the design and implementation of socio-
                         economic infrastructure in the project impact area.
                         f.      Implementation of social and environmental mitigation measures triggered by the civil works
                         planned under the proposed project with the exception of land acquisition and monetary
                         compensation.

                         17.      Typology of works for inter-urban section. The planned road works for the 35 km inter-
                         urban section will generally involve the reconstruction of a 7 meter two lane standard with 1.5 meter
                         shoulders giving a 10 meter paved riding surface. Sections with heavy roadside activities such as
                         markets will be widened to about 16 meters. Sharp curves will be realigned to improve road safety.
                         Existing drainage structures/culverts will be added and/or improved, together with the construction
                         of four new small new bridges with an average span of about 12 meters. This is to improve the
                         climate resilience of the road.

                         18.     Typology of works for Bamenda hill and urban section. The Bamenda hill by-pass and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         urban crossing will be improved to a 4 lane carriage way standard with 2m pedestrian sidewalks and
                         a central separator in some sections. The works on these two sections include the construction of a
                         bridge on the by-pass and the improvement of nine major road intersections.

                         Subcomponent 2.2: Provision of complementary infrastructure along the Babadjou-Bamenda Road
                         section (estimated cost US$ 20 million of which World Bank will finance US$10 million and GoC
                         will finance US$10 million)

                         19.      This subcomponent will finance civil works, equipment and consultant services related to the
                         provision of infrastructure, to enhance access to agricultural production zones and provide basic
                         social services along the Babadjou-Bamenda road. This is to better integrate the Babadjou - Bamenda
                         road with the area that it traverses, which accounts for most of the country's production of vegetables,
                         and to provide basic services to rural populations in the area. The type of infrastructure works that
                         the sub-component will cover incude: (a) paving of existing selected secondary roads to a low cost
                         standard to enhance access from agricultural production areas to the Babadjou - Bamenda road; (b)
                         limited number of small markets along the selected secondary roads; and (c) limited number of wells/
                         minor water supply schemes in villages along the selected secondary roads. The choice of
                         infrastructure to be selected under this sub-component will be demand-driven and based on criteria to
                         be defined consultatively with the local councils and community development leaders. Furthermore,
                         the planned road investments will be subject to basic economic screening.

                                                                      Page 5 of 16
                         20.      The proposed project, for the planned infrastructure works, will finance the following: (a)
                         consultations/studies to assist local communities in the selection of the planned infrastructure; (b)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         preparation of techno-economic feasibility studies; (c) preparation of social and environmental
                         studies; (d) preparation of engineering studies and bid documents; (e) civil works; and (f) consultant
                         supervision and quality audit services.

                         Subcomponent 2.3: Road safety strengthening (estimated cost US$ 7.0 million)

                         21.     A detailed action plan to improveroad safety is outlined in the Cameroon National Road
                         Safety Strategic Action Plan which covers the 2010 to 2020 period. However, the plan is not
                         adequately supported by resources and data management systems. The sub-component will support
                         the implementation of parts of the action plan, which focuses on minimizing deaths or serious injury
                         by addressing their key causes which include: (a) poor road infrastructure (no speed calming
                         measures, unguarded roadside hazards, lack of crosswalks, physical medians, and sidewalks, and
                         unpaved shoulders); (b) poor driving behavior; (c) unlicensed drivers; (d) poor enforcement of the
                         road code; (e) poor post-crash emergency care; and (f) weak system of certification and enforcement
                         of vehicle operation standards.

                         22.     A road safety database and monitoring system is to be established by December, 2016 under
                         the ongoing CEMAC TTFP. In order to ensure its sustainability, the design of the system will include
                         management requirements and appropriate cost recovery mechanisms. The sub-component will help
                         to operationalize the system by focusing on the elements that could not be financed under the
                         CEMAC TTFP. The proposed project will finance technical assistance to ensure the full
                         operationalization of the road safety database. It will also explore the feasibility of linking the road
                         safety database to a common database accessible modularly to insurance companies, the police, the
                         gendarmerie, and other stakeholders.

                         23.     In addition, the subcomponent will finance: (a) road safety baseline surveys (seatbelt
Public Disclosure Copy




                         wearing, speeding, drunk driving, etc.); (b) a study to estimate the socio-economic cost of road traffic
                         accidents to complement data entry into the newly designed database and monitoring system; (c) the
                         purchase of four radar cameras for speed control (with complementary equipment) for Gendarmerie
                         enforcement along the Yaounde-Bafoussam-Bamenda corridor; (d) road safety design audits of some
                         major corridors; (e) implementation of priority audit recommendations carried out as variations to the
                         main contract along the Babadjou-Bamenda corridor; and (f) design and implementation of pilot road
                         safety projects in support of defined targets as outlined in the National Road Safety Strategy action
                         plan.

                         24.       It is expected that the works financed under subcomponent 2.1 and subcomponent 2.2 will
                         include measures such as pedestrian crossings, rumble strips, traffic signs in built-up areas,
                         increasing the space available for pedestrians and non-motorized traffic in populated areas,
                         installation of roadside safety barriers, improvements of dangerous curves and intersections, and
                         traffic signs and road markings at hazardous locations.

                         Subcomponent 2.4: Road asset management (estimated cost US$ 6.7 million)

                         25.     This subcomponent will complement activities already funded by the AfDB focused on
                         strengthening Cameroon's Road Fund and improve axle load controls. More specifically it will
                         finance the following:

                                                                      Page 6 of 16
                         a.      On-the-job training/TA of MINTP and MINMAP staff in the conduct of design studies and
                         the preparation of bidding documents for Output Performance-Based Contracting (OPBC) for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         maintenance of roads that either have been or are being constructed.
                         b.      Development of tools for the enforcement of quality standards in road works design and
                         execution, including a code of ethics, guidelines and manuals for road construction/maintenance and
                         supervision, and related training.
                         c.      Strengthening of road network monitoring and management, including condition and traffic
                         surveys and related training.
                         d.      Putting in place of an eight (8) year OPBC maintenance contract that will include the 50 km
                         Babadjou-Bamenda road section of the Bamenda - Yaounde corridor. The planned OPBC contract on
                         the Babadjou - Bamenda road section would complement AfDB's implementation of a similar OPCC
                         contract for the Yaounde - Bafoussam section of the corridor.


                         Component 3: Air Transport Safety and Security improvement (estimated cost US$ 46.3million of
                         which World Bank will finance US$43.3 million and GoC will finance US$ 3 million)

                         26.      This component focuses primarily on supporting the strengthening of safety and security at
                         Cameroon's four international airports (Yaounde, Douala, Garoua and Maroua), and builds on the
                         activities supported under the World Bank financed West and Central Africa Air Transport Safety
                         and Security project. It also supports in a limited manner the air transport security and safety capacity
                         building. What follow is a detailed description of the activities supported by this component.
                         .
                         Subcomponent 3.1: Airport safety and security strengthening (estimated cost US$ 41.7 million of
                         which World Bank will finance US$ 41.3 million and GoC will finance US$ 3 million)

                         27.     This subcomponent will comprise the following sets of activities:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         a.     Construction of three Crisis Management Centers (CDOUs) at Yaounde-Nsimalen, Garoua
                         and Maroua-Salak airports.

                         b.        Construction and rehabilitation of the fences at the Douala, Yaounde-Nsimalen, Garoua and
                         Maroua-Salak airports. More specifically this sub-component will focus on rectifying shortcomings
                         at all these airports by focusing on the following three fencing standards: (a) a concrete barrier type
                         fence for high-risk areas; (b) steel bar type of fence built on a low wall for low-threat areas; and (c) a
                         concertina wire type of fence in a no-obstacle area or at the end of the landing and takeoff runway.

                         c.       Improvement of the existing security perimeter roads around the Douala and Yaounde-
                         Nsimalen airports. All-weather roads around the security perimeter of airports are essential in
                         emergency situations for the rapid intervention of aircraft rescue and firefighting (ARFF) services or
                         police/gendarmerie. In Douala, the project will pave the existing 13.8 km patrol road, which is
                         entirely located within the airport boundary alongside the security fence. In Yaounde-Nsimalen, the
                         sub-component will improve the road around the airport, which is a priority for the local populations,
                         to mitigate the impact of the location of the airport on their mobility. The fact that the local
                         population regularly crosses the runway is a serious threat to the safe operations of the Yaounde-
                         Nsimalen airport.

                         d.      Studies to identify the basic socio-economic infrastructure needs for the populations living

                                                                       Page 7 of 16
                         around the four airports. Environmental and social conflicts occur regularly around airports and can
                         become acute in the case of new construction. Provision of social infrastructure in favor of the local
                         populations aims to avoid conflicts and ensure the acceptance of projects and their local integration.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         e.       Acquisition of airport security equipment. This subcomponent will finance the purchase and
                         installation of: (a) electronic surveillance and screening equipment to monitor passengers and freight
                         in the four airports, including the acquisition of equipment, training tools and manuals for the
                         CDOUs; (b) video surveillance equipment at each airport; and (c) access control equipment at each
                         airport. Bidding documents will include provisions for suppliers to provide maintenance and spare
                         part for equipment over the useful life of such equipment.

                         f.       Update of the Safety Management Systems at the four airports. ICAO has adopted a standard
                         for Safety Management Systems (SMS), which has been required to be applied to international
                         airports since November 2005. The CCAA needs to develop guidance on SMS implementation in
                         Cameroon in compliance with ICAO's new Annex 19 on Safety Management, which went into effect
                         in 2013. Under the new requirements, international airport operators need to put in place safety
                         programs to form the basis of the National Safety Plan for airports (NSP). The SMS will supplement
                         the NSP by providing a systematic and proactive approach that includes: (a) documenting identified
                         hazards safety and their mitigation measures; (b) monitoring and measuring the ongoing safety
                         experience of the airport; (c) establishing a voluntary non-punitive safety reporting system that can
                         be used by employees of the airport operator, airlines, and tenants; and (d) improving the entire
                         airport's safety culture. The subcomponent will finance:

                         ➯❫       Updating Cameroon's SMS (the SMS guidebook and its NSP) covering the concepts,
                         methodologies, processes, tools, and safety performance measurements that can be applied by
                         airports based on their level of operations and complexity, with the ultimate objective of facilitating
                         the certification of said airports.
                         ➯❫       Preparing accompanying action plans for mainstreaming the implementation of the SMS and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         NSP into the National Civil Aviation Plan (NCAP).
                         ➯❫       Establishing an Internet-based standing mechanism within the CCAA and at each airport for
                         monitoring compliance with the SMS (by airport operators and service providers).

                         Subcomponent 3.2: Strengthening air transport safety and security oversight (estimated cost US$ 1.6
                         million)

                         28.     This subcomponent will be composed of three main activities:

                         a.      Training in air transport safety and security oversight. The subcomponent will finance
                         technical assistance and training to:

                         i.       Improve and update the aviation library established under the first regional project, to
                         become an online Internet platform.
                         ii.      Update CCAA's stock of mandatory aviation manuals and establish a system for their
                         systematic renewal and subscription.
                         iii.     Train CCAA staff responsible for safety oversight on how to use the SMS and the NSP for
                         airport safety monitorin g and supervision.
                         iv.      Train CCAA staff to become trainers of SP staff in airport safety management.
                         v.       Conduct training programs and workshops at airport premises targeting airport operators and


                                                                      Page 8 of 16
                         users on various aspects of the NSP and SMS.
                         vi.       Support study tours for government and CCAA aviation staff as part of on-the-job learning
                         to facilitate policy and program design and implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         b.       Diagnostic Studies: The subcomponent will finance diagnostic studies to collect baseline
                         information for the Cameroon civil aviation industry and prepare medium term programs and long
                         term plans towards full compliance with ICAO's SARPs. The medium term programs will form part
                         of the activities to be implemented in follow-on projects. The diagnostic studies will be conducted in
                         a single technical assistance contract covering the 19 ICAO's civil aviation annexes.

                         c.       Regulation: In 2013 Cameroon enacted a new civil aviation law, which was judged to meet
                         international standards by ICAO's audit experts. The subcomponent will finance updating of the
                         corresponding regulatory framework in the various areas of civil aviation, as required under ICAO's
                         standards.

                         Component 4: Support to Project Implementation Management and Monitoring (estimated cost US$
                         8.3 million of which World Bank will finance US$ 6.6 million and GoC will finance US$ 1.7
                         million)

                         29.     This component will finance technical assistance, equipment, training and operating costs
                         for:
                         a.      Project management and implementation oversight;
                         b.      Project monitoring and evaluation;
                         c.      Operating costs of the two projects implementation units, one responsible for component 1
                         and 2 and the other responsible for component 3.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (GEN07)
                         Kristyna Bishop (GSU01)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            The project supports the rehabilitation of a 52 km road
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     section between Babadjou-Bamenda including upgrading
                                                                    of some urban sections in Bamenda and strengthening the
                                                                    safety and security in the four international airports in
                                                                    Cameroon (Douala, Yaounde-Nsimalen, Garoua and
                                                                    Maroua-Salak) through the construction of emergency
                                                                    operation centers, rehabilitation of safety fences, and land
                                                                    patrol tracks. The project activities may have negative
                                                                    environmental and social impacts that need to be correctly
                                                                    managed. An Environmental and Social Management
                                                                    Framework (ESMF), has been prepared to provide
                                                                    guidelines for the preparation of the implementing
                                                                    safeguards instruments. The ESMF has been published in-


                                                                      Page 9 of 16
                                                        country on June 27, 2016 (www.mintp.cm) and on the
                                                        Bank's Info-Shop on July 08, 2016. In the meantime the
                                                        specific, Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        (ESIA) including the appropriate environmental and
                                                        social mitigation and management measures (ESMP) are
                                                        under preparation for the road (Babadjou-Bamenda) and
                                                        Air transport components. These documents will be
                                                        disclosed by the borrower prior to effectiveness.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No    The project does not anticipate any natural habitats loss.
                         4.04                           No direct impact on any park is anticipated. The ESIA/
                                                        ESMP will identify measures avoiding any poaching
                                                        activities by the workers if applicable.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No

                         Physical Cultural        Yes   The proposed operation will involve significant
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           excavations and movement of earth for the planned
                                                        rehabilitation/reconstruction. However, the EMSF has not
                                                        identified any threat against physical cultural resources in
                                                        the project areas. To anticipate the management of
                                                        "chance finds" physical cultural resources, the ESMF
                                                        includes clear procedures to be followed to identify and
                                                        protect cultural property from theft, and to treat
                                                        discovered artifacts. These procedures will be included in
                                                        the bidding documents. The ESIAs/ESMPs will provide
                                                        measures for handling with "chance finds" during
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        implementation of project activities.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No    No Indigenous peoples that meet the four criteria have
                         BP 4.10                        been identified in the project area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   This policy is triggered due to the fact that activities
                         OP/BP 4.12                     financed under components 1 and 2 will involve
                                                        compensation. The ROW along the entire length of the
                                                        road Babadjou Bamenda will need to be formally
                                                        expropriated and compensation paid to affected persons.
                                                        The expropriation and compensation process under
                                                        Cameroonian law is extremely complicated and generally
                                                        takes a significant amount of time. In an effort to address
                                                        this issue, the DUP for the ROW was signed prior to pre-
                                                        appraisal and this enabled the compensation process to be
                                                        launched and the Evaluation Commission to use the
                                                        World Bank's standards for eligibility and compensation
                                                        criteria. This strategy will ensure that there is one RAP
                                                        that meets both the requirements under Cameroonian law
                                                        and the Bank's standards for eligibility and compensation.
                                                        It will be disclosed per the requirements of the policy



                                                        Page 10 of 16
                                                                        prior project effectiveness
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP         No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            4.37
                            Projects on International    No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed         No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              This project is financing some critical infrastructure that will significantly improve the lives of the
                              people living along the road as well as increase the safety and security of four key airports. It is
                              largely focused on reconstruction and not new construction (with the exception of the CDOU at
                              the airports) and will be almost entirely within the original footprints (with the exception of the 5
                              km bypass section in Bamenda). This means that the environment and social impacts are limited
                              and can be managed as outlined in the ESMF and RPF.
                              The project does not anticipate any potential large scale, significant and irreversible impacts.
                              Nevertheless, the risk of landslide was identified around the road section including Akum and
                              level of the cliff of the Bamenda Up-station. To mitigate this risk, a bypass was proposed and
                              adopted.
                              It is likely that there will be negative impacts on land owners and users, agricultural communities
                              and other infrastructure such as roads and telecommunications. The most common negative
                              impacts are related to disruption of traffic and economic activity during construction, the felling of
                              trees, destruction of crops and house properties, specifically in the crossing urban areas, toll gate
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Santa, market areas and urban section. The land acquisition for facilities constructions, the
                              opening of temporary deviations, and exploitation of quarries and borrow sites.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Increased speed and traffic may lead to more accidents for those living along and using the newly
                              rehabilitated roads. Two very positive impacts related specifically to the rehabilitation of the
                              Babadjou-Bamenda road will be the better connection with Yaounde for personal as well as
                              market purposes as well as fewer accidents that are common right now as a result of the current
                              state of the road.

                              With regard to the airport component, the most important indirect potential negative impact is
                              related to the permanent access restriction to the Maria Sanctuary in Yaounde through the airport
                              runway. In Douala the airport, local communities that have been used to airport facilities close to
                              runways, for football will no more have access to this space. People intrusion and encroachment to
                              airport areas will be limited.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              To mitigate the landslide risks, the government adopted the construction of a bypass/ short course
                              road at the entrance (welcome Bamenda) into the city of Bamenda as an alternative to the


                                                                         Page 11 of 16
                           dangerous section which passes through the steep cliff at up-station Bamenda often experiencing
                           annual landslides and several accidents. In addition, a comprehensive geotechnical studies on
                           sensitive sections to landslides will be carried out. Some changes to the alignment of the road on
Public Disclosure Copy




                           dangerous curves and in the urban section in Bamenda have been made in order to reduce road
                           traffic accidents and avoid negative impacts on livelihoods.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           An environmental and social assessment was undertaken during preparation and used to prepare
                           the ESMF and RPF (reflecting basic principles and the standards to be used in determining
                           eligibility and standards for compensation). The ESMF and RPF which were prepared to provide
                           guidance for implementation were disclosed in-country on June 27, 2016 (www.mintp.cm) and by
                           the Bank on July 8, 2016.

                          To ensure a quick implementation of the project after effectiveness an Environmental and Social
                          Impact Assessment (ESIA) including the appropriate environmental and social mitigation and
                          management measures (ESMP) for the road (Babadjou-Bamenda) and Air transport components
                          are under preparation. These documents will be disclosed by the borrower prior project
                          effectiveness. In addition, the borrower has to prepare and implement an SCD-HIV sensitization
                          and awareness program in the corridor. This activity will be supported through component 2.1.

                          The expropriation and compensation process under Cameroonian law generally takes a significant
                          amount of time. In an effort to address this issue, the DUP for the proposed project was issued
                          prior to pre-appraisal, thus enabling the compensation process to be launched sufficiently early
                          and to enable the Evaluation Commission use the Bank's standards in applying eligibility and
                          compensation criteria. This strategy which is innovative, is expected to avoid having two parallel
                          and inconsistent processes, as currently observed in Cameroon, which often lead to a disconnect
                          between Bank-approved safeguards dispositions during preparation and Cameroon expropriation
                          measures during project implementation. It also ensures that there is one RAP that meets both the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          requirements under Cameroonian law and equally reflects the Banks standards for eligibility and
                          compensation.

                          The DUP was signed on April 1, 2016 and the evaluation commissions established in April as
                          well. This "unified" resettlement and compensation process is being tested for the first time in
                          Cameroon. Given its pioneer nature, the Bank has significantly increased its technical support to
                          the GoC's project team.

                          Training in OP 4.12 for the Evaluation Commission will be provided by the Bank prior to the
                          completion of the RAP. As required by OP 4.12, all compensation must be paid prior to the
                          beginning of works. A focal point in the Prime Minister's office has been appointed in order to
                          facilitate the processing of the various steps and to ensure the timely payment of compensation.

                          For the other components financed by the project, the RPF will be used during implementation to
                          screen for and manage negative impacts such as short term construction related impacts or loss of
                          use/access to crops and fields.

                          In addition, MINTP has begun the process to establish a social communication team that will be
                          responsible for preparing a social communication strategy and then engage with local communities
                          and especially the temporary market vendors in Bamenda.


                                                                    Page 12 of 16
                         Public Consultations. Extensive public consultations were carried out during the whole ESMF,
                         RPF process in the main project areas. The local population expressed concerns and expectations
Public Disclosure Copy




                         that were summarized in the draft ESIA final report. The Public Consultation will continue
                         throughout project implementation with the involvement of civil society, Project-Affected People
                         (PAP), and various stakeholders. During the ESIAs and RAPs preparation process, the
                         Consultation will continue as described in the ESMF and RPF. All environmental safeguards final
                         documents including the RPF and RAP will be disclosed on the MINTP and CCAA websites and
                         through the Bank's Infoshop.

                         In addition, a communication strategy will be prepared and implemented especially for the air
                         transport component to help explain the project objectives to local communities.

                         Citizen engagement activities will be established as a means to empower beneficiary communities
                         to take control of their road networks and become involved with local-level planning decisions.
                         Such activities will be executed by MINTP and will include, inter alia the following activities: (i)
                         gender-representative consultations in all beneficiary communities every six months; and (ii)
                         selection of several representatives from each affected community as part of the consultation
                         meetings to serve as community monitors. MINTP will inform the beneficiaries of the status of
                         rehabilitation works and other project-related activities, and will provide monthly updates
                         regarding the planned works in their communities, and report any issues or problems associated
                         with the implementation of these works on the ground. This community monitoring system will be
                         complemented by a grievance redress mechanism (GRM) that will be operated by MINTP and will
                         allow project beneficiaries to submit questions, complaints, or suggestions via email, phone, text
                         message, or regular mail.

                         Safeguards Institutional Arrangement. The Environmental Assessment and Social procedures in
                         Cameroon remain heavy including several administrative stages. Cameroonian regulations
                         describe in detail the Environmental Assessment process with requirement of fees payment at
Public Disclosure Copy




                         some stage (validation of ToRs by Ministry of Environment, validation of the Final Envi
                         ronmental and Social Impact Assessment Report by the Inter ministerial committee validation of
                         Environmental and Social impact Notice). At the same time, the compensation process requires
                         also several stages that are needed to be followed. To address at the early stage all these
                         administrative constraints that could delay the project implementation, a strong safeguards
                         institutional arrangement is required.

                         The institutional arrangement for the safeguards implementation proposed is fully integrated with
                         the overall implementation arrangement of the project. MINTP/ Cellule BAD-BM and CCAA both
                         have the ultimate responsibility for the project's safeguards compliance. Ministry of Publics works
                         hosts an Environmental and Social Unit that was involved during the preparation and the
                         implementation of the previous transport projects.

                         An institutional assessment capacity of the Cellule BAD-BM carried out during the project
                         preparation reveals weaknesses in the management of social and environmental challenges
                         including weak involvement of the Environmental and Social Unit within the Ministry. Based on
                         this assessment, it was agreed to strengthen the Cellule BAD-BM with two full time persons, one
                         to deal with Environmental challenges and second one for Social issues with a strong skills on
                         compensation management (RPF screening and RAPs monitoring including restoration of life
                         condition of Project Affected Persons). The experts that will be recruited will work closely with

                                                                  Page 13 of 16
                           the main stakeholders involved in the project implementation (Environmental and social Unit of
                           MINTP, CCAA Ministry of Environment, Ministry of State Property and Land, Civil society
                           organization and Contractors).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           To ensure the appropriate implementation of the air transport component by the CCAA in
                           managing safeguards concerns, a Senior Environmental and Social Expert will be hired to cover
                           environmental and social aspects related to the air transport component.

                           The CCAA and Cellule BAM-BM Environmental and Social Experts will work closely to ensure
                           an environmental and social safeguards coherent reporting of the whole project. They will ensure
                           that the environmental and social safeguards implementation status is reflected in the periodic
                           project reports.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The proposed project beneficiaries are current and future road and airport users. The following
                           stakeholders will be involved in the project: Affected people within the ROW of the road
                           component, the communes located in the project area, local NGOs, MINTP, CCAA and other
                           relevant administrations. A robust consultation process was undertaken as part of the preparation
                           of the framework instruments (ESMF and RPF) and also during the preparation of specific
                           instruments.

                           The list of PAPs prepared by the Evaluation commission was also presented during a large public
                           meeting in July 2016 that provided further information to the beneficiary community. The
                           Consultation plans that were proposed in the relevant safeguards documents will be followed
                           during the project implementation and the stakeholder's feedback shared in the project periodic
                           reports. A social communication strategy will be implemented during early implementation to
                           ensure that this dialogue continues.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      27-Jun-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08-Jul-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Cameroon                                                         27-Jun-2016
                           Comments: www.mintp.cm
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      07-Jul-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08-Jul-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Cameroon                                                         07-Jul-2016
                           Comments: www.mintp.cm
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/


                                                                    Page 14 of 16
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                          275 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?




                                                                     Page 15 of 16
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Peter Ngwa Taniform,Marc Marie Francois Navelet Noualhier
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)             Date: 18-Aug-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Nicolas Peltier-Thiberge (PMGR)     Date: 18-Aug-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 16 of 16
