                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA15933
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Mar-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                            Project ID:   P152860
                            Project Name:      Yunnan Early Childhood Education Innovation Project (YECEIP) (P152860)
                            Task Team          Xiaoyan Liang
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          15-Mar-2016                      Estimated   15-Aug-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GED02                            Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Pre-primary education (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (80%), Nutrition and food security (10%), Child health (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         83.22                 Total Bank Financing:        50.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 33.22
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    50.00
                              Total                                                                                    83.22
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to improve the access and quality of ECE provision in the
                           project counties in Yunnan Province.
                            3. Project Description
                           The Project will have four main components:



                                                                      Page 1 of 8
                         Component One: Increasing Access to ECE Programs in the project counties. This component will
                         focus on 1a) Constructing and equipping fifteen kindergartens across the seven project counties, with
                         a total of 140 classes; 1b) constructing and equipping two university affiliated research kindergartens
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in Kunming University and Zhaotong University with a total of 24 classes; 1c) piloting rural
                         community-based ECE centers in Weishan and Qiaojia counties; and 1d) Constructing and equipping
                         an early childhood special education center in Kunming University.

                         Component Two: Improving Quality of ECE. This component will focus on improving the quality of
                         ECE by: 2a) providing structured in-service training of all ECE teachers, managers and staff; 2b)
                         strengthening teacher education programs in three universities; 2c) Establishing ECE research/
                         training centers; and 2d) providing a minimum teaching and learning package to all rural preprimary
                         classes in the project counties.

                         Component Three: Creating an ECE Enabling Environment. This component has been designed to
                         create a favorable policy environment conducive to quality provision of ECE services in the
                         province, through: 3a) Developing and piloting ECE institutional quality standards; 3b) Information
                         and advocacy campaign for ECE and scientific childrearing practices; and 3c) continuous policy
                         development in ECE.

                         Component Four: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         A total of seven project counties and three colleges in two cities are selected for project
                         implementation across Yunnan Province on Yun-Gui Plateau, Southwest of China. The seven
                         project counties are located in five municipalities, with a total of 2.51 million of population. They
                         include Weishan, Eryuan, and Yangbi Counties in Dali Prefecture, Jianshui County in Honghe
                         Prefecture, Qiaojia County in Zaotong City, Xichou County in Wenshan City, and Zhanyi County in
                         Qujing City. Two participating colleges are located in Kunming, and one collage in Zaotong City.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Their climate ranges from subtropical, continental temperate to alpine zone with annual average
                         precipitation from around 700 to about 1000 mm. Most of project counties are national poverty
                         counties. About 28 percent of population are ethnic minorities in the project counties, ranging from
                         5-6 percent in Xichou and Zhanyi to 71 percent in Eryuan.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Xin Ren (GEN02)
                         Youxuan Zhu (GSU02)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            The Project will build new preschools in crowded urban
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     or suburb areas as well as rural ECE centers in more
                                                                    remote rural areas. It will further establish research and
                                                                    teacher training centers within existing campuses of the
                                                                    three project universities. Due to the small scale of each
                                                                    subproject, environmental impacts are small, mostly
                                                                    confined to the site with limited social disturbance. Thus,
                                                                    category B was assigned.




                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                                                        Environmental Assessment (EA) was carried out to
                                                        investigate social-environmental baseline including
                                                        pollution control facilities and analyze the impacts. An
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was developed
                                                        based on the consolidated EA covering all subprojects.
                                                        “As per the World Bank policy OP4.01, public
                                                        consultation took place in project cities after the draft EA/
                                                        EMP and the final was disclosed locally as well as in the
                                                        Bank Infoshop. Feedback from the public was recorded in
                                                        the EA and incorporated in the EMP.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No    The EA process has verified that all project sites are either
                         4.04                           in built up area or suburb of project cities or in existing
                                                        campuses and facilities. Thus this OP is not applied.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    Not applicable

                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     Not applicable

                         Physical Cultural        No    Systematic investigation during the EA process has
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           confirmed that the project doesn’t affect any physical
                                                        cultural resources as defined by this OP.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   The policy is triggered since quite large portion of project
                         BP 4.10                        beneficiaries are ethnic minorities. About 28 percent of
                                                        population in the project counties are ethnic minorities,
                                                        ranging from 5-6 percent in Xichou and Zhanyi to 69
                                                        percent in Eryuan. Among them, Yi, Bai, and Hui are
                                                        three main minorities. Minority population appear more
                                                        concentrated in rural townships and villages, where the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        rural ECE alternative pilot components are located. In
                                                        order to ensure broad support by local population on
                                                        different components of the project, extensive
                                                        consultations were conducted with local communities,
                                                        particularly ethnic minority people in the project areas,
                                                        and an ethnic minority development plan (EMDP) has
                                                        been prepared. Based on the consultations, issues
                                                        concerning minority children, parents, and school teachers
                                                        were identified and concrete measures for ECE
                                                        improvement are incorporated in project design and
                                                        included in the EMDP. The EMDP has been disclosed
                                                        locally in project counties and through the InfoShop. The
                                                        key social benefits of the Project are increasing
                                                        enrollment and quality of ECE in the project areas,
                                                        particularly among ethnic minority communities, through
                                                        development of new schools, provision of teacher
                                                        training, and improvement of ECE policy and social
                                                        support. All these recommendations have been accepted
                                                        by the PMO and built into the project design. The PIU of



                                                         Page 3 of 8
                                                                       project county will lead the implementation of the EMDP
                                                                       under the oversight of the provincial project leading
                                                                       group. An experienced external monitoring agency will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       contracted to conduct independent monitoring and
                                                                       evaluation over the course of the project implementation.
                                                                       The monitoring results will be reported twice a year and,
                                                                       if needed, remedial actions will be designed.
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes               Under the Project, a total of 17 new pre-schools will be
                            OP/BP 4.12                                 constructed, which include 15 preschools in the seven
                                                                       project counties and 2 experimental preschools in the two
                                                                       project universities. Further, 3 research and teacher
                                                                       training centers/buildings will be constructed in the
                                                                       universities. A number of rural ECE centers will also be
                                                                       established in the Weishan and Qiaojia counties.
                                                                       According to the survey, a total of 243 mu of land areas (1
                                                                       ha = 15mu) would be required. All the required land areas
                                                                       are either located within the existing campuses of three
                                                                       colleges or allocated by county governments. Due
                                                                       diligence review confirmed that land acquisition has been
                                                                       obtained in compliance with national laws and local
                                                                       regulations, and compensations have been paid to the
                                                                       affected people with no problem reported.

                                                                       In order to cater to possible site changes during the
                                                                       project implementation, the team and counterparts agreed
                                                                       to trigger the OP/BP4.12 and have developed a
                                                                       Resettlement Plan Framework (RPF) under the project
                                                                       which has been disclosed locally and in the Bank’s
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       Infoshop.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             Not applicable
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No             Not applicable
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No             Not applicable
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Given the nature and small scale of the project activities, environmental impacts during
                              construction will be small and largely confined to the site, including noise, dust, small amount of
                              waste disposal and limited social disturbance. The majority of project sites are connected with
                              sewer network and covered by garbage collection of the cities/towns. Therefore, impacts during
                              operation (sewage, manure and solid wastes) are expected to be moderate too and can be readily
                              mitigated.


                                                                         Page 4 of 8
                          The Indigenous Peoples policy (OP4.10) is triggered as 30 percent minority students and 30
                          percent minority faculty in project schools will benefit from the project activities. The project will
Public Disclosure Copy




                          bring positive social impacts to students, parents, and faculty in the project areas. Issues concerned
                          to minority students and faculty were identified and concreted measures for improvements are
                          incorporated in the project design and included in EMDP developed for the Project.

                           At the time of concept note for the project, it was decided that the Policy of Involuntary
                           Resettlement (OP4.12) was not triggered as all new school buildings are located either within the
                           existing campuses of participating colleges or on the land already acquired. Due diligence review
                           was conducted for all schools with recent land acquisition and confirm that land acquisition is in
                           compliance with national law and local regulations, and all affected people were paid with
                           compensation with no remaining problem. However, upon further deliberations and consultations
                           with the counterparts, the team decided to trigger the OP4.12 and developed a Resettlement Plan
                           Framework for the project to cater to possible changes of construction sites during project
                           implementation.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           This project will play a significant role in improving the quantity and quality of ECE provision in
                           project counties, which will have great benefits for the project schools, teachers, students, and
                           communities. The project implementation can not only directly improve the enrollment of ECE in
                           project counties, particularly in rural areas, but also can promote social development in ethnic
                           minority communities. By breaking the intergenerational transmission of poverty and improving
                           the living standards especially for ethnic minorities, in the long term, harmonious relations among
                           ethnic groups would be developed and sustained in Yunnan Province, Overall, the World Bank's
                           support for the Yunnan Early Childhood Education Innovation Project is of positive social
                           significance.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impacts.
                           Alternative analysis of different design options was undertaken as part of the EA process,
                           including a without project scenario. Site selection for all kindergartens and training centers was
                           analyzed. Different design of toilets and types of sewage treatment were compared respectively for
                           kindergartens in cities/county seats and those in township/countryside. Alternatives with less
                           social and environmental impacts and more suitable for local condition were recommended. These
                           recommendations have been incorporated in the feasibility studies and have been fed into the
                           design process.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Capacity building of the clients has been an integral part of the project preparation process,
                           especially for at city and county level. The Provincial PMO has experience in managing World
                           Bank projects including the most recent Yunnan Technical and Vocational Education and Training
                           Project and has assigned a staff member to manage environmental and social safeguards.
                           Extensive training by the Bank safeguards specialists will be continued during the whole project
                           period to enhance their institutional capacity on preparing and implementing environmental and
                           social safeguards.

                          Based on the EA, an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was developed. It specifies


                                                                     Page 5 of 8
                           mitigation measures, based on experience from similar projects, the WB/IFC’s General Guidelines
                           on Environmental, Health and Safety, and recommendations from public consultation of the
                           project. It outlines the supervising mechanism and monitoring plan. To ensure EMP
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implementation, the EMP includes a budgeted training plan. The EMP will be referred to in
                           bidding documents and contracts with contractors and operators to ensure its implementation.

                           Given the fact that 30percent of students and faculty of project schools are ethnic minorities, in
                           order to ensure their concerns and requirements are included in the project design, extensive
                           consultations were conducted, based on which, an Ethnic Minority Development Plan was
                           developed for the Project. Under EMDP, issues concerning minority students and faculty were
                           identified and concrete measures for improvement were proposed with detailed budget and
                           responsible agencies. The Bank’s safeguards specialists will provide further training on safeguards
                           during the project implementation phase.

                           A Resettlement Plan Framework (RPF) was also developed and disclosed in country in February
                           2016. The RPF sets up objectives, principles, eligible criteria for entitlements, compensation
                           methods, participation and the consultation process and the claims solution mechanism in order to
                           ensure that the affected people and households will restore their living standards, at least as the
                           same as before the project.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders include staff and students of the schools, communities nearby, and local
                           government agencies where the new kindergartens and rural ECE centers will be established.
                           During the project preparation, the project schools, PMO, environmental and social consultants
                           carried out information disclosure and public consultation through posters, a questionnaire survey,
                           interviews and public meetings in project cities. Altogether 476 people with a wide range of
                           background were surveyed. Most of them highly supported the project. Their suggestions and
                           concerns have been incorporated into the safeguards documents and conveyed to the PMO.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Further consultations were also done while developing the EMP, EMDP, and the RPF. Finally, all
                           safeguards documents have been disclosed locally in every project county, in the Capital City of
                           Kunming where the Department of Education is located, as well as in the World Bank's Infoshop.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        02-Dec-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     02-Dec-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                              25-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        02-Feb-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     07-Mar-2016




                                                                     Page 6 of 8
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            25-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      18-Feb-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   29-Feb-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            25-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected




                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             livelihoods)

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Xiaoyan Liang
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Harry Anthony Patrinos (PMGR)                 Date: 15-Mar-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
