INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12953
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-May-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Vanuatu                     Project ID:  P155256
Project Name: Pacific Resilience Program (P155256)
Task Team       Denis Jean-Jacques Jordy,Michael Bonte-Grapentin
Leader(s):
Estimated        16-Mar-2015                Estimated    19-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSURR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (70%), Public
administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (30%)
Theme(s):       Natural disaster management (60%), Climate change (40%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       1.65             Total Bank Financing:     1.50
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.15
International Development Association (IDA)                                   1.50
Total                                                                         1.65
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The objective of the Project is to strengthen the financial protection of Vanuatu.
3. Project Description
Despite recent progress in Vanuatu in terms of national level plans and policy to respond to disaster
and climate risk, translating national climate change and DRM policy into sector policies and
Page 1 of4


﻿resilient investments has been a significant challenge. Vanuatu has been assessed to be the world's
most vulnerable country to climate change, reinforcing the need for climate resilience strategies. The
PREP will complement existing initiatives which aim to minimize the impact of climate change and
natural hazards in Vanuatu, including the World Bank funded Increasing Resilience to Climate
O
U         Change and Natural Hazards Projects and Mainstreaming Disaster Risk Reduction Project. Vanuatu
will not be participating in Component 1 or 2 of PREP and will participate only in Component 3.1.2.
This sub-component will finance part of the Government's Insurance Premium for disaster risk
financing or transfer products. This will enable the continuation of the Pacific catastrophe risk
insurance pilot which provides catastrophe risk insurance coverage for high and medium risk layers
to participating PICs (including Vanuatu) through a regional pooling mechanism.
The Project will assist the GoV to pay the catastrophe insurance premia through IDA after the third
year of the ongoing pilot. The estimated cost of the premium for Vanuatu is US$0.5million/year for
three years to provide insurance coverage for Vanuatu against tropical cyclones and earthquakes/
tsunamis until 31st October 2018. The GoV will provide counterpart funding in the amount of US
$40,000 to partially finance the premium for the year commencing November 2015, US$50,000 for
the year commencing November 2016, and US$60,000 for the year commencing November 2017.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The main office for the project will be in Shefa Province, Vanuatu. Due to its nature as a financing
project, it will have no salient physical characteristics which would be relevant to a safeguards
analysis.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Nicholas John Valentine (GSURR)
Ross James Butler (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Q)        Environmental           No          The project involves financial assistance only. There will
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               be no environmental or social interactions
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Page 2 of 4


﻿Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
0
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project will have no potential safeguards issues as is an insurance financing project only.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Vanuatu may choose to participate more fully in the PREP in future. Should this eventuate, a
separate project will be assessed
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
N/A
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
N/A
B. Disclosure Requirements
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
0
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
in the project cost?
Page 3 of 4


﻿Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Denis Jean-Jacques Jordy,Michael Bonte-Grapentin
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)               Date: 27-May-2015
Manager:
Page 4 of 4


