                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC15025

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Jan-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            India                            Project ID:       P155038
                            Project Name:       24x7 - Power for all in Andhra Pradesh (P155038)
                            Task Team           Mani Khurana,Simon J. Stolp
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           08-Sep-2016                      Estimated         30-Nov-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GEE06                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
                            Theme(s):           Other public sector governance (30%), City-wide Infrastructure and Service
                                                Delivery (40%), Rural services and infrastructure (30%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    575.00                       Total Bank Financing:        400.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       175.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                          400.00
                              Total                                                                          575.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objective of the project is to increase the system capacity to deliver electricity to
                           customers, and to improve the operational efficiency and system reliability in distribution of
                           electricity in the state of Andhra Pradesh
                           C. Project Description
                           The project will cover the following components:-
                         Component A: Power Transmission system strengthening (US$ 100million of which IBRD $70
                         million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •       This component would support APTRANSCO in augmenting the transmission system to
                         increase the system’s capacity to transmit additional power generation (~7000-8000 MW) for
                         servicing higher loads (annual load growth estimated to be around 8-9%).
                         •       As mentioned earlier, while the state plans to meet the bulk of its investment needs through
                         other sources, the proposed project would undertake augmentation at lower voltage levels of 220kV
                         and 132kV, to demonstrate the implementation of an integrated transmission and distribution
                         planning approach, which would also help in reducing technical losses in transmission system.
                         .
                         Component B: Distribution Investments- Urban (US$ 200 million of which IBRD $140 million)

                         •         This component would support investments in distribution network strengthening &
                         augmentation (33kV and below), smart grids (including smart metering), underground cabling, LT
                         ABC, and other ICT enabled interventions in select urban towns.
                         •         The objective of these investments would be to augment the network to meet the growing
                         power requirement, reduce technical & commercial losses, improve operational efficiency and
                         increase the system reliability especially in coastal towns prone to natural calamities.
                         •         A set of towns would be identified for these investments, based on pre-defined selection
                         criteria.

                         Component C: Distribution Investments – Rural (US$ 215 million of which IBRD $150 million)
                         •        This component would support strengthening and augmentation of distribution network
                         (33kV and below), high voltage distribution system (HVDS) and feeder segregation in identified
                         rural areas.
                         •        While Andhra Pradesh has already implemented rural HVDS in a number of districts, it
                         plans to cover the remaining districts under this component. Similarly, AP has virtual feeder
Public Disclosure Copy




                         segregation for agriculture and domestic households and dedicated feeders for rural industrial centers
                         (small to large scale). This component would support the state in constructing dedicated feeders to
                         remaining rural industrial pockets.
                         •        The key objective of this component is to provide better quality power to rural areas and to
                         reduce technical and commercial losses

                         Component D: Solar Pump sets (US$50million of which IBRD $30 million)
                         •        This component would support the distribution utilities in deploying solar agri-pumpsets in
                         rural areas.

                         Component E: Technical assistance for capacity building (IBRD $10 million)
                         •        This component would support the distribution companies to improve their institutional
                         structure and business processes, and integrate ICT in day to day operations. Diagnostic studies will
                         be in the project preparation phase to clearly identify capacity building needs. Focus areas would
                         include redefining identified business processes and large scale deployment of IT enabled systems
                         (including upgrading ERP systems) for managing both customer facing operations as well as internal
                         functions. This component will also be used to support areas like Third Party Quality Assurance
                         Consultants to supervise implementation, developing a stakeholder communication strategy,
                         designing the training calendar of utilities etc. based on areas identified during project preparation.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be undertaken in urban and rural areas of Andhra Pradesh. Andhra Pradesh, located
Public Disclosure Copy




                         on the east coast of India has been recently reorganized following the creation of Telangana state.
                         The State is richly endowed with natural and human resources with competitive socio economic
                         advantages. Its geographical area of 1, 60,205 sq. km makes it the 8 largest State in the country.
                         Situated in a tropical region, has the 2nd longest coastline in the country with a length of 974 km.
                         Barring four, all other 9 districts have a border with the Bay of Bengal. The State has a forest area of
                         34,572 sq.kms as per the forest records, which accounts for 21.58% the total geographical area. .
                         Majority of its forests are dry deciduous type and located in it border areas with Telangana in the
                         west and Chhattisgarh in the north. The State has a variety of physiographic features ranging from
                         high hills, undulating plains to coastal and deltaic environment. The State has three physiographic
                         zones, the hilly region having Nallamalai, Erramalai hills and the Eastern Ghats having an altitude of
                         500 to 1400 m; the plateau having an altitude of 100 m to 1000 m and the deltas of rivers between
                         the Eastern Ghats and the Sea Coast. The total notified forest area of the State is 36914.69 Km2,
                         which is 22.73 % of the geographical area. The forest cover in the State is 23399.95 Km2, which is
                         15.24% of the Geographical area. Krishna and Godavari are the major rivers of the state.

                         AP has a population of about 50 million which accounts for the 4.10% of the country's population
                         making it the 10 most populous State in the country. While 71% of the total population live in rural
                         areas, the remaining (29) % live in urban areas. Of the total population, 50.08% are males and
                         49.92% females. There are 1272 million households in the State and the average size of the
                         household is 4. Of the total population of the State, Schedule Castes constitute 17.1% and Schedule
                         Tribes 5.5 percent. The state has certain areas under the Fifth Schedule of the Indian Constitution,
                         meant to safeguard the interests of the tribals, and are spread across six districts- Visakhapatnam,
                         East Godavari, West Godavari Srikakulam, Vizianagaram, and Prakasam
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Government of Andhra Pradesh enacted the Electricity Reforms Act in 1998. As a consequence, the
                         State Electricity Board was unbundled into Andhra Pradesh Power Generation Corporation Limited
                         (APGENCO) & Transmission Corporation of Andhra Pradesh Limited (APTRANSCO) in 1999.
                         APTRANSCO was further unbundled in 2000 into "Transmission Corporation" and four
                         "Distribution Companies" (DISCOMS). As the state got bifurcated (into Andhra Pradesh and
                         Telengana) in 2014, the power transmission and distribution in AP now rests with three entities: (i)
                         Transmission Corporation with a state wide mandate; (ii) Southern Distribution Company, covering
                         eight districts; and (iii) Eastern Distribution Company for five districts in the remaining part of the
                         state. The Implementing Agencies, which are expected to handle most of the investments, have
                         considerable knowledge and experience of addressing these issues as they have implemented, or are
                         currently implementing, several projects financed by bi-lateral and multi-lateral agencies. One such
                         project is the ongoing World Bank financed Andhra Pradesh Disaster Recovery Project involving
                         underground cabling in Vishakhapatnam. Towards mainstreaming social and environment aspects,
                         the project will invest in building dedicated social and environmental capacity in each of the
                         implementing agencies and enable development of a robust environmental and social management
                         framework. Thus, adequate implementation capacity does exists in the state for managing the current
                         project as well.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         Gaurav D. Joshi (GEN06)
                           Suryanarayana Satish (GSU06)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment       Yes        There will be some impact of the proposed
                           OP/BP 4.01                                intervention on the biophysical and socio-economic
                                                                     environment that would need to be assessed and
                                                                     appropriately managed.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    TBD        While the exact locations of sub-project interventions
                                                                     are not currently known, they could potentially affect
                                                                     havens for wildlife and/or other natural habitats. This
                                                                     will be studied and confirmed during project
                                                                     preparation.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36             TBD        The alignments for proposed lines are currently not
                                                                     fixed. Some of those may pass through forests. The
                                                                     nature and extent of impacts, if any, will be
                                                                     determined as part of project preparation.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09        TBD        The extent of use of pesticides, if any, will be
                                                                     confirmed during preparation.
                           Physical Cultural Resources    Yes        Since the exact locations and alignments are not
                           OP/BP 4.11                                finalized, there can be some impact on such
                                                                     resources. There could be chance finds during
                                                                     construction. Project preparation will consider this
                                                                     aspect.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       Yes        AP state has tribal population in some districts. A
                           4.10                                      few of them are also covered under the Fifth
                                                                     Schedule of the Indian Constitution. However, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     tribal habitations are confined to a few pockets in the
                                                                     state. Given the current thinking, the project is
                                                                     unlikely to cover the tribal areas. Investment plans
                                                                     drawn as of now are exclusively in the non-tribal
                                                                     pockets only. Despite this, the project would like to
                                                                     be certain that ‘tribals’ are not impacted in any way
                                                                     by the project activities. This will become known
                                                                     only after the investment plans are decided and that
                                                                     location as well as the main and associated activities
                                                                     are firmed up. Subsequent to this, a decision will be
                                                                     taken on preparing or otherwise a Tribal Peoples
                                                                     Framework/Plan.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes        Lands are required for the project’s two main
                           BP 4.12                                   activities: (i) construction of sub stations; and (ii)
                                                                     drawing up of transmission/ distribution lines.
                                                                     Approaches to secure lands will have to be
                                                                     formulated.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No
                                 Projects on International      No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Mar-2016
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The utilities will undertake social and environmental assessment so as to prepare their own
                                      environmental and social management frameworks (ESMF), in conformity with applicable Bank
                                      policies as well as the national and regional legal stipulations. . The social management framework
                                      will comprise, among others and as appropriate, Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and Tribal
                                      People Plan Framework (TPPF) as well as a Gender Action Plan. Individual sub-projects will
                                      undertake detailed specific assessments and prepare management action plans to be incorporated
                                      into the implementation cycle.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Mani Khurana,Simon J. Stolp
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                                                                                                Date: 28-Jan-2016
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Julia Bucknall (PMGR)                                                                                                  Date: 18-Mar-2016
                                 Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
