INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12798
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Apr-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Lao People's Democratic     Project ID:  P151425
Republic
Project Name: Lao PDR Health Governance and Nutrition Development Project (P151425)
Task Team       Laura L. Rose,Phetdara Chanthala
Leader(s):
Estimated       22-Apr-2015                 Estimated    23-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GHNDR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Health (75%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (10%),
Public administration- Health (10%), General energy secto r (5%)
Theme(s):       Nutrition and food security (40%), Population and reproductive health (30%),
Child health (20%), Health system performance (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
O
U         Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      26.40             Total Bank Financing:    26.40
Financing Gap:            0.00
a           Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                  26.40
Total                                                                        26.40
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project development objective is to help increase coverage of reproductive, maternal and child
health, and nutrition services in target areas.
Page 1 of 9


﻿3. Project Description
The Project supports two important Government of Lao PDR Programs to improve health and
nutrition outcomes. The first is the Health Sector Reform Strategy (HSRS) which was approved in
2013 and is built around five priority areas: (i) human resources for health, (ii) health financing, (iii)
governance, organization, and management, (iv) health service delivery, and (v) health information
systems. The second is the Multi-sectoral Food and Nutrition Security Action Plan (MFNSAP)
which has been drafted to accelerate multi-sector actions to address the crisis in under-nutrition.
o        There are numerous active development partners in Lao PDR, including the UN agencies (e.g.
UNICEF, UNFPA, WHO), the European Union, the Asian Development Bank (ADB), and bilateral
partners (Korea, Japan, USA) who are aligning behind these Government policies. IDA financing is
proposed for a Project that comprises the following activities which complements those of other
donors in support of the Government's Program:
Component 1: Health Sector Governance Reform (US$0.5 million)
The Component will support the expansion and continued improvements to the district health
management information system (DHIS2); support to train internal Ministry of Health (MOH) staff
in access and utilization of the system is also covered. This system is utilized by the MOH to report
on their health indicators and provides key management information to inform policy direction and
resource allocation. Data generated by this system will be utilized to inform on targets to be attained
in order to ascertain achievement against the disbursement linked indicators (DLIs) supported under
Component 2, Service Delivery. This component will also assist the GOL to establish a system for
civil registration and vital statistics (CRVS).
Component 2: Service Delivery (US$18 million)
This Component aims to support the GOL's aim to strengthen reproductive, maternal, and child
health, and nutrition services. Financing will be provided based on results which are tracked
through a set of DLIs. DLIs are a set of tracer indicators aimed at measuring performance against
service delivery outcomes and health system strengthening actions.
O
Two sets of DLIs have been adopted: One set of three DLIs at the Central level focuses on
management and health system actions that support decentralized service delivery and thereby
support achievement of the Project objectives. The second set of DLIs focus on service delivery in 14
of the 18 provinces. While the DLIs for the 14 provinces will measure performance against the same
seven indicators, there will be 14 province specific DLI tables which indicate the province specific
baseline, the target and the amount the individual province can achieve for each DLI. The total
amount available for component 2 for each province will be allocated based on a formula, which
includes provincial level population and poverty data. The final formula will be agreed during
negotiations. IDA will disburse funds to the Central MOH upon achievement of the Central DLI
targets, which are monitored annually and subject to independent verification. Funds will also be
disbursed to the center (who will then transfer to each of the provinces) based on their annual
provinces achievement against province specific DLI targets. The provincial DLIs will be monitored
through (i) the national health management information system and provincial registers; and (ii)
independent verification through a national agency. In addition, a supervisory checklist will be
introduced to periodically review performance of the health centers and district hospitals to form the
backbone of the service monitoring efforts. Support for the independent verification mechanism is
provided under Component 4.
Page 2 of 9


﻿Component 3: Nutrition Social and Behavior Change Communication (US$4 million)
This component will complement the health facility and community-based nutrition-related services
supported under Component 2 by financing the implementation of nutrition- and health-related
SBCC. Activities supported under this Component are organized under two sub-components. Sub-
component 3.1 supports efforts related to the preparation of national strategy for a SBCC and sub-
component 3.2 supports implementation of SBCC at the national and village level in a selected
number of high priority districts. SBCC content will cover both nutrition-specific as well as
nutrition-sensitive interventions.
Sub-Component 3.1: Preparing an SBCC Strategy (US$0.5 million)
This sub-component will help the National Nutrition Committee prepare a high impact, integrated
social and behavior change communication strategy which is a key priority identified in the
MFNSAP. The component will finance technical assistance for: (a) stocktaking of existing SBCC
materials and delivery approaches, as well as additional formative research (mostly qualitative) to
help fill priority gaps (e.g. maternal nutrition, animal and child feces disposal and clean play areas
for infants); (b) development of an integrated SBCC Strategy and Implementation plan, including
stakeholder consultation; and (c) development of an SBCC campaign concept and umbrella slogan,
and a set of integrated campaign tools, such as mass media tools (TV spots, videos, radio programs,
posters, banners, social media applications, and collaterals), and also tools/scripts to organize
community edutainment events interpersonal communications toolkits for village facilitators, as well
as job-aids for health center (outreach) staff.
Sub-Component 3.2: Implementation of SBCC Strategy (US$3.5 million)
At the national level, the sub-component will supplement existing Government's budget to finance
the following items: (i) delivery costs of the mass-media campaign, including air-time/radio time,
social-media costs, staging of community edutainment events focused on selected districts; (b)
printing/production costs for SBCC materials, including job-aids for health center (outreach) staff,
village facilitator toolkits, posters and production of other collaterals; and (c) equipment needs for
villages to support SBCC activities, such as pocket projectors, height boards and weighing scales, as
a        well as equipment for SBCC-activities supported by the District Health Office (DHO).
At the village level, the sub-component complements national activities through community-based
SBCC activities aimed at contributing to improvements in: maternal nutrition and related caring
practices; infant and young child feeding and caring practices; appropriate sanitation and personal as
well as environment-related hygiene behaviors; household air pollution through use of near
smokeless cookstoves; dietary diversification, and other determinants of nutrition at the village level.
Village-based facilitators, who will comprise mostly female village health volunteers and/or
members of Lao Women's Union, will support the SBCC implementation a village level, under the
guidance of district health staff. The geographical area of the village-level activities will be
identified by the government, and would include priority target "convergence" districts in 3
provinces from the MFNSAP following a phased approach and with the aim to cover entire districts.
The delivery mechanism and implementation are expected to be replicated and scaled up in other
areas, contributing to sustainability.
Two innovative multi-sectoral programs are highlighted:
Page 3 of 9


﻿Open Defecation Free (ODF) villages. While SBCC activities will deliver messages on
sanitation and hygiene to target audiences, complementary community mobil ization is needed to
empower villagers to collectively stop the practice of open defecation. This is especially important
U         due to the externalities of open defecation. In line with the priority actions under MFNSAP, the
project will support district-wide implementation of Community-Led Total Sanitation (CLTS) for the
targeted districts. District Health staff will be facilitators for CLTS, working closely with village-
based facilitators. The project supports the achievement of ODF villages, through CLTS and SBCC
activities. It will follow the MOH's Operational Guideline and ODF verification guideline. The
project supports operational costs for SBCC and CLTS, and training for facilitators, Health Office
staff and sanitation suppliers. The project will not pay for construction of latrines, as households are
expected to self-finance. In order to address any environmental impacts from construction of these
latrines, measures under the ECOP adopted by Nam Saat of MOH will be applied. This ECOP has
been reviewed by the World Bank and found to be acceptable.
*      Cookstoves. The GOL has created a Lao Clean Stove Initiative Inter-Ministerial Taskforce
with support from the World Bank, initiated an assessment of the practicability and cost-
effectiveness of introducing near smokeless "super-clean" cookstoves into households in the poorest
rural communities of Lao PDR. Initial results suggests the cookstoves are a cost effective way to
reduce household air pollution (HAP). Cleaner and more convenient cookstoves fit well also with
specific measures to improve nutrition in the MFNSAP such as cooking demonstrations to improve
food safety and treatment of household water by boiling. Preliminary financial modeling of the cost
of a 50,000 super clean stoves distribution program in Lao PDR indicates that private sector
financing is plausible. Addressing HAP and promotion of clean cookstoves will be included in
Behavioral Change Activities in IDA financing. As the specific activities will not be known by
appraisal the MOH will adopt ECOPs acceptable to the World Bank prior to implementation of any
such activities.
Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$2.5 million)
0
This Component will support project management, including the general monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) efforts. It will cover contracting of a firm or institution to independently verify the results
achieved under the DLIs. It will also support contracting of technical assistance (TA) to help
a        Provinces achieve the DLIs. Financing is also to be used for the design of a supervision checklist
which will be used as part of the verification process. Periodic studies and surveys will be financed to
better understand health seeking behavior, and to enable better targeted interventions.
Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response (US$0 million)
The objective of the contingent emergency response component with a provisional zero allocation is
to allow for the reallocation of financing in accordance with the IDA Immediate Response
Mechanism in order to provide a rapid response to disaster or emergency events, as needed. This
component would finance expenditures on a positive list of goods and/or specific works and services
required for emergency recovery. An Emergency Response Manual (ERM) will apply to this
component, detailing streamlined financial management, procurement, safeguard and any other
necessary implementation arrangements.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Page 4 of 9


﻿The Program will cover the whole country. Support from IDA for the service delivery (Component
2) through DLIs, and the support under Component 4 will exclude Provinces supported by Lao-Lux,
and therefore only cover 14 of the 17 Provinces. Financing from IDA under Component 1 and the
SBCC design under Component 3, will be national.
Q         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (GENDR)
Satoshi Ishihara (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         This policy is triggered because of any potential
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               environment impact by the project although these are
expected to be minimal.
The Project will not finance any civil works. There will be
no new construction of buildings; rehabilitation or
refurbishment of existing health centers or administrative
offices or minor repairs (window rehabilitation, wall
painting, internal wall demolition, etc.). The Project is
also expected to generate medical waste.
The Project will support SBCC and CLTS activities to
achieve Open Defecation Free (ODF) villages. The
Project will finance operational costs for SBCC and
CLTS, and training for village facilitators, health staff and
sanitation businesses. No civil works would be financed
for this activity. Villagers would build latrines by
themselves. In order to address any environmental
impacts from construction of these latrines, measures
under the ECOP adopted by Nam Saat of MOH will be
applied. This ECOP been reviewed by the Bank and
found to be acceptable.
Cook stoves
As the specific activities are not known by appraisal the
MOH will adopt ECOPs acceptable to the World Bank
prior to the commencement of any such activities.
Any technical assistance that has environment and social
implications has to adopt the Bank's safeguard policy
requirements. The Bank policy applies for any TOR that
are prepared for these activities.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          The Project will not cause any degradation of natural
4.04                                habitats as defined under the safeguard policy. The nature
and scope of the Project involves only technical assistance
and service delivery that will not have the potential to
Page 5 of 9


﻿cause any significant loss or degradation of natural
habitats weather directly or indirectly.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           The Project will not finance forest related sector activities
or other interventions that have the potential to impact
upon forested areas.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          The Project will not involve any procurement of
pesticides nor cause any increased use of pesticide. It will
not lead to use or procurement of pesticides equipment or
to any present pest management practices.
Physical Cultural       No           Civil works of are not eligible for financing under this
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 Project. Therefore, the Project activities will not adversely
affect sites with archaeological, paleontological,
historical, religious, or unique natural values.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes          OP4. 10 is triggered, because the target Districts where the
BP 4.10                              Project components 2 and 3 would be implemented will
include those districts where poor ethnic groups reside.
Moreover, the Component 3 to support behavior change
communication as well as ODF and cook stove initiatives
will target vulnerable population groups including some
of the ethnic groups. TA to be financed includes the
design of a social and behavior campaign and studies
assessing knowledge, attitudes, and practices towards
nutrition.
The Department of Planning and International
Cooperation together with the Department of Hygiene and
Health Promotion has undertaken a social assessment
(SA) which included participatory assessments and free,
prior and informed consultations with ethnic groups, in
order to assess the Project's potential positive and adverse
effects on local communities including but not limited to
ethnic groups, and examine alternatives where adverse
effects may be significant. In particular, the SA has
reviewed existing barriers for ethnic women and children
to receive proper health services, including those related
to language, traditions, customs, values, etc. This
assessment was carried out in a participatory manner with
measures to address these barriers, which allowed their
perspectives to be collected and reflected in the Project
design. The SA found a broad community support among
ethnic groups who joined the participatory assessment to
the Project.
The existing Ethnic Group Development (EGDP) of the
HSIP and CNP was updated based on the finding of the
SA which provides measures to ensure free, prior and
Page 6 of 9


﻿informed consultations with ethnic minorities during
implementation leading to their broad community support,
and steps to be taken to address barriers to their receiving
project benefit and address negative impact that may
occur, if any.
 Involuntary Resettlement No       The Project will not finance civil works, including minor
OP/BP 4.12                          repairs, neither will it involve land acquisition or
involuntary resettlement.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No          The Project does not involve any dam construction or
4.37                                rehabilitation or works on related reservoirs.
Projects on International  No       The Project does not involve international waterways.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No          The Project will not be located in any known disputed
Areas OP/BP 7.60                    areas as defined in the policy.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Safeguards. The Project will not finance any scale of civil works. There will be no
new construction of buildings; rehabilitation or refurbishment of existing health centers or
administrative offices or minor repairs (window rehabilitation, wall painting, internal wall
demolition, etc.).
The project will support SBCC and CLTS activities to achieve Open Defecation Free (ODF)
villages. The project will finance operational costs for SBCC and CLTS, and training for village
facilitators, health staff and sanitation businesses. The project will not pay for construction of
latrines, as households are expected to self-finance. In order to address any environmental impacts
from construction of these latrines, measures under the ECOP adopted by Nam Saat of MOH will
be applied. This ECOP has been reviewed by the World Bank and found to be acceptable.
*           Social Safeguards. A Social Assessment confirmed that access to and quality of health services
vary significantly among ethnic groups. Ethnic minority women, due to topographical and social/
cultural reasons, are less likely to receive anti-natal care or give birth with the assistance of a
trained professional. The Project will support activities in areas with diverse ethnic groups,
thereby triggering OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples
The proposed IDA financed Project will support the implementation of the Government's overall
health sector program embedded in the Health Sector Reform Framework, in coordination with
various projects financed by other development partners in Lao PDR including the ADB. To this
end, the Bank and ADB will rely on common implementation arrangements developed by the
Government to satisfy the fiduciary and safeguard requirements of both institutions, and will
undertake joint implementation reviews.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Not applicable
Page 7 of 9


﻿3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not applicable
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The MOH has had around 10 years of experience in implementing projects financed by the World
Bank, and has carried out, both in planning and in implementation, activities associated with
a          Environment Management Plans and Ethnic Group Development Plans satisfactorily. The EGDP
prepared in 2014, was updated and will be used under this project given the similarity in nature,
types, scale and scope of impacts that may occur as was found under a social assessment carried
out during the preparation of this project.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The MOH, along with District Health Office representatives carried out consultations with
potential project beneficiaries/communities through a participatory social assessment, using the
mechanism of "free, prior and informed consultation" in accordance with the Bank's Indigenous
Peoples Policy (OP 4.10) to assess whether the potential target villages and their communities
support the implementation of the project. Focus group discussions (FGD) were conducted in three
provinces, one in each region of north, central and south, covering a total of 17 villages, to identify
possible issues and concerns that may be raised by potential target beneficiaries, of whom the
majority are ethnic groups. The EGDP was prepared based on key findings of the social
assessment, and consultation meetings were held between March 25- 29, 2015, in Bolikhamxay,
Salavan, and Oudomxay.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              24-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           16-Apr-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Lao People's Democratic Republic                         24-Mar-2015
& Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              24-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           16-Apr-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Lao People's Democratic Republic                         24-Mar-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Page 8 of 9


﻿C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [ X] No [ ]  NA [  ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes[X]  No[  ]  NA
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes[X]  No[  NA
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]  No[     NA[
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Laura L. Rose,Phetdara Chanthala
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                 Date: 21-Apr-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Toomas Palu (PMGR)                 Date: 21-Apr-2015
Manager:
Page 9 of 9


