                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA21416
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Feb-2017
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Jun-2015, 06-Feb-2017, 17-Feb-2017
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Philippines                        Project ID:   P132401
                            Project Name:     Metro Manila BRT Line 1 Project (P132401)
                            Task Team         Ke Fang,Vickram Cuttaree,Victor Dato
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         20-Jul-2015               Estimated     16-Mar-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GTI02                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       109.41           Total Bank Financing:     40.70
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                                    44.81
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                       40.70
                              Clean Technology Fund                                                                       23.90
                              Total                                                                                      109.41
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve the efficiency, effectiveness and safety of
                           the public transport system along the Project Corridor in Metro Manila in an environmentally
                           sustainable manner.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project adopts a light Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) approach, and utilizes a comprehensive,
                           integrated package of roadway, traffic management, and public and non-motorized transport


                                                                      Page 1 of 13
                         strategies and investments to improve the people-moving performance of an important transport
                         corridor in Metro Manila. A full fledged BRT option was analyzed but not adopted, due to
                         considerations for reducing investment costs and minimizing social and environmental impacts. As a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         result, BRT infrastructure such as single-lane segregated bus ways, moderately elevated stations, off-
                         board fare collection, traffic management and bus priority measures will be provided on the project
                         corridor.

                         The project consists of six main components:

                         Component 1: BRT Infrastructure. This component finances development of BRT infrastructure
                         along the Project Corridor, including, among others, construction of bus terminals and bus stations,
                         segregated busways (on part of the corridor), sidewalks, road reconstruction, intersection
                         improvement, landscape strips, warning and directional signage, advanced directions signs,
                         carriageway markings, and associated traffic management infrastructure (such as pedestrian
                         walkways), construction of bus depots, including pedestrian crossing facilities. The GOP will use the
                         counterpart funds finance the provision of compensation and assistance for land acquisition and
                         resettlement related to the development of BRT infrastructure along the Project Corridor.

                         Component 2: System Management. This component finances (i) traffic engineering and
                         management measures along the Project Corridor including, among others, intersection optimization,
                         parking management, u-turn slots and improved signals; (ii) development of an intelligent bus
                         operational support and management system; (iii) development of IT and marketing functions of the
                         BRT system management; and (iv) provision of technical support consultants for the planning,
                         design and implementation of the Project and the promotion of BRT and other sustainable urban
                         transport concepts in the territory of the Borrower.

                         Component 3: Capacity Building and Concept Development and Dissemination. This component
                         includes carrying out of feasibility studies, training and capacity building activities to support the
                         application of the BRT and other sustainable urban transport concepts in Metro Manila, and other
Public Disclosure Copy




                         cities of the Borrower, including public outreach.

                         The technical assistance may also include feasibility studies. Such feasibility studies will be subject
                         to the preparation and review by Bank of TORs to include safeguards policy requirements as
                         applicable to the type of feasibility study. If any of the TOR requires the preparation of safeguards
                         instruments such instruments will also be subject to Bank review. The borrower will refer to the
                         Bank's Interim Guidelines on the ➢❨ Application of Safeguards Policies to Technical Assistance" for
                         guidance.

                         Component 4: Accessibility and Urban Realm Enhancements. This component supports carrying out
                         of specific activities aimed at integrating BRT transport and land use development in Metro Manila
                         by establishing physical connections from stations and terminals to major trip attractors and
                         generators, and through improvement of the pedestrian environment.

                         Component 5: Project Outcome Monitoring. This component finances monitoring and evaluation
                         activities, including, among others, service, data collection, reporting and analysis.

                         Component 6: Project Management. This component finances provision of technical and operational
                         support for the day-to-day management, coordination, supervision, procurement, financial
                         management, environmental and social management, including measures for mitigation of social or

                                                                       Page 2 of 13
                         environmental impacts, and communication of Project activities.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project will be implemented along the Espa➅❰a-Quezon Avenue corridor, which is a main
                         strategic transport route cutting diagonally through the upper half of Metro Manila from Quezon City
                         to Manila City. The corridor is located within high density commercial areas of north east Manila
                         City and south west Quezon City, These areas also contain key institutional centers, a number of
                         important medical facilities, and high density residential centers. Thehe BRT corridor will have an
                         approximately 13-km long corridor extending from Manila City Hall in the southwest to Philcoa in
                         the northeast of Quezon City. Currently there is no other form of mass transit, such as Metro, light
                         rail or BRT, on this corridor. Public transport demands are mainly served by low quality and low
                         capacity jeepneys or buses operated by private companies with licenses issued by the government.

                         The project corridor extends from the immediate area around Philcoa footbridge on Commonwealth
                         Avenue, in the north east; to the Andres Bonifacio Memorial area near Manila City Hall in the south
                         west. This section forms the core improvement corridor and will witness the insertion of
                         comprehensive infrastructure at the median of the corridor to assist with bus priority.

                         Metro Manila is dotted with places of significant cultural importance including monuments,
                         museums, libraries, schools, even old bridges. The ESIA identifies several cultural and historical
                         sites including old buildings and bridges, churches, monuments and shrines, and public institutions
                         that are located along and/or in close proximity to the BRT route and thus may be affected by the
                         project.

                         The project design seeks to minimize negative project impacts and also manage implementation
                         risks, particularly to reduce the need for land acquisition and impacts on existing public transport
                         operations. BRT stations will be placed relatively far apart, positioned where there is no land
                         constraint and thus avoid land acquisition. During the life of the project, most existing jeepney
Public Disclosure Copy




                         services will continue to operate providing additional service of intermediate locations and reducing
                         overall impact upon the existing transport sector. Infrastructure to support the proposed BRT Line 1
                         is defined to sit within the confines of the existing road right of way both negating the need for land
                         acquisition and managing overall environmental impact.

                         The project includes a terminal at Manila City Hall. Several potential sites for two bus depots have
                         been identified, but final selection has not been made, and thus construction of the bus depots is not
                         included to the first year of project implementation.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Frederick Edmund Brusberg (GSU03)
                         Gerardo Pio Francisco Parco (GEN2B)
                         Leonardo Jr. Batugal Paat (GEN2A)
                         Roberto B. Tordecilla (GSU02)
                         Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (GEN06)
                         Victoria Florian S. Lazaro (GSURR)
                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes            The BRT is expected to generate benefits as a result of


                                                                      Page 3 of 13
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01          improved and more efficient mass transit system.
                                                        However, the development of the BRT is anticipated to
                                                        generate significant environmental and social impacts
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        including loss of livelihood of affected drivers and
                                                        operators of public vehicles plying the corridor since the
                                                        old transport system will be replaced by high quality A/C
                                                        buses. Ambulant vendors whose livelihoods depend on
                                                        the PUV system may be impacted as well. Access and
                                                        affordability to the new system could also be an impact
                                                        especially for vulnerable sectors such as women, persons
                                                        with disabilities and the poor.

                                                        Potential traffic congestion and related traffic safety will
                                                        also be a concern during the construction phase. In
                                                        addition, the project may have some impacts on physical
                                                        cultural resources along the route.

                                                        Construction-related activities may include overall
                                                        nuisance to the communities brought about by noise and
                                                        vibration, dust, traffic congestion, and waste.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No    The proposed project is not expected to have any impact
                         4.04                           on conversion or degradation of critical or other natural
                                                        habitats. There are no known natural habitats expected to
                                                        be covered by the proposed project. Accordingly, the
                                                        policy has not been triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    The project will be implemented in the urban areas and
                                                        will not have any impact on the health and quality of
                                                        forests, the rights and welfare of people and their level of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        dependence upon or interaction with forests; and the
                                                        management, protection, or utilization of natural forests or
                                                        plantations.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     The project will not purchase or promote use of fertilizer
                                                        or pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural        Yes   There are cultural properties and historical landmarks
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           found along and near the corridor. These properties
                                                        include old buildings and bridges, churches, parks,
                                                        monuments and shrines, and public institutions. Among
                                                        the important sites validated by the ESIA include the
                                                        historical monuments and shrines such as the Quezon City
                                                        Memorial Circle, Nacpil-Bautista House, and the
                                                        Bantayog ng mga Bayani Memorial. Important religious
                                                        places were also identified including the UST, oldest
                                                        catholic university in Asia Included as important
                                                        historical feature of Manila are the old bridges connecting
                                                        the various parts of Manila City and traversing the Pasig
                                                        River such as the Quezon Bridge and the Ayala Bridge.




                                                         Page 4 of 13
                                                                   There is a possibility that due to excavation work,
                                                                   property of historical, cultural or religious importance
                                                                   may be found. During construction, the landscape of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   sites may also be affected and structural damage to old
                                                                   structures may result from vibrations, earth moving and
                                                                   excavation of adjacent areas. The ESMP provides for the
                                                                   mitigating measures needed to address such disturbances
                                                                   and the handling of chance finds. A Chance Find
                                                                   Procedure is included in the ESIA.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No         The proposed project is not expected to have any impacts
                            BP 4.10                                on indigenous peoples and/or ancestral domains as none
                                                                   exist in Metro Manila. Accordingly, the policy has not
                                                                   been triggered.
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes           Most infrastructure and facilities to be constructed under
                            OP/BP 4.12                             the project are located within the existing right of way of
                                                                   roads, and thus would not involve land acquisition.
                                                                   However, about 3.2hectares of land will need to be
                                                                   acquired for the construction of two bus depots but the
                                                                   specific locations of these depots have not been finalized
                                                                   by appraisal.

                                                                   Consistent with the principle of avoidance and/or
                                                                   minimizing impact to resettlement, the borrower intends
                                                                   to acquire unoccupied land using willing buyer-willing
                                                                   seller scheme. Thus, impact is expected to be minimal.

                                                                   Potential loss of income from business disturbance is also
                                                                   expected to arise for some shop owners.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for the project
                                                                   has been prepared to guide the acquisition of land and
                                                                   resettlement activities that may take place during the
                                                                   project. The project also seeks to minimize impacts
                                                                   through meaningful stakeholders consultations, public
                                                                   communication, inclusive planning, and feasible design
                                                                   interventions and mitigation.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No         Not applicable. The project does not entail works related
                            4.37                                   to dams.
                            Projects on International   No         Not applicable. Project site is specific to the urban built
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   areas of the cities of Manila and Quezon.
                            Projects in Disputed        No         Not applicable. Project site is not located in any disputed
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                       areas as defined in OP7.60
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:


                                                                     Page 5 of 13
                         The corridor chosen for the BRT project is a main artery connecting Manila City with Quezon
                         City, home to more than a quarter of Metro Manila's population who would directly or indirectly
                         benefit from the Project. However, although efforts have been made during project identification
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and preparation to avoid or minimize the negative social and environmental impacts, some drivers,
                         operators, and support workers of public utility vehicles, and some buildings and structures, are
                         still likely to be adversely affected by the project. The traffic congestion and safety during the
                         construction period will also need to be managed carefully. Considering the possible loss of
                         existing economic status of a large group of people, possible impacts on traffic during construction
                         period, and possibility of potential risk on PCR, the project is classified as a Category A.

                         The Environmental and Social Impacts Assessment (ESIA) for this project confirmed that the
                         project will produce significant improvements in the existing transport system that can lead to
                         social and environmental benefits, apart from the adverse social and environmental impacts.

                         The social benefits that are expected from the Metro Manila BRT Line 1 Project are (a) a more
                         efficient and safer public transport alternative; (b) a safer and orderly loading and unloading
                         system, particularly for the vulnerable stakeholders; (c) creation of direct employment as a result
                         BRT construction and operation; (d) creation of new job opportunities (including new skill
                         training opportunities) for existing public transport workers and their family members, including
                         drivers, operators, and support workers, (e) enhanced land use along the corridor due to the
                         resulting efficient transportation service; (f) improved public transport regulations; and (g)
                         provision of transport supportive of women. Economic benefits include travel time and cost
                         savings, reduced vehicle operating costs, savings in GHG and CO2 emissions, and reduction in
                         traffic accident occurrences. In terms of environmental benefits, the project will contribute to
                         improving the urban environment in the long-run by reducing air pollutants and GHG emissions as
                         well as nuisance such as noise and exposure to fumes and pollutants from existing jeepneys.

                         The expected major adverse social impact of the project is the potential loss of livelihood of some
Public Disclosure Copy




                         PUV drivers and operators, which is caused by the possible cancellation and relocation of some of
                         the present PUV routes that are operating along the project corridor. Currently there are
                         approximately 6,384 drivers, operators, and support personnel of buses and jeepneys plying on the
                         corridor. In addition, there are ten (10) commercial establishments that are within the proposed
                         limits of BRT stations, most of which are small businesses, makeshift stalls, parking area of a
                         mall, and food shops. Some of them may potentially be blocked by the proposed stations and lose
                         their frontage, customer access, parking space, or display areas. These physical restrictions might
                         have negative impact on the livelihood of the owners and their employees. In some cases, land
                         may need to be temporarily acquired and other properties removed to give way to the construction
                         of stations. However there is no expected permanent land taking of identified establishments along
                         the corridor. Involuntary resettlement and land acquisition is expected to arise from the acquisition
                         of both the North and South bus depots during project implementation. The Feasibility Study of
                         the Project estimated around 3.2 hectares of permanent land is needed for the bus depots. During
                         project preparation, efforts have been made to avoid or minimize all above mentioned social
                         impacts by comparing different design options. Mitigation measures have been also considered
                         and incorporated into the infrastructure design, and construction and operation arrangements.
                         Additionally, an Environment and Social Management Plan has been developed to ensure all
                         unavoidable social impacts are properly addressed.

                         Key concerns for women and vulnerable sectors in public transport in Metro Manila are (1) the


                                                                   Page 6 of 13
                           harassment that they encounter in over-crowded public transport vehicles; and (2) difficulty in
                           boarding and alighting. Women employees are also not well-represented in the sector where
                           drivers and conductors are predominantly men. These concerns have been addressed in the design
Public Disclosure Copy




                           of the Project through the following actions: (1) ease the boarding and alighting by providing more
                           and wider doors on the buses and reduce the floor level difference between the stations and buses;
                           (2) reduce the encumbrances of passengers including over-crowding by provision of sufficient
                           space for passengers; (3) provide better safety and security environment inside buses and at
                           stations and surrounding areas by improving street lighting and bus lighting at night, installing
                           surveillance cameras inside the buses and at stations, presence of service personnel at stations, etc,
                           and (4) create a policy environment that promotes equal employment opportunity for women in
                           the BRT system.

                           The BRT system also integrates appropriate public transportation design standards that will
                           address safety and accessibility for persons with disabilities, elderly and students based on existing
                           laws and policies of the Philippine government and international covenants and standards.
                           Students, senior citizens, and PWDs shall be afforded discounted fares based on applicable
                           regulations on passenger fares.

                           The ESIA found the project may affect some Physical and Cultural Resources (PCRs) along the
                           project corridor such as places that are culturally and historically important. These notable places
                           were documented in the ESIA. They include old buildings, monuments, shrines, churches, bridges,
                           and schools. During the project implementation, property of historical, cultural or religious
                           importance may be found due to the excavation and construction works. Also during the
                           construction, the visual/aesthetic landscape of the sites may also be affected and structural damage
                           to old structures may result from vibrations, earth moving and excavation of adjacent areas. ESIA
                           has provided measures to manage such impacts and the handling of chance finds.

                           The Project is not expected to create any significant and/or irreversible environmental impacts.
                           Among the expected environmental impacts that require attention during the pre-construction
Public Disclosure Copy




                           phase are (i) disturbance of vehicular traffic and pedestrians; (ii) Interruption to power, water,
                           telecom and other utility systems and services; (iii) removal of affected structures; and (iv)
                           removal of trees and other vegetation. There will be no massive construction activities that can
                           damage the built environment. The construction of the BRT carriageway and to some extent the
                           associated stations and facilities are low impact construction activities that are expected to
                           generate impacts such as (i) traffic congestion, disturbance and public hazards (ii) soil erosion and
                           disturbance of existing land features or landscape, (iii) noise pollution, and, (iv) air and water
                           pollution due to solid and liquid wastes, hazardous wastes and excavations spoils generations.
                           Environmental impacts during operation include (i) noise pollution, (ii) air pollution, (iii) water
                           pollution, (iv) community safety and (v) power/energy resource use conflict with the locality.
                           Measures to address these impacts have been developed and included in the Environment and
                           Social Management Plan.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The project will be implemented along the alignment of the existing roads and additional induced/
                           indirect and/or long-term impacts have been foreseen. The project is expected to have long-term
                           social, economic and environmental benefits. With the improvement of transport efficiency and
                           accessibility, the project will promote downstream impacts in the long-term. The improvement in
                           the transport system in Metro Manila can potentially lead to increased traffic and commercial


                                                                      Page 7 of 13
                          activities that can eventually lead to additional emissions indirectly affecting ambient air quality.
                          On the other hand, the introduction of fuel efficient vehicles and the resulting efficient cycles
                          through the BRT may improve the system overall and reduce the pollution. This can lead to
Public Disclosure Copy




                          indirect benefits such as reduced exposure to pollutants. The project is expected improve the
                          transport efficiency and accessibility in long run. This will allow a reduction in fuel consumption
                          as a result of transport efficiency gains.

                           The proposed BRT Line-1 will be established in existing road system and the origins and
                           destinations of passengers will remain much the same but the overall pattern of movement may
                           change with the improved efficiency of public transport. Land use patterns proximate to the
                           corridor may also be influenced by the changes in the movement pattern of commuters. The
                           project may also induce improvements in strategic transport planning, area-wide traffic
                           management system and the general improvement of the overall transport network.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The ESIA described and analyzed the project alternatives. The alternatives considered are the No
                           Project Alternative and various configurations of With Project Alternative.

                          No Project Alternative
                          Under the No project scenario, travel demand will increase with no additional capacity provided.
                          Traffic volume as expressed in terms of vehicles kilometers (v-kilometers) across the Metro
                          Manila, is forecast to increase from around 755,000 v-km in 2013 to around 1,775,000 v-km in
                          2040. With no increase in network capacity, the result is rapid deterioration in traffic speeds, from
                          around 20.3 km per hour (kph) in 2012 to just 3.8 kph in 2040. The low speeds forecast represents
                          an untenable situation in the future. In a mixed traffic environment where all vehicles compete for
                          road space, public transport vehicles will be affected more severely by the increased traffic
                          congestion than private vehicles, as public transport buses have to make many stops during their
                          journeys, and it is also more difficult to maneuver big public transport vehicles than small private
Public Disclosure Copy




                          vehicle. As a result, poor people and vulnerable groups will suffer the most as they depend on
                          public transport services for accessing jobs and services, and they also have no or very few
                          alternatives in terms of job/housing locations or timing to work.

                          With Project Alternative
                          With the BRT project, savings of up to 12 percent in v-km volume are expected to accrue starting
                          2025 due to improved efficiency. Speed improvement is also anticipated including savings from
                          GHG emissions. Economic productivity is also anticipated to increase alongside the ability of
                          businesses and institutions to provide goods and services and the public➢❨ s access to education,
                          employment, utilities and services. Poor people and vulnerable groups will gain more benefits than
                          the rich families.

                          BRT system and LRT system
                          BRT was also compared with light rail transport as an alternative mass transport system. Although
                          both systems deliver more or less similar level of service, the BRT was considered significantly
                          less expensive to build and maintain. Comparative analysis of BRT and LRT systems also favored
                          BRT in terms of speed, and operational flexibility.

                          Other project alternatives considered accessibility issues by minimizing passenger inconvenience
                          particularly for PWDs, fuel options for the BRT vehicles, and minimal development footprint.


                                                                     Page 8 of 13
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           An Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) is developed following the ESIA and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           aims to to effectively manage the environmental and social issues and concerns identified. The
                           plan includes (i) mitigating measures to be implemented; (ii) required monitoring associated with
                           the mitigating measures; and (iii) implementation arrangement. Institutional set-up discusses the
                           requirements and responsibilities during pre-construction, construction, and operation phases. The
                           plan includes tabulated information on (i) required measures for each environmental impact that
                           requires mitigation; (ii) locations where the measures apply; (iii) associated costs; and (iv)
                           responsibility for implementing the measures and monitoring. The BRT system shall integrate
                           appropriate public transportation design standards that will address safety and accessibility for
                           persons with disabilities, elderly and students based on existing laws and policies of the Philippine
                           government and international covenants and standards. Students, senior citizens, and PWDs shall
                           be afforded discounted fares based on applicable regulations on passenger fares. Associated plans
                           that will be developed to support the ESMP include the following:

                           Tree Cutting and Replanting Plan ➢❨ provides measures to avoid indiscriminate cutting of trees
                           by defining areas where tree removal is necessary and specific guidance for replanting. This also
                           serves as a compliance document to the DENR tree cutting permit requirement.

                           Utilities Management Plan ➢❨ provides measures to minimize interruption to power, water and
                           telecommunication systems

                           Traffic Management Plan ➢❨ provides measures to minimize disturbance to vehicular and
                           pedestrian traffic particularly during construction period

                           Waste Management and Spoil Disposal Plan ➢❨ for handling, storage, treatment, transport and
                           disposal of solid and liquid waste, hazardous waste, spoils, and inert construction debris
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Materials Management Plan ➢❨ details the arrangements to facilitate the timely production and
                           supply of construction materials to avoid unnecessary stockpiling and storage inside and near the
                           project area

                           Drainage Management Plan ➢❨ ensures that construction will not cause flooding with the project
                           area, camps, borrow/quarry areas, and other project-related activities and areas

                           Excavation Protection and Runoff Control Plan ➢❨ ensures that construction works will not cause
                           excessive runoff and siltation of waterways and drainage channels

                           Noise and Dust Control Plan ➢❨ minimizes impacts of noise and dust to identified sensitive
                           receptors

                           Workers and Public Safety Plan ➢❨ identifies interfaces between works and public and ensures
                           workers and public safety measures are in place to prevent accidents from construction activities

                           Resettlement Policy Framework - prepared specifically for the north and the south depot
                           components of the Proposed Metro Manila BRT Line ➢❨ 1.



                                                                      Page 9 of 13
                          The social management plan also contains measures to manage and mitigate social impacts and
                          include options for PUV drivers and operators such as (a) Route relocation, modification and
                          truncation; (b) Co-existence with the BRT or remain on their route, despite the impact of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Metro Manila BRT Line-1 Project; (c) Scrapping or wholesale purchase of old PUJ units by the
                          government; (d) Formation of concessionaire group among operators to become part of the BRT
                          consortium/investors; and (e) Provision of alternative livelihood/TESDA training/preferential
                          hiring to affected drivers/personnel and/or members of affected households. Commercial
                          establishments that will be affected close to the BRT stations will be entitled to social safeguards
                          under applicable Philippine laws and WB safeguard standards. Efforts will be taken to prevent
                          impacts as in using the outer lane roadway so as not to affect entrances to malls and other
                          activities taking place in sidewalks. In the event that negative impacts cannot be avoided, these
                          establishments are entitled to receive compensation as a replacement cost for the physical
                          structures affected by the project and loss of income in accordance with compensation guidelines
                          under Philippine laws and the WB social safeguard policies which ever is more superior in
                          provisions.

                          The implementing agency DOTR is responsible for coordination and management if the project
                          has prepared the detailed ESIA by hiring a consulting firm. It has set up a National Steering
                          Committee (NSC) for the overall policy formulation and oversight of bus rationalization in the
                          Philippines. The Steering Committee has participation of all national and city-based agencies,
                          including DOTR, MMDA and DPWH at the national level and representatives of the concerned
                          municipalities. A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) will be signed among all agencies
                          laying down key responsibilities and obligations during design, implementation and operation of
                          the system. A National Project Management Office (NPMO) has been set up to support the
                          mandate of the NSC and oversee implementation of all bus improvement plans, policies,
                          standards, regulations, and projects nationwide. At the project level, a Project Implementation
                          Unit (PIU) has been set up to carry out day-to-day project implementation, including project
                          management, financial management, procurement, reporting, monitoring, and environmental and
                          social safeguards. To support project preparation and implementation, NPMO/PIU will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                          supported by a Technical Support Consultant (TSC), in the areas of project management, technical
                          support, monitoring and evaluation.

                           DOTR and the firm hired to carry out an integrated environmental and social assessment are
                           familiar with the World Bank safeguard policies. The PIU will hire qualified environment and
                           social safeguards specialists to implement safeguards compliance and management including
                           reviews, ESMP implementation, supervision, and monitoring. These personnel working on the
                           project➢❨ s environmental and social safeguards shall be appointed prior to negotiation. Capacity
                           development for the project➢❨ s safeguards specialists will be undertaken and can be through the
                           UP National Engineering Center➢❨ s Center of Excellence for Environmental and Social
                           Sustainability.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           From November 2014 to May 2015, a total of 21 consultation sessions were held attended by close
                           to 300 participants from different transport groups and institutions. Separate consultations were
                           also held with other special interest groups such as the National Center for Commuter Safety and
                           Protection (NCCSP), National Council for Disabilities Affairs, and the Philippine Commission on
                           Women (PCW). Prior to these, seven consultations sessions with the LGUs of Quezon and Manila
                           cities were also held in the course of preparing the Detailed Technical Study.


                                                                    Page 10 of 13
                           During the consultations, the project concept was presented and through facilitated discussions,
                           key environmental and social issues were noted from the stakeholders. Among the issues that were
                           raised include loss of income as well as the risk of eradicating the Jeepney as a cultural symbol/
Public Disclosure Copy




                           icon of the country. Upon the presentation of the key features and examples of similar systems in
                           other parts of the world as well as the proposed alignment, the participants acknowledge the
                           potential benefits this would have on addressing the problem of congestion and organizing road
                           transport. The consultation sessions were documented and recorded. Concerns specific to the
                           vulnerable groups were also noted and addressed in the ESMP.

                           Another public consultation was held on November 3, 2016 attended by 70+ persons. This public
                           consultation presented the ESIA and RPF, and the findings of the assessment of impacts and
                           proposed mitigation measures. A public announcement in the Philippines Star was published 10
                           days before the public consultation. Copies of the ESIA and RPF were made available to the
                           public through the DOTr office. Additional public disclosures and consultations will be held as
                           required by the Philippine EIS system.

                           The project has multiple key stakeholders. These are public transport passengers, pedestrians,
                           public transport drivers/operators, public transport owners, different associations, various
                           government department and agencies etc. DOTR has initiated a process of two-way
                           communication during project preparation and intends to continue it during the construction and
                           operational phase. As part of the communication process, the project concept was presented to the
                           stakeholders and their views on the respective proposals were gathered and incorporated into the
                           project design. A detailed list of individual operators and drivers and the agreed method of
                           addressing their concerns have been developed for further action.

                           During detailed design, DOTR will conduct further public consultations and information
                           disclosure. Affected stakeholders and property owners will be invited to attend these proposed
                           consultations since detailed mode and scheme of property and structure acquisition and
                           compensation will be presented and discussed. DOTR will maintain records of environmental and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           social complaints received during consultations, field visits, informal discussions, and letters,
                           together with the subsequent follow-up and resolutions of issues.

                           All safeguard instruments, namely the ESIA and RPF for the proposed project have been prepared
                           and disclosed locally on May 15, 2015; they were disclosed electronically at the Bank➢❨ s
                           Infoshop on May 15, 2015. Brochures in English and Tagalog will be distributed on the rights and
                           responsibilities of displaced people and notices posted in barangays in City of Manila and Quezon
                           City.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       12-May-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    15-May-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                       15-May-2015
                           Comments:


                                                                    Page 11 of 13
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05-May-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-May-2015
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                      15-May-2015
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                          Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?




                                                                     Page 12 of 13
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ke Fang,Vickram Cuttaree,Victor Dato
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                    Date: 17-Feb-2017
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Almud Weitz (PMGR)                   Date: 17-Feb-2017
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 13 of 13
