                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC18709

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Sep-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Sri Lanka                      Project ID:      P160552
                            Project Name:        Climate Mitigation Action Support
                            Team Leader(s):      Keisuke Iyadomi
                            Estimated Date       31-Oct-2017
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GSU18                          Lending          IPF
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 3.35                          Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Partnership for Market Readiness                                                            3.35
                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To help Sri Lanka develop capacities and systems to: (a) implement national climate change policies,
                           strategies and actions; and (b) design or strengthen market/non-market mitigation instruments.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project will be supported by multilateral trust funds in order to achieve PDOs including the
                           Partnership for Market Readiness, a grant-based, capacity building multi-donor trust fund that
                           provides funding and technical assistance for the collective innovationand piloting of market-based
                           instruments for Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions reduction. Additional funding sources will be
                           identified as needed.

                           The Partnership for Market Readiness (PMR), which was launched in December 2010 and became
                           operational in April 2011, provides support to prepare and implement climate change mitigation
                           policies, including carbon pricing instruments in order to scale up GHG mitigation. The PMR also
                           serve as platform to share lessons, countries work together to shape the future of cost-effective GHG
                           mitigation. Implementing Country Participants use PMR resources to support the design,
                           development, and piloting of instruments to price carbon and/or create a carbon market. Some
                           countries are ready to design the instruments themselves, others are at a stage of capacity building.
                         The PMR consists of three phases: i) Expression of Interest (EOI) and Organizational Framework
                         Phase; ii) Preparation Phase; and iii) Implementation Phase. At the EOI Phase, a country submits an
                         EoI to the PMR Secretariat, which is subsequently presented to the PA for confirmation as an
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Implementing Country Participant. Following confirmation, a country presents to the Partnership
                         Assembly (PA) an organizational framework of proposed PMR activities in order to receive the
                         preparation phase of PMR funding. At the Preparation Phase, an Implementing Country Participant
                         will receive a Preparation Funding allocation from the PA of US$ 350,000 in order to formulate its
                         Market Readiness Proposal (MRP), which details the country's roadmap for its proposed market-
                         based instrument and market readiness components, as well as a funding for its implementation. At
                         the Implementation Phase, an Implementing Country Participant implements readiness components
                         outlined in the MRP, which will be supported by PMR funding up to $3 million depending on the
                         readiness components proposed along with other funding sources identified.

                         Sri Lanka is already granted to start the Preparation Phase by the PA. Sri Lanka has submitted its EoI
                         and presented the Organizing Framework for the scoping of PMR activities at the PA meeting held in
                         Lima, Peru on April 26-29, 2016. Participation of Sri Lanka as an Implementing Country Participant
                         and US$ 350,000 preparation grant were approved at the same meeting. The proposed project will
                         support Sri Lanka to prepare a MRP and implement PMR activities under the Implementation Phase,
                         which is expected to start in early 2018 subject to an approval of US$ 3 million implementation grant
                         by the PA.

                         The proposed project will consists of two phase as per the PMR process: Preparation Phase and
                         Implementation Phase. The proposed components for the Implementation Phase will be further
                         elaborated and materialized in the market readiness proposal with the use of US$ 350,000
                         preparation grant. Further, these components could be further modified at the PMR Implementation
                         Phase or complemented by other multilateral trust funds or donors.

                         Preparation Phase (October 2016 - December 2017) with US$ 350,000 PMR Preparation Grant:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The World Bank Group will support the Government of Sri Lanka to formulate a Market Readiness
                         Proposal as per the guideline provided by the PMR Partnership Assembly. The proposed activities,
                         though will be formulated better and finalized during MRP preparation phase, are the following:
                         (i) Conduct an assessment and studies in the areas identified in the Sri Lanka's Organizational
                         Framework for the PMR activities;
                         (ii) Prepare terms of references for activities to be included in the Market Readiness Proposal and
                         undertaken during the Implementation Phase; and
                         (iii) Organize consultation with key Ministries, Government entities, local offices, and other multi-
                         stakeholders to formulate the Market Readiness Proposal.

                         Implementation Phase (January 2018 - June 2020) with up to US$ 3 million PMR Implementation
                         Grant:

                         The World Bank Group will support the Government of Sri Lanka to implement the following
                         activities which will be further stipulated in the Market Readiness Proposal and subject to approval
                         by the PMR Partnership Assembly.

                         1. National MRV Systems and registry tracking

                         Sri Lanka has implemented an excel based carbon registry and tracking under Sri Lanka Carbon
                         Crediting Scheme. Sri Lanka's current participation in the World Bank's Carbon Partnership Facility
                         and some other mitigation activities with the support of UNDP is expected to strengthen the support
                         for MRV in the energy sector. Development of an effective national MRV system helps to streamline
Public Disclosure Copy




                         monitoring, reporting, and verification of the mitigation activities in different sectors. At present, Sri
                         Lanka's MRV systems have not been well developed due to under developed carbon markets (also
                         demand issue), limited institutional capacity and low awareness of carbon offsetting scheme
                         processes.

                         The project with support from the Partnership for Market Readiness can help develop a suitable
                         national MRV system to be linked with future domestic carbon market while it will also strengthen
                         Sri Lanka's MRV systems, thereby encouraging investments in climate-friendly development
                         activities by:

                          i) Conducting a market analysis to assess a suitable market instruments for Sri Lanka;
                          ii) Improving data management and validation processes;
                          iii) Building institutional capacity to develop domestic carbon markets so as to effect   ively
                         engage in international markets (e.g. through bilateral offset schemes);
                          iv) Building awareness and confidence in the carbon offsetting scheme process, especially with
                         banks and financial institutions; and
                          v) Identify sectors that show the greatestpotential for development of domestic carbon offsets market
                         (e.g. energy efficiency in industry and manufacturing, waste heat recovery, renewable energy).

                         2. Institutional/regulatory capacity building

                         Institutional capacity building would be required across stakeholders for creating effective domestic
                         carbon markets as well as supporting the proposed national MRV and registry system. Capacity to
                         develop necessary regulations and policies that support development, implement and enforcement of
                         market instruments is needed in the beginning. Considering this, Sri Lanka is expecting support from
                         PMR for:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          i) Developing national capacity to better manage international grants for climate change activities
                         through establishment of a Project Management Unit of the PMR;
                          ii) Facilitating stakeholder consultations to promote private investment in green growth and increase
                         domestic demand for Sri Lanka Carbon Offset Scheme; and
                          iii) Conducting a market analysis on domestic carbon markets to identify suitable instruments.

                         3. Sri Lanka Carbon Offset Scheme (SLCOS)

                         Sri Lanka has instituted domestic carbon standards through its carbon offset scheme (SLCOS) for
                         regulation and registry of projects that provide carbon offsets. Projects that meet SLCOS eligibility
                         criteria are registered and are eligible to receive SCERs (Sri Lankan Certified Emission Reductions).
                         The SLCOS could support generating voluntary offsets for promoting Sri Lanka's carbon neutrality.
                         It also incentivizes projects for blue-green development under Sri Lanka Next. Expansion of carbon
                         footprint registry can accelerate green growth and facilitate the achievement of INDCs. The Sri
                         Lanka Climate Fund provides carbon footprinting certification services ranging from organization to
                         product footprints in line with GHG Protocol, ISO 14064 -1 & 2 and PAS 2050 carbon footprinting
                         standards. SLCOS requires further strengthening through:

                         i) Research on mitigation potential in Sri Lanka to target sectors with the greatest potential;
                           ii) Development & design of market-based instruments that supports the scheme;
                           iii) Improving data management to build a national registry; and
                           iv) Help identify measures to improve tradability of carbon offsets to improve uptake of the scheme.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Not applicable. The project does not finance any physical activity on the ground, but rather consists
                           solely of technical assistance and capacity building activities.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Institutional capacity needs to be further assessed in case it is revealed at later stage that the project
                           would trigger any safeguard policies. Nevertheless, it may be still required to provide technical
                           guidance or inputs as well as training to increase general understanding of safeguard policy when the
                           existing carbon offset scheme is studied and improved as a part of the project components at the both
                           Preparation and Implementation Phase if needed.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Samira El Khamlichi (GCCIA)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09               No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/       No
                           BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP        No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37             No
                           Projects on International             No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP      No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                              Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):             Name: Keisuke Iyadomi
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:         Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                         Date: 02-Sep-2016
                         Practice Manager/                Name: Chandra Shekhar Sinha (PMGR)                                 Date: 22-Sep-2016
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                         InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                         affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
