                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                          Report No.: ISDSA16370
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Feb-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Feb-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Sri Lanka                         Project ID:   P132833
                            Project Name:     Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)
                            Task Team         Amali Rajapaksa
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         22-Feb-2016                       Estimated   09-May-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GTI06                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (90%), General transportation sector
                                              (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Other rural development (50%), Other urban development (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:       125.00           Total Bank Financing:  125.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                     Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                      0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                           125.00
                              Total                                                                                 125.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the Road Development Authority’s capacity for
                           asset management and improve the road service delivery on the selected corridor.
                            3. Project Description
                           2.     The proposed project is designed to support modern road asset management in the RDA. It

                                                                     Page 1 of 10
                         focuses on creating an enabling environment for more effective asset management and includes
                         interventions to develop systems and capacity within the RDA and the industry. It would
                         demonstrate the implementation of asset management principles in selected priority road corridors of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the national road network. The project would particularly focus on the institutional and system
                         changes that are necessary to transform RDA from a provider of infrastructure to a service provider
                         in line with the ambition and needs of a middle income country. The asset management contract
                         representing Design-Build-Maintain-Operate and Transfer (DBMOT), methodology through the use
                         of an Output and Performance based Contract (OPRC) format is being piloted on a selected corridor
                         to meet this overarching objective. The Bank through this project will continue to support the
                         country’s road safety strategy and particularly, the provision of safe infrastructure which is seen to
                         substantially impact the road safety outcome of Sri Lanka.

                         3.      The project components are as given below:

                         Component 1: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building for Asset Management (US$ 25
                         Million). This component would finance activities to support the RDA in institutionalizing the use of
                         DBMOT/OPRC and implement institutional and system changes necessary to sustain and expand the
                         use of DBMOT/OPRC in the RDA and in the construction industry. The following sub-components
                         have been identified for project support:
                         (a)      Road Asset Management: This sub-component would provide support to: (i) Operationalize
                         the web-based, multi-user asset management system to improve network data collection and finance
                         additional software and technical support for the customization of the computerized road asset
                         management system; (ii) Establish an asset management unit within the RDA that would be
                         responsible for planning and implementation of DBMOT contracts and it’s variants; (iii) Carry out a
                         study to assess staffing, skills, and institutional capacity building needs to institutionalize asset
                         management practices within the RDA; (iv) Enhance capacity of RDA’s technical and managerial
                         staff, contractors, consultants, regulatory bodies, auditors and other stakeholders to build awareness
                         and capacity in the implementation of DBMOT contracts;(v) the Monitoring consultant to monitor
                         and evaluate the pilot contract; (vi) Carry out the necessary preparatory work for DBMOT/OPRC
Public Disclosure Copy




                         formats in the event of a scale up of the operation;(vii) Carry out a Cost efficiency assessment of
                         DBMOT contracts using OPRC contract format that would include all of RDA contracts financed by
                         ADB and the Bank.
                         (b)      Operational Improvements: This sub-component would provide the support to the RDA to
                         transform itself into a more efficient and service-oriented organization. Specifically, it would include
                         support for: (i) developing a Financial Management Information System for the RDA to obtain
                         timely information for appropriate decision making; (ii) establishing a system for monitoring and
                         evaluation of projects;(iii) Establishing a Grievance Redress System to better enable RDA to receive,
                         manage, and respond to public complaints related to national roads and (iv) Incremental Operating
                         cost of the project.

                         Component 2: Piloting the Implementation of Road Asset Management Principles (US$ 100
                         Million). This subcomponent will finance the DBMOT contract for the approximately 65 km along
                         the Peliyagoda to Madampe section of the A03 corridor. The contract will incorporate all
                         interventions needed during a ten-year period, including road upgrading, rehabilitation, sealing and
                         patching, repaving, drainage structures, widening in selected stretches, sidewalks and all
                         maintenance requirements to achieve a prescribed level of service of the road. The design features
                         will include enhanced road safety, automated traffic management as well as infrastructure demanded
                         by urban population. The corridor also may require minimum widening in identified locations to
                         ensure safety.

                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         4.      The proposed section targeted under the project is approximately 65 km along the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Peliyagoda to Madampe section of the A3 corridor. The corridor has two distinct sections; (i)
                         Peliyagoda to Ja-Ela (18km) that has been rehabilitated in 2015 and (ii) Ja-Ela onwards on the
                         Peliyagoda to Puttlama corridor (82-107 km) that was last rehabilitated in 2001.

                         5.       Peliyagoda to Madampe Road section (A03) is an existing paved national road that covers
                         mainly Gampaha district and small extent within Puttlam- district. Gampaha District is located in the
                         west of Sri Lanka and has an area of 1,387 square Kilometers. It is bounded by Kurunegala and
                         Puttalam districts from north, Kegalle District from east, Colombo District from south and by the
                         Indian Ocean from west. The borders of the district are the Maha River on the north, Kelani River on
                         the south and 1,000 feet contour line on the east. Gampaha has a tropical monsoon climate. The
                         annual rain fall is about 2500mm and the average temperature is about 27.9 °C. The Puttlam district
                         has a land area of 3,013 square Kilometers including inland water bodies and a coastal belt of 288
                         Kilometers in length. Pattalam has a short dry season from June to September and a second dry
                         season from January to March. The wet season is mainly from October to December. Temperatures
                         remain steady throughout the year with little variations in between.

                         6.      The road section to be supported under the project traverse through highly built up area.
                         There are number of religious sites along the section. A number of rivers go across the road section
                         including Attanagalu Oya and Dandugam Oya that falls into the Negombo lagoon, Maha Oya, and
                         Gin Oya. One man-made tank names Maha Oya is located closer to Madampe section of the road.
                         There are trees planted within the Right of Way (RoW) in some places.

                         7.      There may be activities off the area of the road to be rehabilitated and maintained, including
                         borrow-pit areas, disposal sites for soil spoil material, establishment of workers camps, equipment
                         storage areas, and operation of quarries, which are to be identified by the contractor.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         8.       The total population of the two districts amounts to 2.99 million (2280860 – Gampaha
                         District, 709677 – Puttalam District) according to Census of Population conducted in 2012 spread
                         within a total land area of 4459 Km. The total population of the Divisional Secretariat areas covering
                         the road section from Ja-ela to Madampe in both Gampaha and Puttalam Districts amount to
                         808,202, i.e Gampaha (3 DSDs) - 578948 and Puttalam (4 DSDs) - 229254 (Department of Census,
                         2012).

                         9.       The share of population of the 7 Divisional Secretariat Divisions of the project area indicate
                         that the area is predominantly Sinhalese consisting of over 81% of the total population, 11% Sri
                         Lankan Moor and 6% Sri Lankan Tamils. The balance 2% is comprised of other ethnic groups such
                         as Indian Tamil, Malay Burger and others. The share of population also shows that Katana, Ja-Ela
                         and Negombo DS areas in Gampaha District and Wennappuwa DS Division in Puttalam District
                         have a large concentration of people within the vicinity of the project area, also considered as the
                         more frequent road users of the A-03 Road. The other significant feature that can be observed is the
                         large concentration of Muslims located in the Negombo DS Division.

                         10.     Similarly, the male population in the eight DS divisions in Puttalam District is 48% of the
                         total population and the female population stands at 52%. The total female population in all DS
                         Divisions in the Gampaha District is 51% and the male population accounts for 49%.


                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                         11.     The economically active population (between the ages of 15 -59) in Gampaha district forms
                         63.6%, which is little above the national average of 61.8%. On the other hand, the economically
Public Disclosure Copy




                         active population in Puttalam district is 66.7%.

                         12.     Fishing and tourism are thrust economic activities along the long coastal line from Ja-Ela in
                         Western Province and Wennappuwa to Madampe in the Puttalam district. Just beyond the project
                         area, specifically in Puttalam, is one of the largest lagoons in the Country and the salt production is a
                         major industry in this district. In addition lagoons located in Negombo and Chilaw have plenty of
                         potential for fishing and recreation activities.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Darshani De Silva (GEN06)
                         Susrutha Pradeep Goonesekera (GSURR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental                Yes            Although the road corridor is known (existing), the
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                       detailed engineering design has not yet been done. A
                                                                     framework approach for safeguards was recommended, as
                                                                     the detailed design will be done by the DBMOT/OPRC
                                                                     contractor considering the prevailing conditions of the
                                                                     road. The existing ESMF of RDA was updated. In
                                                                     addition, based on the current alignment and conceptual
                                                                     design proposed, an Environmental Assessment (EA) has
                                                                     also been done. This EA will be updated by the OPRC
                                                                     contractor parallel to completing the detailed design
                                                                     during project implementation.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP       Yes            The natural habitats along the selected road corridor
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4.04                                        include few small rivers, two man-made tanks and a
                                                                     lagoon. An initial, assessment of potential sites that may
                                                                     get impacted has been identified in the EA including
                                                                     mitigation measures to manage significant negative
                                                                     impacts.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36           Yes            There are no natural forests long selected the road
                                                                     corridor, However, there may be off-site impacts to the
                                                                     forests as many of gravel and metal extraction sites are
                                                                     located within natural forests in Sri Lanka. EA identifies
                                                                     potential impacts and mitigation measures, as well as
                                                                     potential sites outside forests to be considered by the
                                                                     contractor.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No                  The project does not involve pest management activities.

                         Physical Cultural            Yes            This policy is applicable because there are number of
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11                        religious sites along the road corridor, but out from the
                                                                     ROW that may require protection when rehabilitation and
                                                                     upgrading activities take place.




                                                                       Page 4 of 10
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/   No                There are no indigenous people living within the
                            BP 4.10                                    identified project area.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes               Given the detailed engineering design is to be carried out
                            OP/BP 4.12                                 in the future, a framework approach (ESMF, RPF) has
                                                                       been adopted based on the conceptual design available. In
                                                                       addition, a Social Impact Assessment (SIA) and a
                                                                       Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) have been prepared
                                                                       based on the consultations that have already been carried
                                                                       out and these documents have now been publicly
                                                                       disclosed. The specific instruments will be updated by the
                                                                       OPRC contractor parallel to completing the detailed
                                                                       design.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             The project does not involve dam related works.
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No             The project does not affect international waterways.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No             There are no disputed areas along the project corridor.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project activities will include rehabilitation and/ upgrading and routine and periodic
                              maintenance as well as instituting road safety measures and traffic management along a 65km
                              section of the existing road corridor of A3. The Project has been assigned Environmental Category
Public Disclosure Copy




                              B because the environmental impacts are generic to upgrading, rehabilitation, and maintenance
                              works of existing roads that will be predictable, localized and readily mitigated. The potential
                              environmental impacts of the proposed road corridor of the project include: clearance of trees that
                              have been planted on the road side due to realignment and safety needs (to avoid black spots),
                              changes in drainage patterns to address current flooding issues within the road corridor and its
                              immediate impact areas and increase in sediment load into waterways, and soil and water
                              contamination due to spillage and leakage of oils and other toxic materials, noise, dust and air
                              pollution from road works, health and safety issues due to operation of borrow pits, quarries,
                              crushers and asphalt plants. There are no potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible
                              impacts anticipated given the fact that the proposed road corridor follows the existing road
                              alignment, with likely road re-alignment not causing any changes to physical cultural resources or
                              natural habitats.

                             The Social impacts intrinsic to rehabilitation and maintenance works are localized and readily
                             mitigated. There could be some land acquisition for possible road re-alignment to rectify identified
                             black-spots, which may include physical displacement / relocation of shops. Deviation from the
                             present alignment will be for engineering and safety reasons and will avoid or minimize
                             resettlement.

                             In addition, the potential social impacts will also include the following: the most significant


                                                                        Page 5 of 10
                           benefits perceived by the affected HHs were the improvement of the quality of environmental
                           conditions, high demand for land, and prospect of appreciating the value of land. The other notable
                           advantage is the improvement of road safety. On economic advantages, a reduction in the cost of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           living had been perceived. The other impacts perceived by the affected HHs were the development
                           of business premises, work place and social infrastructure. There are, however, a significant
                           amount of mobile vendors along the proposed corridor that will need some specific attention
                           during the implementation of the project.

                           Except for the effect on women who are in occupation of possible affected structures due to the
                           rectification of identified black-spots (as stated above), there appears to be no other major impact
                           on their daily lives as most of them have facilities at close proximity to their dwellings for health,
                           education and preschools for children. The issues of women selling fish in temporary huts should
                           be looked into. Wayside fruit, vegetable and corn sellers are mostly women. Except for the
                           probable income loss that they may suffer during construction, they would not face any other
                           economic disadvantages as a result of the planned improvement.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           NA
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Realignment to rectify identified black spots is being considered as part of the conceptual design.
                           However, these are proposed to be avoided by introducing some deviations from the existing
                           alignment to minimize or avoid potential environmental and social impacts.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The potential environmental impacts of rehabilitation, upgrading and maintenance works for the
                           existing national road, A003 will be mostly localized and can be easily managed through good
Public Disclosure Copy




                           planning and established good practices. Therefore, the project has been assigned Environmental
                           Category B.

                           At this stage of the project, the targeted road section for DBMOT/OPRC has been identified with a
                           conceptual design. However, the final engineering design including the specific road works
                           required for the various sections and timing is not yet determined and will be carried out by the
                           Contracting Entity (CE) once selected. Therefore, the Environmental and Social Management
                           Framework (ESMF) for World Bank projects was updated and used as a guiding document for the
                           conceptual design and to develop the site-specific safeguard instruments. The ESMF has
                           established clear guidelines and methodologies for the identification and assessment of
                           environmental and social impacts. Therefore, in line with the ESMF, the Environmental
                           Assessment (EA), Environmental Management Plan (EMP), Social Impact Assessment (SIA) and
                           Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) were developed for the project by the Road Development
                           Authority (RDA) in close consultation with key stakeholders. In addition, a stand-alone
                           Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been adopted to provide guidance on the resettlement
                           and rehabilitation principles to be applied in the preparation of the RAP.

                           The EA/EMP and SIA/RAP provide the environmental and social baseline condition of the road
                           corridor, identify potential impacts as per the conceptual design and propose mitigation measures
                           to avoid, mitigate and/or compensate for significant environmental and social impacts associated


                                                                      Page 6 of 10
                         with project activities.

                         The Contracting Entity who will be preparing the detailed design is expected to update the EA/
Public Disclosure Copy




                         EMP and SIA/RAP and get it approved by RDA and Bank prior to commencement of physical
                         activities on the ground. The EA and SIA identify significant impacts anticipated due to the
                         project as described above under sub-section IIA1.

                         The potential environmental and social impacts and proposed mitigation measures for the impacts
                         identified as included in EA/EMP and SIA/RAP will be included in the bidding document of the
                         OPRC format and will form the basis for monitoring by the Borrower and the Monitoring
                         Consultant to be engaged under the project. The frameworks (ESMF and RPF), on the other hand,
                         will provide guidance to the Contracting Entity in the likely event that more interventions are
                         identified during the 10-year implementation period. The bidding document will also include the
                         need to update the safeguard instruments in line with the detailed design and preparation of an
                         Environmental Methods Statement in line with the EMP and construction method statement to be
                         kept regularly updated satisfactory to the RDA and the Bank.

                         The most critical environmental issues have been identified as the flooding due to the extensive
                         hydrological system present in some parts of the corridor. In order to understand how the current
                         hydrological system is functioning a detailed hydrological study has been also carried out. The
                         potential issues that require attention under the project including maintaining the quality of surface
                         water bodies/natural habitats and proposed mitigation measures have been identified through this
                         study have been included in the EA and the conceptual design of the project. In addition, there is
                         one archeological site and some religious and sensitive sites closer to the RoW of the road that
                         could be impacted due to road works. While there will not be any physical relocation of these
                         sites, during rehabilitation/upgrading works impacts due to dust, noise and temporary access issues
                         are anticipated. The EA as part of the EMP, provides suitable measures to mitigate and/avoid such
                         impacts. The EA also includes monitoring plan for these sensitive receptions both during pre-
                         construction, construction and operations and maintenance periods. Some trees that have been
Public Disclosure Copy




                         planted within the RoW may have to be removed or pruned to ensure safety if the road users. The
                         EA proposes to avoid the removal of threatened species as much as possible or try to relocate them
                         to a new location if cost-effective or ensure replanting similar plants in a public place.

                         The interventions proposed by the project for the corridor does not require national approval from
                         Central Environmental Authority (CEA), as this project does not fall within the prescribed project
                         list identified as part of National Environmental Act. However, site clearances requires permission
                         from CEA and local authorities. Environmental Protection Licenses, Licenses from Geological
                         Survey and Mines Bureau and local authority permits will be necessary for offsite activities such
                         as quarry operations, crusher plants, borrow pits, etc. The EA identifies potential sites that are
                         currently been operated with the necessary licenses/permits outside sensitive areas such as
                         significant natural habitats and forests. The EA also indicate that sites outside the RoW that will
                         the supporting the road works need to be redeveloped prior to abandoning or handing over to the
                         owners.

                         The most critical social issue is identified as the possible acquisition of land and the resulting
                         physical displacement due to the proposed rectification of black-spots. As the black-spots were
                         identified subsequent to the SIA and the finalization of RAP, the RPF will give guidance on the
                         principles to be applied in the relocation of the project affected persons, which should be reflected
                         in the updates made by the CE.

                                                                    Page 7 of 10
                           RDA already has a Project Management Unit (PMU) set up with a seasoned Environmental and
                           Social Specialist who is very conversant with the environmental and social safeguard requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                           of the Bank to manage project related safeguard activities. RDA also has an Env ironmental and
                           Social Division with adequate capacity who will also support the PMU in reviewing documents
                           and monitoring.

                           Nevertheless, further (and continuous) training programs will be proposed on environmental and
                           social safeguard compliance, targeting the staff of RDA, the general public / local CBOs and
                           NGOs in the project area, as well as the staff and laborers of the CE. This training will mainly
                           focus on sensitizing the need for environmental and social safeguards compliance in road
                           development projects and use of safeguards instruments in place to mitigate potential impacts.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           During preparation of safeguards instruments for the project, consultations with key stakeholders
                           and potential project affected persons were carried out and has been documented as part of the EA
                           and SIA.

                           The key stakeholders for the project are the people living and working along the identified road
                           corridor, as well as the road users. A participatory approach was undertaken to carry out a
                           comprehensive consultation process to study the socio economic status and to identify key impacts
                           of the project. Stakeholder meetings, Focused Group Discussions and Key Informants Discussions
                           were held with identified persons, in addition to a Socio Economic Survey and Road Users Survey.

                           Stakeholder meetings were carried out during the month of January 2015, usually held at the
                           Divisional Secretary’s (DS) office, chaired by the Divisional Secretary himself. At the stakeholder
                           meeting carried out in Puttalam, for example, thirty six participants were present including
                           affected persons, the DS, Urban Councilor, Chief incumbent priest of the Puttalam Buddhist
Public Disclosure Copy




                           centre, the divisional engineers of Chilaw and Puttalam of RDA. A framework has been proposed
                           for continuing consultations during the implementation.

                           The EA and SIA have been publicly disclosed in country and the documents have also been
                           disclosed in Bank’s Infoshop.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        15-Dec-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     22-Feb-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                          Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         08-Jan-2016
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      22-Feb-2016


                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

                          257 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                          66 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          and constraints been carried out?


                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Amali Rajapaksa
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                       Date: 24-Feb-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Karla Gonzalez Carvajal (PMGR)                Date: 24-Feb-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                     Page 10 of 10
