INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12425
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-May-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Cote d'Ivoire             Project ID:  P131778
Project Name: Obsolete Pesticides Management Project (P131778)
Task Team       Douglas J. Graham,Salimata D. Follea
Leader(s):
Estimated       15-Jun-2015               Estimated    24-Aug-2015
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Managing Unit: GENDR                      Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
GEF Focal.
AEFca:         Persistent Organic Pollutants
Area:
Sector(s):      General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
Theme(s):       Pollution management and environmental health (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      7.00            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
O
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                   0.00
Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                          7.00
Total                                                                      7.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is the same as the Global Environmental Objective. The
PDO is to improve the management of obsolete pesticides and associated wastes in C6te d'Ivoire by
the Government and other stakeholders.
Page 1 of 7


﻿3. Project Description
The Stockholm Convention is a global treaty with the general objective to protect the environment
and human health against the threat of POPs. The Stockholm Convention divides POPs into 3
categories: chemicals that must be eliminated, including 14 pesticides and PCBs; chemicals whose
use and production need to be reduced (DDT); and unintentionally produced chemicals such as
dioxins and furans. The GEF Operational Program on POPs serves as the financing mechanism of the
Stockholm Convention and thus this project focuses on POPs targeted under that Convention.
The project components and its overall design are based on the recognition that the current level of
information on the magnitude, characteristics and geographic distribution of the obsolete pesticides
stockpiles is grossly insufficient (as only 5% of the country was inventoried during the NIP exercise),
for identifying contaminated sites, and for safeguarding and implementing pesticides disposal. The
design therefore entails review and improvement of policy and regulatory frameworks, detailed
pesticides inventories, evaluation and selection of management or disposal techniques, and
preparation of comprehensive environmental and social safeguard instruments.
The proposed project consists of four components:
*      Component 1: Capacity Building and Strengthening the Regulatory Framework (GEF US$
0.6 million; Counterpart funds US$ 0.2 million): This component aims to strengthen the
Government's capacity to manage, monitor, and control POPs and pesticides. Activities under this
component will include a comprehensive review of current hazardous waste management
regulations, and the development of needed legislative and regulatory instruments that will address
POPs in general, POPs pesticides in particular, and pesticides overall. In addition, technical
guidelines on safety procedures for POPs pesticides handling, transport, storage and disposal will be
developed, and used for training key stakeholders. Other guidelines to be developed could include
those on pesticide site investigation, risk assessment and hazardous waste import/export procedures.
Further, regional laboratories for testing and quality control of pesticides will be identified and
upgraded.
S*     Component 2: Management of POPs pesticides (GEF US$ 3 million; Counterpart funds US$
4.0 million): This component will support sound management of POPs pesticides stockpiles and will
consist of: (i) a comprehensive inventory of POPs pesticides. The outcome of this inventory will
provide a clear picture on the quantity, extent, and locations of POPs pesticides stockpiles and
contaminated sites across the country, especially as the NIP inventory only covered less than 5% of
the country; (ii) establishment of a Pesticide Stock Management System (PSMS) database, similar to
what was developed under African Stockpiles Program, on registered and banned pesticides; import,
distribution, and use to serve as a basis for sound management of pesticides; and (iii) implementation
of needed measures to manage obsolete pesticide stocks and associated wastes as well as
contaminated sites. It could also support disposal of obsolete pesticides depending on the cost and
availability of funds.
* Component 3: Promotion of alternatives to chemical pesticides (GEF US$ 0.75 million;
counterpart fund US$ 5.05 million): In order to prevent the buildup of new stockpiles, this
component will involve identification of alternatives to use of banned POP pesticides as well as more
generally to conventional chemical pesticides, including the adoption of Integrated Pest Management
(IPM) techniques and would comprise of: (i) field testing demonstrations of identified alternatives
for control of key pests on crops in key geographical areas; (ii) development of curricula to improve
Page 2 of 7


﻿farmer field schools and build capacity of selected farmers on alternatives to conventional pes
ticides; and (iii) communication strategy evolved and implemented to inform farmers and population
in general on the misuse of pesticides containers, impact of pesticides on human health and the
environment, and alternatives to conventional pesticides and PO Ps.
o
Component 4: Project Management (GEF US 0. 65 million; Counterpart funds US 0.75
million): This component is designed to provide effective and efficient management support for the
implementation of the project; and will be essentially for day-to-day project management activities,
including project management and coordination; monitoring and evaluation; and financial
management and procurement.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project is of a national scope and will take place throughout the country. Existing pesticides
stockpiles will only be identified during implementation but they are believed to occur widely. They
will be managed at a much reduced number of longer-term storage sites, but the location of the latter
remain to be determined.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Lucienne M. M'Baipor (GSURR)
Melissa C. Landesz (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         Management of pesticide stockpiles (transport and
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               storage) involve environmental risks, although these are
far less than the environmental impacts currently resulting
from unmanaged stockpiles. Overall the project will
significantly reduce environmental risks. Nonetheless,
accidents or mishandling of POPs could lead to major
Q)                                            adverse, possibly irreversible, environmental and social
impacts. The borrower prepared 2 safeguards instruments:
(1) an ESIA including an ESMP, and (2) manual/action
plan that covers best practices and standards for the
management of POPs under the project including removal
from targeted sites, transportation, temporary storage,
and/or disposal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          No project investment are expected to involve impacts on
4.04                                natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          No project investment will involve impacts on forests or
will have any relationship to forest management.
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes         The third component of the project aims to promote a
range of strategies and investments to reduce usage of
chemical pesticides (and particularly POPs pesticides) by
supporting alternative strategies, such as IPM. The project
will not procure pesticides nor support the use of any
hazardous chemicals. A PMP will be prepared during
project implementation as part of training and capacity
Page 3 of 7


﻿building to key actors and stakeholders who play a critical
role in the management of pesticides.
Physical Cultural        No           No project investment will involve impacts on physical
Resources OP/BP 4.11                  cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No           It is possible that small amounts of land might be needed
OP/BP 4.12                            for some storage facilities but the project will include a
condition that site selection must not require land
acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement and/or
restrictions of access to resources or livelihoods.
Safety of Dams OP/BP     No           N/A.
4.37
Projects on International  No         N/A.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed     No           N/A.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is categorized as Category A (Full Assessment) because the handling, transportation,
and elimination of highly toxic chemicals like Persistent Obsolete Pesticides carry significant
risks. The management of POPs includes the collection, repacking, transportation, temporary
storage, and elimination of stocks as well as risk reduction actions in pesticide polluted sites (e.g.,
site decontamination). At each stage, accidents (leakages or spills) or mishandling of POPs could
lead to major adverse, possibly irreversible, environmental and social impacts. However,
implementing best practices and following safety and security procedures at each stage will
significantly reduce these short-term risks. The project triggers OP 4.01 Environmental
Assessment and OP 4.09 Pest Management.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The potential indirect and long-term impacts of project activities are expected to be highly positive
overall because the proper management, stocking and disposal of POPs will significantly reduce
the threat to environmental and human health as well as the risk of exposure to dangerous
chemicals. In the long-term, the project activities will result in improved environmental protection
when it comes to POPs management and disposal.
Risks and negative impacts are related to contact with the chemicals, mainly during the collection,
repacking, transportation, treatment of polluted sites, and temporary storage prior transportation
and disposal. These adverse consequences could affect human health (the communities living
close to the sites and the employees of the contractor) and the environment through contaminated
dusts or in cases of accidental leakage or spills.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Page 4 of 7


﻿The ESIA and the best practices procedure manual describe in detail project alternatives at each
stage in the management of POPs (handling, collection. repacking, transportation, consolidation,
and disposal), the solutions retained for the project and the corresponding safety and security
measures to help avoid or minimize negative impacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The borrower prepared two safeguards instruments: (1) an Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIA) has been developed, including an Environmental and Social Management Plan
(ESMP). The ESIA focuses on 2 districts, Soubr6 and Bingerville, and includes, in the ESMP, the
procedures (and institutional arrangements) to follow to screen subsequent sites once the inventory
is completed in first year of project and to carry out the necessary environmental work. (2) A
manual/action plan that covers best practices and standards for the management of POPs under the
project including removal from targeted sites, transportation, temporary storage, and/or disposal.
As part of the contracting clauses approved through the ESMP, the disposal company must
implement the best practices and action plan in the Manual which includes emergency measures in
case of leakages, awareness raising and occupational safety cautions. The ESIA and the manual
were consulted upon, validated by the Bank and subsequently disclosed in-country and at the
InfoShop on April 2, 2015. The project will be implemented by a Projects Administration Unit
(PAU) under MINESUDD, responsible for two World Bank-financed projects. The projects will
combine resources to hire a full-time environmental specialist and social specialist. The need for
further training or capacity building of these persons will be evaluated during the first supervision
mission.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are poor rural or urban communities inadvertently living in the vicinity of
public (and to some extent private) obsolete pesticide stocks; farmers; Ministries of Environment,
Agriculture, and Health; private sector interests involved in the production, transport, sale, and use
of pesticides (e.g., CropLife-C6te d'Ivoire). The project will provide training and capacity
O
building for key actors and stakeholders who play a critical role in the management of pesticides.
As part of the preparation of the safeguards instruments, consultation with potentially affected
communities and other key stakeholders were organized. These consultations are documented in
the ESIA which also includes a communication plan for the project and a grievance redress
mechanism.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                11-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             02-Apr-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  02-Apr-2015
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Cote d'Ivoire                                              02-Apr-2015
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?             Yes
Page 5 of 7


﻿Date of receipt by the Bank                                11I-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             02-Apr-2015
"In country" Disclosure
O
Cote d'Ivoire                                              02-Apr-2015
Comments:
O
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [    ]
report?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Is a separate PMP required?                              Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [    ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a      Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [    ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  No        NA
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Douglas J. Graham,Salimata D. Follea
Page 6 of 7


﻿Approved By
Practice Manager/    Name: Benoit Bosquet (PMGR)             Date: 08-Jun-2015
Manager:
Page 7 of 7


