                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSR16744
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Jan-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Philippines                                  Project ID:           P145391
                            Project Name:       Studies for Sustainable Flood Management (P145391)
                            Task Team           Joop Stoutjesdijk
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           15-Apr-2014                                  Estimated   31-Oct-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GWA02                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:           Flood protection (100%)
                            Theme:            Water resource management (70%), Natural disaster management (30%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                          No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          4.40             Total Bank Financing:        0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                                Financing Source                                                      Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                                   1.20
                              Philippines - Free-standing Trust Fund Program                                                             3.20
                              Total                                                                                                      4.40
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The development objective is to prepare priority projects that aim to improve flood
                           management and resilience in the Greater Metro Manila Area.
                           Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                           The project development objective is to prepare a priority project that aims to improve flood
                           management and resilience in the Greater Metro Manila Area.


                                                                                  Page 1 of 9
                         3. Project Description
                         The Metro Manila Flood Management Master Plan (approved by the Government of the Philippines
                         (GoP) in September 2012) proposes a large program of priority infrastructure to safely manage and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         control major flood events in the Greater Metro Manila Area that comprises Metro Manila and
                         Laguna de Bay and its shore areas. Among the main large-scale priority interventions that have been
                         identified in the Master Plan are: (i) a high dam in the upper Marikina River catchment area to reduce
                         the peak flows entering the city during typhoon and other extreme rainfall events; (ii) flood
                         protection works in the Marikina River, upstream of the proposed Phase IV of the Pasig-Marikina
                         River Channel Improvement Program; (iii) land raising or another similar development along the
                         western shore of Laguna de Bay to protect the population against high water levels in the lake; and
                         (iv) further development of a comprehensive flood forecasting system and monitoring and early
                         warning system for the Greater Metro Manila Area, with maximum participation of local
                         communities.

                         The government intends to start the implementation of the Master Plan with substantial investments
                         as soon as possible. It is therefore necessary to prepare some of the large high priority investments,
                         both structural and non-structural, as well as develop improved institutional arrangements for flood
                         management. Such investments will be essential to make substantial improvements to flood
                         management in large parts of the Greater Metro Manila Area.

                         This project will finance two components, the main one related to the carrying out of feasibility and
                         design studies and preparation of tender documents of priority infrastructure that, when implemented,
                         will lead to substantially increased safety of the population during flood events. A small second
                         component relates to project management and administration.

                         Component A – Preparation of feasibility and design studies for priority flood management
                         infrastructure. Feasibility and design studies will be prepared for a high dam in the upper Marikina
                         River catchment area. Government received also a US$2.73 million PHRD grant which will finance
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the preparation of the other major interventions mentioned in the first paragraph above (i.e.
                         interventions (ii) and (iv), except the one for Laguna de Bay that will now be pursued through PPP
                         funding. A multi-disciplinary team of consultants, including expertise in civil engineering, dam
                         engineering, resettlement, hydrology, economics, social science, environment, urban renewal, etc.,
                         will be recruited to prepare the detailed feasibility and design studies for the dam. The feasibility
                         studies will review the various options for flood management improvements in the study area,
                         including a quick assessment of related social and resettlement impacts in terms of magnitude, costs,
                         and risks, to be followed immediately by design studies and preparation of tender documents of the
                         selected option. The design phase will include the technical and engineering studies, economic
                         studies, and social and environmental studies, all in compliance with the relevant World Bank
                         Operational and Safeguard Policies and government requirements, and up to a level ready for
                         appraisal/financing by the government, possibly with the assistance of international organizations
                         such as the World Bank. It is anticipated that one consulting firm/institute will be hired for the social
                         and environmental assessments for interventions (i) and (ii) mentioned in the first paragraph above.
                         A Panel of Experts on Dams will be established as per OP on Dam Safety.

                         Component B – Project management and administration. Operational expenses for the Department
                         of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) will be financed to manage the implementation of the grant
                         and monitor the consultants and the outputs of the services. Fixed costs, such as staff costs, will be



                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         paid for by DPWH. The government's Commission on Audit (COA) will conduct the annual audit of
                         the grant.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The project location is the upper catchment area of the Marikina River, where the potential dam will
                         be located.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Gerardo F. Parco (GEN02)
                         Roberto B. Tordecilla (GSU02)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes           While the project only supports the preparation of
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                    engineering designs of a priority investment identified in
                                                                   the Metro Manila Flood Management Master Plan, i.e. a
                                                                   high dam in the upper Marikina River catchment area, and
                                                                   the conduct of environmental and social assessments for
                                                                   this priority investment, the policy is triggered since these
                                                                   studies are expected to lead to investments expected to
                                                                   have positive but also potentially adverse environmental
                                                                   and social impacts if not managed adequately.

                                                                   Part of this project is the conduct of environmental and
                                                                   social assessments to assess impacts and put forward
                                                                   options and mitigation measures to be considered in the
                                                                   engineering designs of the proposed investment. The
                                                                   environmental and social assessments will be carried out
                                                                   by DPWH with technical assistance and support from
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   qualified consultants to ensure that the Bank's and the
                                                                   National Government's environmental and social
                                                                   safeguard policies are being followed and complied with.
                                                                   The environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA)
                                                                   will carefully assess the environment and social impacts
                                                                   of the proposed investment, including cumulative
                                                                   impacts, and lay out detailed plans for mitigation in the
                                                                   Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP),
                                                                   including a monitoring and reporting program. An
                                                                   institutional assessment and capacity building plan for
                                                                   DPWH's Environmental and Social Safeguards Division
                                                                   (ESSD) will be prepared as well. The ESMP will be
                                                                   properly costed to ensure that the costs to fully implement
                                                                   it get incorporated into any future civil works contract.

                                                                   A Grievance Redress Mechanism will be developed and
                                                                   be detailed in the ESMP and be presented during public
                                                                   consultations.




                                                                     Page 3 of 9
                                                        A covenant has been added in the amendment letter that
                                                        requires the Recipient to ensure that the environmental
                                                        and social safeguard instruments to be prepared under the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        Project are prepared and carried out under terms of
                                                        reference satisfactory to the World Bank and in
                                                        compliance with the World Bank safeguard policies.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   The ESIA will identify natural habitats and other
                         4.04                           ecologically sensitive areas that may be affected by the
                                                        investment. The project will not support activities that
                                                        would significantly convert or degrade critical natural
                                                        habitats consistent with the policy. If the ESIA indicates
                                                        that the project would significantly convert or degrade
                                                        non-critical natural habitats, the project would include
                                                        acceptable mitigation measures in the ESMP. Such
                                                        mitigation measures could include, as appropriate,
                                                        minimizing habitat loss (e.g. strategic habitat retention
                                                        and post-development restoration) and establishing and
                                                        maintaining an ecologically similar protected area.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes   The ESIA will confirm the project impacts on forests and
                                                        forest-dependent communities, if any, particularly in and
                                                        around the proposed dam site. As needed, the ESMP will
                                                        include measures to address impacts on forests, forest
                                                        health, and forest-dependent communities, if present.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     The project will not support directly or indirectly any
                                                        investments that would trigger the policy.
                         Physical Cultural        Yes   The ESIA will closely assess the various alternative
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           technical options to determine any possible cause of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        disturbance and negative impacts to historical areas,
                                                        architectural land marks, and other cultural property,
                                                        which may need to be mitigated. During construction, the
                                                        landscape of the sites may also be affected. The ESIA
                                                        will confirm impacts of priority investments on physical
                                                        cultural resources (PCR), and where needed a PCR
                                                        management plan will be formulated as part of the ESMP,
                                                        including chance find procedures that will be followed
                                                        during construction.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   The whole of Metro Manila does not have ancestral
                         BP 4.10                        domains and/or Indigenous Peoples (IP) communities.
                                                        However, a study done in early 2000s for another project
                                                        found that there are IP communities in the upland areas of
                                                        8 LGUs of Rizal Province. Initial investigations have
                                                        shown that there are no settlements in and around the
                                                        proposed reservoir area of the Marikina Dam. The area
                                                        is, however, part of the ancestral domain of the
                                                        indigenous Dumagat-Remontados people.




                                                         Page 4 of 9
                                                                     Further screening will be carried out by the social and
                                                                     environment consultants early on during the
                                                                     implementation of the studies and if the screening
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     confirms their presence in and around the proposed
                                                                     reservoir area social assessment to comply with the policy
                                                                     will be incorporated in the ESIA and an indigenous
                                                                     peoples (IP) Framework and/or IP Plan will be developed,
                                                                     as needed.
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes             It is not expected that people live in the future reservoir
                            OP/BP 4.12                               area of the dam, or if there are the number will be very
                                                                     limited. Although unlikely, there may be some temporary
                                                                     affected households during construction, downstream
                                                                     households potentially affected by dam, as well as well as
                                                                     potentially affected households by ancillary activities and
                                                                     associated facilities. This will be determined during
                                                                     preparation of studies through screening. Based on the
                                                                     results of the screening, the preparation of a Resettlement
                                                                     Action Pan (RAP) may be needed. Although not
                                                                     expected, an RPF may also be prepared by the Recipient
                                                                     if there are elements of the project design that remain
                                                                     unidentified. This is to be determined during preparation
                                                                     of studies and agreed with the Bank. The ToR for the
                                                                     RAP and RPF, if required, are to be submitted to RSA for
                                                                     review and clearance.

                                                                     Based upon the results of the screening and the scope of
                                                                     potentially affected households it will be determined
                                                                     whether an Independent Panel of Experts is required as
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     per OP 4.01.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        Yes          Since the project will entail the design of a high dam this
                            4.37                                     policy is triggered. OP 4.37 requires that experienced and
                                                                     competent professionals design and supervise
                                                                     construction, and that the borrower adopts and
                                                                     implements dam safety measures through the project
                                                                     cycle. A Panel of Experts on Dams with the needed
                                                                     technical expertise will be established by the time the
                                                                     studies start.
                            Projects on International   No           The sub-project will not be in international waterways.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No           The sub-project will not be in disputed areas.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:


                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                            The project itself is meant to produce design studies. While by itself the project is not expected
                           to have social and environmental impacts, the studies will identify impacts related to the future
                           construction of a dam and its operation and incorporate mitigating measures in the ESMP and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           design of the civil works. The potential environment and social issues described in the previous
                           section of ISDS will be carefully taken into account during the preparation of the studies.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            Improved flood management in the Greater Metro Manila Area is the anticipated result when the
                           dam is eventually constructed in future. This will help improve the quality of life and socio-
                           economic well-being of communities that currently are regularly subjected to flooding from the
                           Pasig-Marikina River. Any potentially induced or cumulative impacts related to the flood control
                           management of the dam will be assessed as part of the EISA.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            An analysis of alternatives, in terms of type of civil works and location, was carried out as part of
                           the master plan preparation. A more detailed analysis will be carried out early on during the
                           implementation of this project as part of the feasibility study to determine in detail the alternative
                           that will have the least environmental and social impacts, while being technically viable and
                           economically most attractive. The selected option will then be worked out up to design level,
                           including tender documents.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            DPWH is familiar with the Bank Safeguards Policies. It has an Environmental and Social
                           Safeguards Division (ESSD), primarily dedicated to the environmental and social impact
                           management of their different projects. It maintains separate sets of safeguard standards
                           depending on the funding source of the project it implements. The performance of ESSD, based
                           on the recent World Bank thematic review for the Philippines, points to the need of putting in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           place a capacity building program if it is to be in charge of handling safeguard issues during the
                           future implementation of the designs prepared under this project. ESSD will benefit by
                           strengthening its capacity to manage and coordinate the safeguards principles and procedures
                           especially related to the preparation of the environmental and social assessment studies. The
                           consultants that will prepare the environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA),
                           environmental and social management plan (ESMP), and resettlement action plan (RAP), as
                           needed, will work closely with ESSD during the preparation of the studies.

                           A Panel of Experts on Dams will be established as per OP on Dam Safety. If determined required
                           during the studies an Independent Panel of Experts will also be established as per OP 4.01.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders of the project are the people living in the project affected area that remains
                           to be determined during the preparation of studies and the corresponding local governments units
                           (LGU) that are affected by recurrent flooding along the Pasig-Marikina River. There will be at
                           least two formal consultations through workshops (one at the beginning of the study and one after
                           the draft reports have been prepared), as well as informal consultations as needed with the
                           potentially affected households, non-governmental organizations (NGO) and civil society
                           organizations (CSO), LGUs, government agencies, etc. DPWH, with support of the Bank task



                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                           team and other agencies, as needed, will implement an information campaign that emphasizes
                           expectations and transparency.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      29-Feb-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   31-Mar-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      31-Mar-2016
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                      31-Mar-2016
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      29-Feb-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   31-Mar-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                      31-Mar-2016
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      29-Feb-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   31-Mar-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                      31-Mar-2016
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?

                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?



                                                                      Page 8 of 9
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Joop Stoutjesdijk
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                           Date: 23-Jan-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Ousmane Dione (PMGR)                        Date: 25-Jan-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 9 of 9
